{{short description|Neoplatonist philosopher and mystic (c. 245 – c. 325)}}
{{other people}}
{{more footnotes needed|date=November 2021}}
{{Use dmy dates|date=October 2019}}
{{Infobox philosopher
| region           = [[Western philosophy]]
| era              = [[Ancient philosophy]]
| image            = Iamblichus.jpg
| caption          = 
| name             = Iamblichus
| other_names      = Iamblichus Chalcidensis, Iamblichus of Chalcis, Iamblichus of Apamea 
| birth_date       = {{circa|245}}<ref>{{cite book |last1=Dillon |first1=John M. |title=Iamblichi Chalcidensis in Platonis Dialogos Commentariorum Fragmenta |date=2009 |publisher=The Prometheus Trust |location=Wiltshire, UK |isbn=978-1-898910-45-9 |page=3 |edition=Revised Second}}</ref>
| birth_place      = [[Chalcis ad Belum]], [[Roman Empire]]
| death_date       = {{circa|325}} (aged {{circa}} 80)
| death_place      =
| school_tradition = [[Neoplatonism]]
| main_interests   = [[Metaphysics]], [[philosophical cosmology]]
| notable_ideas    = 
| notable_works    = {{collapsible list|''On the Pythagorean Way of Life'' ({{lang|grc|Περὶ τοῦ πυθαγορικοῦ βίου}}; {{lang|la|De vita pythagorica}}), {{lang|la|Protrepticus}} ({{lang|grc|Προτρεπτικὸς ἐπὶ φιλοσοφίαν}}), ''[[On the Mysteries of the Egyptians, Chaldeans, and Assyrians|On the Egyptian Mysteries]]'' ({{lang|grc|Περὶ τῶν αἰγυπτίων μυστηρίων}}; {{lang|la|De Mysteriis Aegyptiorum}})}}
}}

'''Iamblichus''' ({{IPAc-en|aɪ|ˈ|æ|m|b|l|ɪ|k|ə|s}} {{respell|eye|AM|blik|əs}}; {{langx|grc|Ἰάμβλιχος|Iámblichos}}; {{langx|arc|𐡉𐡌𐡋𐡊𐡅|Yamlīkū|label=[[Aramaic]]}};<ref name="Aydin2016">{{cite book | author = Sami Aydin | date = 29 August 2016 | title = Sergius of Reshaina: Introduction to Aristotle and his Categories, Addressed to Philotheos | publisher = BRILL | pages = 183– | isbn = 978-90-04-32514-2 | oclc = 1001224459 | url = https://books.google.com/books?id=S_I6DQAAQBAJ&pg=PA183}}</ref><ref>Gawlikowski, M. The Journal of Roman Studies, vol. 84, [Society for the Promotion of Roman Studies, Cambridge University Press], 1994, pp. 244–46, https://doi.org/10.2307/300919.</ref> {{circa|245<ref>{{cite book |last1=Dillon |first1=John M. |title=Iamblichi Chalcidensis in Platonis Dialogos Commentariorum Fragmenta |date=2009 |publisher=The Prometheus Trust |location=Wiltshire, UK |isbn=978-1-898910-45-9 |page=3 |edition=Revised Second}}</ref>|325}}) was a [[Neoplatonism|Neoplatonist]] [[Ancient Roman philosophy|philosopher]] who determined a direction later taken by Neoplatonism. Iamblichus was also the biographer of the Greek mystic, philosopher, and mathematician [[Pythagoras]].<ref>{{Cite book|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=EB5UvHrdMpsC|title=Iamblichus' Life of Pythagoras|last=Iamblichus|date=December 1986|publisher=Inner Traditions / Bear & Co|isbn=9780892811526|language=en}}</ref><ref>{{Cite book|url=https://archive.org/details/lifeofpythagoras00iamb|title=The life of Pythagoras;|last1=Iamblichus|last2=Taylor|first2=Thomas|date=1918|publisher=Krotona; Hollywood, Calif. : Theosophical Pub. House|others=Internet Archive}}</ref> In addition to his philosophical contributions, his {{transliteration|grc|Protrepticus}} is important for the study of the [[sophist]]s because it preserved about ten pages of an otherwise unknown sophist known as the Anonymus Iamblichi.<ref>B. Cassin, 'Anonymus Iamblichi', in [[Brill's New Pauly]]</ref>

== Life ==
According to the {{transliteration|grc|[[Suda]]}} and Iamblichus' biographer, [[Eunapius]], Iamblichus was born in Chalcis (later called [[Qinnasrin|Qinnašrīn]]) in [[Coele Syria (Roman province)|Coele]], now in northwest [[Syria]].<ref>{{cite book | last1=Clarke | first1=E.C. | last2=Dillon | first2=J.M. | last3=Hershbell | first3=J.P. | title=De Mysteriis | publisher=Society of Biblical Literature | series=Society of Biblical Literature: Writings from the Greco-Roman world | year=2003 | isbn=978-1-58983-058-5 | url=https://books.google.com/books?id=UJuDa8G7RikC  | access-date=2023-11-23 | page=xviii|quote=Eunapius reports (Vit. soph. 457) that Iamblichus was born in Chalcis “in Coele (Syria).” After Septimus Severus’s division of the Syrian command in 194 C.W., this refers not to southern but to northern Syria, and so the Chalcis in question must be Chalcis ad Belum, modern Qinnesrin, a strategically important town to the east of the Orontes valley, on the road from Beroea (Aleppo) to Apamea, and from Antioch to the East.}} The son of a wealthy, well-known family,</ref>{{sfnp|Sorley|1911|p=213}} Iamblichus was descended from the [[Emesene dynasty]]. He initially studied under [[Anatolius of Laodicea]] and later studied under [[Porphyry (philosopher)|Porphyry]], a pupil of [[Plotinus]] (the founder of Neoplatonism). Iamblichus disagreed with Porphyry about [[theurgy]], reportedly responding to Porphyry's criticism of the practice in ''[[On the Mysteries of the Egyptians, Chaldeans, and Assyrians]]''.

He returned to Coele Syria around 304 to found a school in [[Apamea, Syria|Apamea]] (near [[Antioch]]), a city known for its Neoplatonic philosophers. Iamblichus designed a curriculum for studying [[Plato]] and [[Aristotle]], and wrote commentaries on the two which survive only in fragments. [[Pythagoras]] was his supreme authority, and he wrote the ten-volume ''Collection of Pythagorean Doctrines'' with extracts from several ancient philosophers; only the first four volumes and fragments of the fifth survive.<ref>{{cite book | last=Anthon | first=C. | title=A Classical Dictionary: containing an account of the principal proper names mentioned in ancient authors ... Together with an account of coins, weights and measures, etc | publisher=Harper & Bros. | year=1841 | url=https://books.google.com/books?id=RqFVAAAAcAAJ&pg=PA655 | access-date=2023-08-28}}</ref>

Iamblichus wrote the ''Exhortation to Philosophy'' in Apamea during the early fourth century.<ref>{{cite web|url=http://blog.protrepticus.info/2014/04/introduction-to-iamblichus-exhortation.html|title=Introduction to Iamblichus' Exhortation to Philosophy (upcoming talk)|access-date=31 May 2015}}</ref> Considered a man of great culture and learning, he was renowned for his charity and self-denial and had a number of students. According to [[Johann Albert Fabricius]], he died sometime before 333 during the reign of [[Constantine the Great]].{{sfnp|Sorley|1911|p=213}}

== Philosophy ==
{{Neoplatonism}}
Iamblichus detailed [[Plotinus]]' Neoplatonic formal divisions, applied Pythagorean number symbolism more systematically, and (influenced by other Asian systems) interpreted Neoplatonic concepts mythically.{{sfnp|Shaw|2006}}{{sfnp|Sorley|1911|p=213}} Unlike Plotinus, who broke from platonic tradition by positing a separate soul, Iamblichus re-affirmed the soul's embodiment in matter and believed that matter was as divine as the rest of the cosmos.{{sfnp|Shaw|2006}}

=== Cosmology and theology ===
{{See also|Neoplatonism#Iamblichus}}
Iamblichus placed the [[Monad (philosophy)|Monad]] at the head of his system, from which emanates the ''[[Nous#Plotinus and Neoplatonism|Nous]]'' (intellect, or [[demiurge]]) and the ''[[Soul#Socrates and Plato|psyche]]''. Plotinus represented the ''Nous'' as three stages: objective being, subjective life, and realized intellect. Iamblichus divided them into two spheres: intelligible (the objects of thought) and intellective (the domain of thought).{{sfnp|Sorley|1911|pp=213–214}}

Iamblichus and [[Proclus]] may have introduced a third sphere between the two worlds, separating and uniting them.<ref>O'Meara', Dominic J. ''Pythagoras Revived: Mathematics and Philosophy in Late Antiquity'', Oxford University Press.</ref> The identification of ''nous'' with the demiurge in the Neoplatonic tradition was adopted and developed in Christian [[gnosticism]]. [[Augustine of Hippo]] follows Plotinus, identifying the ''nous'' with ''[[logos]]'' (the creative principle) as part of the [[Trinity]].<ref>{{Citation|last1=Gundel|first1=Hans Georg (Gießen)|title=Iamblichus|date=2006-10-01|url=https://referenceworks.brillonline.com/entries/brill-s-new-pauly/*-e520890|work=Brill's New Pauly|publisher=Brill|language=en|doi=10.1163/1574-9347_bnp_e520890|access-date=2021-12-15|last2=Brisson|first2=Luc (Paris)|last3=Fusillo|first3=Massimo (L'Aquila)|last4=Galli|first4=Lucia (Florence)|url-access=subscription}}</ref>{{sfnp|Sorley|1911|p=214}}

Iamblichus multiplied the number of divine entities according to universal [[mathematics|mathematical]] theorems. He conceived of gods, angels, demons and heroes: twelve heavenly gods (whose number increases to 36 or 360), 72 other gods proceeding from them, 21 chiefs and 42 nature-gods. His divine realm extends from the Monad to material nature, where the soul descends into matter and becomes embodied in human form. These superhuman beings influence natural events and communicate knowledge about the future, and are accessible with prayers and offerings. Iamblichus posited that numbers are independent, occupying a middle realm between the limited and unlimited.{{sfnp|Sorley|1911|p=214}} He believed that nature was bound by [[destiny|fate]], differing from divine things which are not subject to fate and turn [[evil]] and imperfection to good ends; evil was generated accidentally in the conflict between the finite and the [[Infinity|infinite]].{{sfnp|Sorley|1911|p=214}}

== Works ==
Only a fraction of Iamblichus' books have survived; knowledge of his system is preserved in fragments of writings preserved by [[Stobaeus]] and others: notes by his successors (especially [[Proclus]]), his five extant books and sections of his work on [[Pythagoreanism]]. In addition to these, Proclus attributed to him the ''On the Mysteries of the Egyptians, Chaldeans, and Assyrians'', also known as ''The Theurgia''. Although stylistic and doctrinal differences exist between this book and Iamblichus' other works, it originated from his school at least.{{sfnp|Sorley|1911|p=213}} Iamblichus also completed a coherent polytheist theological system under the Egyptian pseudonym ''Abammon''.<ref>[[Garth Fowden|Fowden, Garth]] (2000) [1999]. "Religious Communities". In Bowersock, G. W.; Brown, Peter; Grabar, Oleg (eds.). Late Antiquity: A Guide to the Postclassical World. [[Harvard University Press|The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press]]. pp. 85-86. ISBN 0-674-51173-5</ref>

=== {{anchor|List of editions and translations}}Editions and translations ===
* ''On the Mysteries'' ({{lang|la|De mysteriis}}), ed. [[Gustav Parthey]], [[Teubner]], 1857;<ref>{{cite web|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=BKACAAAAMAAJ|title=De mysteriis liber|website=Google Books|access-date=19 September 2022|author1=Iamblichus |year=1857 }}</ref> ed. Edouard des  Places, [[Collection Budé]], 1989.
** English translations: [[Thomas Taylor (neoplatonist)|Thomas Taylor]], 1821;<ref>{{cite book|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=wb8vAAAAYAAJ|title=Iamblichus on the Mysteries of the Egyptians, Chaldeans, and Assyrians|isbn=9780608371542 |access-date=19 September 2022|author1=Iamblichus |author2=Porphyry |publisher=C. Whittingham }}</ref><ref>{{cite web |url=http://ars-theurgica.org/taylor_on_the_mysteries.html |title=On the Mysteries - Translated by Thomas Taylor |website= |access-date=19 September 2022 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20141121164922/http://ars-theurgica.org/taylor_on_the_mysteries.html |archive-date=21 November 2014 |url-status=dead}}</ref> Alexander Wilder, 1911;<ref>{{cite web|url=https://archive.org/details/theurgiaoregypt00wildgoog|title=Theurgia, Or The Egyptian Mysteries|website=Internet Archive|access-date=19 September 2022}}</ref><ref>{{cite web|title=Iamblichus: Theurgia or On the Mysteries of Egypt|url=http://www.esotericarchives.com/oracle/iambl_th.htm|website=esotericarchives.com|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20010412213611/http://www.esotericarchives.com/oracle/iambl_th.htm|archive-date=12 April 2001|access-date=19 September 2022|url-status=live}}</ref> Emma C. Clarke, [[John M. Dillon]], and Jackson P. Hershbell, 2003, {{ISBN|1-58983-058-X}}.
* ''The Life of Pythagoras''<ref>{{cite web|url=https://archive.org/details/lifeofpythagoras00iamb|title=The Life of Pythagoras|website=Internet Archive|access-date=19 September 2022}}</ref> 
** English translation: Thomas Taylor, 1818<ref>{{cite web|url=https://archive.org/details/b29318610/page/n8/mode/1up|title=Iamblichus' Life of Pythagoras or Pythagoric Life|website=Internet Archive|date=1818 }}</ref>
* ''On the Pythagorean Way of Life'' ({{lang|la|De vita pythagorica}}), ed. Theophil Kießling, Leipzig, 1816;<ref>{{cite web|url=https://archive.org/details/iamblichichalci00kegoog|title=Iamblichi Chalcidensis ex Coele-Syria De vita Pythagorica liber : Graece et Latine|website=Internet Archive|access-date=19 September 2022}}</ref> ed. [[August Nauck]], St. Petersburg, 1884; ed. Ludwig Deubner, Teubner, 1937 (rev. Ulrich Klein, 1975).
** English translations: Gillian Clark, 1989, {{ISBN|0-85323-326-8}}; [[John M. Dillon]] and Jackson Hershbell, 1991, {{ISBN|1-55540-523-1}}
* ''On General Mathematical Science'' ({{lang|grc|Περὶ τῆς κοινῆς μαθηματικῆς ἐπιστήμης}}, {{lang|la|De communi mathematica scientia}}), ed. Nicola Festa, Teubner, 1891 (reprint 1975)<ref>{{cite web|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=2NkfAAAAMAAJ|title=Iamblichi De communi mathematica scientia liber|website=Google Books|access-date=19 September 2022|author1=Iamblichus |year=1891 }}</ref>
** English translations: John M. Dillon & J. O. Urmson (2021; Bloomsbury Publishing)
* ''Protrepticus'', ed. [[Ermenegildo Pistelli]], Teubner, 1888 (repr. 1975);<ref>{{cite web|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=f7wOAAAAIAAJ|title=Protrepticus|website=Google Books|access-date=19 September 2022|last1=(Chalcidensis) |first1=Jamblichus |year=1888 }}</ref> ed. des Places, Budé, 1989.
** English translation: Thomas Moore Johnson, ''Iamblichus' Exhortation to the Study of Philosophy'', Osceola, Mo., 1907 (repr. 1988, {{ISBN|0-933999-63-1}}).
* ''[[Nicomachus#Introduction to Arithmetic|In Nicomachi arithmeticam introductionem]]'', Teubner, ed. Pistelli, Teubner, 1894<ref>{{cite book|url=https://books.google.com/books?id=MKUNAAAAIAAJ|title=In Nicomachi arithmeticam introductionem liber|isbn=9783519014447 |access-date=19 September 2022|author1=Iamblichus |publisher=B. G. Teubner }}</ref> (rev. Klein, 1975)
* Letters: John M. Dillon and Wolfgang Polleichtner, ''Iamblichus of Chalcis: The Letters'', 2009, {{ISBN|1-58983-161-6}}.
* John F. Finamore and John M. Dillon, ''Iamblichus' De Anima: Text, Translation, and Commentary'', Leiden: Brill, 2002, {{ISBN|1-58983-468-2}}.
* Fragmentary commentaries on Plato
** Bent Dalsgaard Larsen, {{lang|fr|Jamblique de Chalcis: Exégète et philosophe}} (vol. 2, appendix: ''Testimonia et fragmenta exegetica''), Universitetsforlaget i Aarhus, 1972 (Greek texts only).
** John M. Dillon (ed. and trans.), {{lang|la|Iamblichi Chalcidensis in Platonis dialogos commentariorum fragmenta}}, Leiden: Brill, 1973.
* ''Theological Principles of Arithmetic'' (''Theologumena arithmeticae'', an anonymous work ascribed to Iamblichus or [[Anatolius of Laodicea]]), ed. [[Friedrich Ast]], Leipzig, 1817; ed. Vittorio de Falco, Teubner, 1922.
** English translation: [[Robin Waterfield]], Pseudo-Iamblichus: ''The Theology of Arithmetic'', translation, introduction, notes; foreword by K. Critchlow, Phanes Press, 1988, {{ISBN|0-933999-72-0}}.

== Reception ==
Iamblichus was praised by his followers, and contemporaries credited him with [[Miracle|miraculous]] powers. The Roman emperor [[Julian (emperor)|Julian]], not content with Eunapius' modest eulogy that Iamblichus was inferior to Porphyry only in style, regarded him as second only to Plato and said that he would give all the gold in [[Lydia]] for one of his letters. During the 15th- and 16th-century revival of interest in his philosophy, Iamblichus' name was rarely mentioned without the epithet "divine" or "most divine".{{sfnp|Sorley|1911|p=213}}

== See also ==
* [[Henotheism]]

== References ==
{{Reflist}}
* {{EB1911|wstitle=Iamblichus (philosopher)|display=Iamblichus|last=Sorley|first=William Ritchie|author-link=William Ritchie Sorley|volume=14|pages=213–215}}

== Bibliography ==
{{refbegin}}
* {{cite SEP | url-id=iamblichus | title=Iamblichus | first=Riccardo | last=Chiaradonna | first2=Adrien | last2=Lecerf }}
* {{cite book |last=Fowden |first=Garth |title=The Egyptian Hermes: A Historical Approach to the Late Pagan Mind |location=Princeton |publisher=Princeton University Press |year=1986}} (has an excellent section on Iamblichus' and the Neoplatonists' relation to the works attributed to [[Hermes Trismegistus]])
* {{cite encyclopedia |last=George |first=Roy |title=Iamblichus |encyclopedia=Encyclopedia of the Goddess Athena |url=http://www.goddess-athena.org/Encyclopedia/Friends/Iamblichus/index.htm |year=1999}}
* Hartmann, Udo (2018). ''Der spätantike Philosoph. Die Lebenswelten der paganen Gelehrten und ihre hagiographische Ausgestaltung in den Philosophenviten von Porphyrios bis Damaskios'' [The late antique philosopher. The lifeworlds of pagan scholars and their hagiographic treatment in the philosophical vitae from Porphyrius to Damascius]. 3 volumes. Bonn: Habelt, {{ISBN|978-3-7749-4172-4}}, pp. 497-544.
* {{cite book |first=Joel |last=Kalvesmaki |title=The Theology of Arithmetic: Number Symbolism in Platonism and Early Christianity |series=Hellenic Studies Series |volume=59 |location=Washington, DC |publisher=[[Center for Hellenic Studies]] |url=https://archive.chs.harvard.edu/CHS/article/display/6300.joel-kalvesmaki-the-theology-of-arithmetic-number-symbolism-in-platonism-and-early-christianity}}
* {{cite journal |last=Moore |first=Edward |title='Likeness to God as Far as Possible': Deification Doctrine in Iamblichus and Three Eastern Christian Fathers |url=http://www.theandros.com/iamblichus.html |url-status=dead |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20080611065643/http://www.theandros.com/iamblichus.html |archive-date=11 June 2008 |journal=Theandros |volume=3 |issue=1 |year=2005}}
* {{cite book |last=Shaw |first=Gregory |title=Theurgy and the Soul: The [[Neoplatonism]] of Iamblichus |location=Pennsylvania |publisher=Pennsylvania State University Press |year=1995}}
* {{cite book |last=Shaw |first=Gregory |contribution=Neoplatonism I: Antiquity |title=Dictionary of Gnosis & Western Esotericism |editor-last=Hanegraff |editor-first=Wouter J. |location=Leiden & Boston |publisher=Brill |year=2006 |pages=834–835}}
* {{cite web |last=Siorvanes |first=Lucas |year=1998 |title=Iamblichus |publisher=Routledge |url=http://www.muslimphilosophy.com/ip/rep/A062.htm |via=MuslimPhilosophy.com}}
{{refend}}

== External links ==
* {{Wikiquote-inline}}
* {{Wikisource author-inline}}
* {{Gutenberg author | id=52368}}

{{Platonists}}
{{Authority control}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:Iamblichus}}
[[Category:240s births]]
[[Category:320s deaths]]
[[Category:3rd-century Greek philosophers]]
[[Category:3rd-century Romans]]
[[Category:3rd-century mathematicians]]
[[Category:3rd-century writers]]
[[Category:4th-century Greek philosophers]]
[[Category:4th-century Romans]]
[[Category:4th-century mathematicians]]
[[Category:4th-century philosophers]]
[[Category:Ancient occultists]]
[[Category:Apamea, Syria]]
[[Category:Emesene dynasty]]
[[Category:History of magic]]
[[Category:Neo-Pythagoreans]]
[[Category:Neoplatonists]]
[[Category:Occult writers]]
[[Category:Pagan anti-Gnosticism]]
[[Category:People from Roman Syria]]
[[Category:Syrian philosophers]]
[[Category:Theurgy]]
[[Category:Year of birth uncertain]]
[[Category:Year of death uncertain]]
[[Category:Greek-language commentators on Plato]]
[[Category:Pages]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]