== Notes for [[Item:Q87204|Q87204]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Claudia_Marcella

Claudia Marcella Minor

The younger daughter, Claudia Marcella Minor (PIR2 C 1103, Minor Latin for the younger, born 40 BC or 39 BC), was born after her father's death. She is generally believed to have been married twice but her marriages are not directly mentioned in any Roman texts, and are assumed on the basis of other sources.

Her first marriage was to a Claudius Pulcher, by adoption Marcus Valerius Messalla Appianus (Consul in 13 BC), who died in the early months of his consulship[9]. Marcella had one child by Appianus, a son named Marcus Valerius Messalla Barbatus. This son died prior to achieving a consulship, but not before marrying his half-cousin Domitia Lepida, by whom he had his only child, the later Roman Empress, Valeria Messalina[10][11].

At some point after Appianus' death, Marcella entered into a second marriage, this time to the former consul and censor, Lucius Aemilius Lepidus Paullus. Paullus, like Marcella, had also already been married and lost a spouse (Cornelia, the maternal half-sister of Julia the Elder), by whom he had had three children[12]. Marcella and Paullus may have had a son together, named Paullus Aemilius Regillus[13], who was a quaestor of Tiberius Caesar[14].

Other sources, however, make her only daughter by her first marriage Claudia Pulchra, born around 13 BC, who became the second wife of her distant cousin, Publius Quinctilius Varus after the death of his first wife, Vipsania Marcella, and following the death of her second husband she married Marcus Valerius Messalla Messallinus, by whom he had a son born in 12 BC named Marcus Valerius Messalla Barbatus - who was the father of Empress Messalina - and a daughter Valeria, who married Lucius Vipstanus Gallus, Praetor in 17, who died during his office, and by whom she had issue.[15][page needed]

--------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Claudia_Marcella

Claudia Marcella Minor

The younger daughter, Claudia Marcella Minor (PIR2 C 1103, Minor Latin for the younger, born 40 BC or 39 BC), was born after her father's death. She is generally believed to have been married twice but her marriages are not directly mentioned in any Roman texts, and are assumed on the basis of other sources.

Her first marriage was to a Claudius Pulcher, by adoption Marcus Valerius Messalla Appianus (Consul in 13 BC), who died in the early months of his consulship[9]. Marcella had one child by Appianus, a son named Marcus Valerius Messalla Barbatus. This son died prior to achieving a consulship, but not before marrying his half-cousin Domitia Lepida, by whom he had his only child, the later Roman Empress, Valeria Messalina[10][11].

At some point after Appianus' death, Marcella entered into a second marriage, this time to the former consul and censor, Lucius Aemilius Lepidus Paullus. Paullus, like Marcella, had also already been married and lost a spouse (Cornelia, the maternal half-sister of Julia the Elder), by whom he had had three children[12]. Marcella and Paullus may have had a son together, named Paullus Aemilius Regillus[13], who was a quaestor of Tiberius Caesar[14].

Other sources, however, make her only daughter by her first marriage Claudia Pulchra, born around 13 BC, who became the second wife of her distant cousin, Publius Quinctilius Varus after the death of his first wife, Vipsania Marcella, and following the death of her second husband she married Marcus Valerius Messalla Messallinus, by whom he had a son born in 12 BC named Marcus Valerius Messalla Barbatus - who was the father of Empress Messalina - and a daughter Valeria, who married Lucius Vipstanus Gallus, Praetor in 17, who died during his office, and by whom she had issue.

--------------------
'''
=Claudia Marcella Minor=
'''

Claudia Marcella Minor (PIR2 C 1103, Minor Latin for the younger, born late 40 BC probably.) Octavia was pregnant when she married Antony in 40, and it is likely that the child was Marcella Minor - but this is not a certainty. She was also known as Marcella Minor, Claudia Marcella the Younger and Marcella the Younger. Marcella was born after the death of her father and she grew up part of the first post-Actium generation.

Marcella first married close to the age of 15 (as did her three sisters). Her first husband was the future consul of 12 BC, Marcus Valerius Messalla Appianus. Marcella bore Appianus a daughter called Claudia Pulchra and a son, called Marcus Valerius Messalla Barbatus. Appianus died while consul in 12 BC.

Marcella later married the former consul and censor Lucius Aemilius Lepidus Paullus, also known as Paullus Aemilius Lepidus. Paullus was previously widowed. From the earlier marriage he had three children. The marriage of Marcella and Paullus linked two honored republican houses and tied them closely to the imperial circle. Marcella bore him a son called Paullus Aemilius Regulus. Regulus served as a quaestor during the rule of the Roman emperor Tiberius who reigned from 14 until 37.

Some scholars have tried to reverse the order of her husbands, but find difficulty if they delay Marcella's first marriage (as alleged) until 15 BC when she was 25. If so, she would be very old for a first marriage, and then have to remarry and immediately have two children before her second husband died in office in 12 BC. Instead, marriage 10 years earlier seems much more likely, given that Marcella's two younger half-sisters had already married by 15, and the younger Antonia gave birth to Germanicus on 24 May 15 BC.

According to the French Historian Christian Settipani after the death of her second husband, Marcella married the Roman Senator Marcus Valerius Messalla Messallinus. Marcella bore Messallinus a daughter called Valeria Messalla born ca. 10 BC, who later married the praetor of 17, Lucius Vipstanus Gallus. However, Messallinus (son of Corvinus) was younger than Marcella. That fact does not prevent the marriage, but makes it unlikely on statistical (and sexist) grounds.

In a tomb near Rome, numerous inscriptions have survived of slaves and freedmen of Marcella. A columbarium located between the Via Appia and Via Latina in Rome belonged to the family of Marcella. According to epigraphical evidence, the work on it was completed in 10, when the urns were divided among the shareholders of the company which had built the place.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Claudia_Marcella#Claudia_Marcella_Major

Marcella minor, married (1) M. Vipsanius Agrippa, and (2) Julius Antonius

Marcella major, married (1) M. Valeriusa Barbatus Appianus, and (2)Sextus Appuleius. There were offspring from each marriage.

Claudia Marcella
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.
Jump to: navigation, search
Claudia Marcella was the name of both daughters of Octavia the sister of Caesar Augustus, and her first husband, the consul Gaius Claudius Marcellus.

The elder, Claudia Marcella Major (b. 44 BC), was married to Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa in 28 BC to cement a political alliance between Agrippa and her uncle. Their daughter Vipsania Marcella was born in Rome in 27 BC. In 21 BC Agrippa divorced Claudia to marry Augustus' daughter Julia Caesaris. She then married Iullus Antonius, the son of Mark Antony, who was later exiled for adultery with Julia. Their son Lucius Antonius was born in 20 or 19 BC. After Iullus' exile, Claudia married Sextus Appuleius, the consul of AD 14. In AD 17 their daughter Appuleia Varilla was charged with adultery and speaking insultingly about the imperial family. Although she was acquitted, her loved Manlius was banished from Italy and Africa.

Her younger sister, Claudia Marcella Minor (b. 43 BC), was married first to the consul Aemilius Lepidus Paullus. Their daughter Claudia Pulchra was born in 14 BC. After Paullus' death in 13 BC, Claudia married the consul Marcus Valerius Messalla Messallinus. Through their son, Marcus Valerius Messalla Barbatus, she was the grandmother of the emperor Claudius' wife Messalina.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]