== Notes for [[Item:Q90645|Q90645]] ==

Here is a quick question for you: who was the first person Paul led to the Lord? The first one recorded in Scripture, took place on the island of Cyprus. It was here that the apostle led a Roman proconsul by the name of Sergius Paulus to Christ, Acts 13:6-12.

Their outreach to the Cypriots occurred around 47 AD just before Sergius death. Luke, the author of the book of Acts, is careful to refer to Sergius Paulus as "Proconsul." Sure enough, this is the proper title for a Roman ruler sitting in authority on Cyprus at that time. Prior to this, a Roman ruler on the island would have been referred to as a "Propraetor." In 58 BC, Cyprus was annexed by Rome. From that point forward, an appointee of the Roman Emperor administered control over the island. In the Roman vernacular of the day, such a ruler would be referred to as an "Imperial Legate" or "Propraetor."

In 22 BC however, Rome changed the status of Cyprus from one of an annexed territory to that of a full-fledged province. Once a territory became a province, it fell under the authority of an appointee of the Roman Senate. As such, a "Proconsul" assumed ruling authority for the island. "One of the most remarkable tokens of (Luke's) accuracy is his sure familiarity with the proper titles of all the notable persons who are mentioned...Cyprus, for example, which was an imperial province until 22 BC, became a senatorial province in that year, and was therefore governed no longer by an imperial legate (a Propraetor) but by a Proconsul. And so, when Paul and Barnabas arrived in Cyprus about AD 47, it was the Proconsul Sergius Paulus whom they met..."1

Luke is not just accurate in his use of titles. Historians and archeologists have collected evidence for the existence of this particular Proconsul. In 1877, an archaeological dig was taking place in the area near ancient Paphos on Cyprus. Supervising the excavation was Luigi Palma di Cesnola. Cesnola had been a Medal of Honor recipient for his efforts during the American Civil War. After the war ended, he was appointed US Consul in Cyprus. Once there, he led a number of excavations. Incidentally, he would eventually be named the first curator of New York’s Metropolitan Museum. He located an inscription that proved a Proconsul named Paulus did exist. The inscription was in a marble block that was used to consecrate a monument in the first century, and it read as follows:

"Apollonius to his father...consecrated this enclosure and monument according to his family’s wishes...having filled the offices of clerk of the market, prefect, town-clerk, high priest, and having been in charge as manager of the records office. Erected on the 25th of the month Demarchexusius in the 13th year [of the reign of Claudius]. He also altered the senate by means of assessors during the time of the Proconsul Paulus."2 The 13th year of the reign of Claudius would be 54 AD, or just after the time of Paul and Barnabas’ visit. It could be that he is one in the same as the Sergius Paulus who was reached out to Paul and Barnabas.

Additional evidence for the existence of Sergius Paulus comes from a first century Roman source. Pliny the Elder, as history refers to him, was a Roman naval commander who lived from 23-79 AD. He was also a statesman, naturalist, and historian. A good deal of what we know about ancient Rome comes from his writings. Being in such influential positions, he came to know personally many of the important Roman political figures of the day.

Pliny the Elder’s most important work is Naturalis Historia (Latin for Natural History). It is, for all intents and purposes, Rome’s encyclopedia of the day. It is also one of the largest single works of Roman literature to have survived. He writes a good deal on Cyprus. In fact, He references a certain "Sergius Paulus" in his list of sources or authorities for Books 2 and 18 of his Natural History.3

In his discussions on Cyprus, Pliny reveals one more detail that is pertinent to Luke’s account in Acts 13:

"There existed different groups of magicians from the time of Moses such as Jannes and Lotape, of whom the Jews had spoken of. And in fact many thousands yearly follow after Zoroastrian ways especially during recent times on the Island of Cyprus."4 Here, Pliny the Elder confirms the presence of magicians (or what Luke calls "sorcerers") on Cyprus in the first century. They were so prominent that he actually gives them a place in his discussion of the island.

Before we leave Sergius Paulus, one more item is worth reviewing. Scripture tells us Asia Minor was the next place Paul and Barnabas journeyed to after leaving Cyprus. In fact, they head specifically toward Antioch in Pisidia (see Acts 13:13-14). An inscription is on display in the Yalvac Museum within Turkey that was found in the vicinity of Pisidian Antioch. The whole word "Paulii" and portions of "Sergii" are visible on it.5 It would seem that the family of Sergius Paulus had a large estate in this area. The inscription itself may even be a reference to the Proconsul. Who knows? Maybe Paul and Barnabas headed there at the request of the Roman commander with the hopes of leading his family to Christ! This stone can be found at: http://www.sacred-destinations.com/turkey/images/pisidian-antioch/sergius-paulus-inscription-c-hlp.jpg.

1 Bruce, F.F., The New Testament Documents: Are They Reliable?. Inter Varsity Press, Downers Grove, Illinois, 1973, p. 82. 2 Online at http://www.biblehistory.net/newsletter/paulus.htm. 3 Pliny the Elder, Natural History, Books 1 and 2, Volume 1, Translation by H. Rackham. Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1979 (Loeb Classical Library, pg. 330). 4 Online at http://www.biblehistory.net/newsletter/paulus.htm. 5 Online at http://www.padfield.com/2008/antioch-of-pisidia.html.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]