== Notes for [[Item:Q88163|Q88163]] ==

* [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antigone_of_Macedon Antigone] (Greek: Ἀντιγόνη) was a Greek Macedonian noblewoman that lived in the 4th century BC.

She was the child born to the nobleman Cassander by unnamed mother. Antigone was a relative to the powerful Regent Antipater as she was his niece. Her father and paternal uncle were the sons of Iolaus and through her father Antigone was a distant collateral relative to the Argead dynasty.

Antigone was originally from either Paliura or Eordeaea. Little is known on her life. Antigone married a Greek Macedonian nobleman from obscure origins called Magas who was from Eordeaea. Antigone and Magas lived in Eordeaea and had a daughter called Berenice I of Egypt.

The colony of Antigonia, was named after her and her granddaughter of the same name. Her namesake was the first wife of the Greek King Pyrrhus of Epirus.
--------------------

=Antigone of Macedon
=

Antigone (Greek: Ἀντιγόνη) was a Greek Macedonian noblewoman that lived in the 4th century BC.

She was the child born to the nobleman Cassander by unnamed mother.[1] Antigone was a relative to the powerful Regent Antipater[2] as she was his niece. Her father and paternal uncle were the sons of Iolaus and through her father Antigone was a distant collateral relative to the Argead dynasty.[3]

Antigone was originally from either Paliura or Eordeaea. Little is known on her life. Antigone married a Greek Macedonian nobleman from obscure origins called Magas who was from Eordeaea.[4] Antigone and Magas lived in Eordeaea and had a daughter called Berenice I of Egypt.[5]

The colony of Antigonia was named after her and her granddaughter of the same name. Her namesake was the first wife of the Greek King Pyrrhus of Epirus.

References[edit]

1.Jump up ^ Ptolemaic Genealogy: Berenice I, Footnote 3
2.Jump up ^ Berenice I article at Livius.org 3.Jump up ^ Ptolemaic Dynasty - Affiliated Lines: The Antipatrids 4.Jump up ^ Ptolemaic Genealogy: Berenice I, Footnote 2 5.Jump up ^ Heckel, Who’s who in the age of Alexander the Great: prosopography of Alexander’s empire, p. 71

Sources[edit] Berenice I article at Livius.org Ptolemaic Genealogy: Berenice I Ptolemaic Dynasty - Affiliated Lines: Antipatrids W. Heckel, Who’s who in the age of Alexander the Great: prosopography of Alexander’s empire, Wiley-Blackwell, 2006

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antigone_of_Macedon

--------------------
'''
=Antigone of Macedon=
'''

Antigone (Greek: Ἀντιγόνη) was a Greek Macedonian noblewoman that lived in the 4th century BC.

She was the child born to the nobleman Cassander by unnamed mother. Antigone was a relative to the powerful Regent Antipater as she was his niece. Her father and paternal uncle were the sons of Iolaus and through her father Antigone was a distant collateral relative to the Argead dynasty.

Antigone was originally from either Paliura or Eordeaea. Little is known on her life. Antigone married a Greek Macedonian nobleman from obscure origins called Magas who was from Eordeaea. Antigone and Magas lived in Eordeaea and had a daughter called Berenice I of Egypt.

The colony of Antigonia was named after her and her granddaughter of the same name. Her namesake was the first wife of the Greek King Pyrrhus of Epirus.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antigone_of_Macedon

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]