== Notes for [[Item:Q105354|Q105354]] ==

Capt. Joseph RAMON [1836],[2640] was born (date unknown). Parents: Joseph RAMON (Joseph de Morales) and Juana de MORALES (aka Juana Gutierrez).

Spouse: Josepha Lopez de la PEÑA. Josepha Lopez de la PEÑA and Capt. Joseph RAMON were married. Children were:
*1. Juan RAMON,
*2. Francisco RAMON,
*3. Capt. Luis RAMON.

http://www.raullongoria.net/Genealogy/FamilyTree/b183.html#P8784

==========================

40. CAPTAIN JOSEPH4 RAMON-DE-MORALES-Y-GUTIERREZ (JOSEPH3 DE MORALES-Y-RAMON, JUANA2 DE TREVINO-QUINTANILLA-Y-SALAZAR, PEDRO1 DE SALAZAR)
*was born 1640, and
*died 08 Jul 1682 in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
*He married JOSEPHA LOPEZ-DE-LA-PENA.

Notes for CAPTAIN JOSEPH RAMON-DE-MORALES-Y-GUTIERREZ: His last will and testament was signed on July 8, 1682. Source:Origen de los Fundadores de Texas, Nuevo Mexico, Coahulia, y Nuevo Leon, by Guillermo Garmendia Leal. Page 134.

Children of JOSEPH RAMON-DE-MORALES-Y-GUTIERREZ and JOSEPHA LOPEZ-DE-LA-PENA are:
*1. i. JUAN5 RAMON-DE-MORALES-Y-LOPEZ,
**m. BERNARDA DE CEPEDA, 08 Jun 1722, Saltillo, Coahulia, Mexico;
***b. 1704.
****Marriage Notes for JUAN RAMON-DE-MORALES-Y-LOPEZ and BERNARDA DE CEPEDA: Source:Index to the Marriage Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara by Raul J. Guerra, Jr., Nadine M. Vasquez, Valdomero Vela, Jr. Page 231.
*2. ii. ANTONIO RAMON-PENA.
*3. iii. ALCALDE FRANCISCO RAMON-DE-MORALES,
**b. 1690;
**m. FRANCISCA-XAVIERA DE CEPEDA-Y-VALLE, 04 Feb 1706/07, Saltillo, Coahulia, Mexico;
***b. 15 Dec 1686, Sagrario Metropolitano, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
****Marriage Notes for FRANCISCO RAMON-DE-MORALES and FRANCISCA-XAVIERA DE CEPEDA-Y-VALLE: Source:Index to the Marriage Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara by Raul J. Guerra, Jr., Nadine M. Vasquez, Valdomero Vela, Jr. Page 196.
*4. iv. CAPTAIN LUIS RAMON-DE-MORALES-Y-LOPEZ-DE-LA-PENA,
**m. ISABEL DE CEPEDA-Y-GARCIA.

http://www.somosprimos.com/inclan/salazar.htm

====================

Incorrect genration:

joseph ramon 1640-1682 coahuila ,mexico
* father : JOSE Ramon De Morales (1627-1670)
* mother: juana de morales gutierrez (-)

siblings :
* Ildeponsa Ramon (-)
* juana Ramon De Morales (-)
* maria jacinta Ramon (-)
* nicolas Ramon De Morales (-)
* maria Ramon (1652-)

Half-Siblings
* diego Ramon (-1716)
* jose domingo Ramon (-)
* leonor Ramon (-)
* maria Ramon De Morales (-1691)

wife: josepha peña (1654-)

Children
* juan RAMON (-)
* luis RAMON (-)
* francisco RAMON (1690-)

http://genforum.genealogy.com/ramon/messages/77.html

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000011021244781

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]