== Notes for [[Item:Q111216|Q111216]] ==

----
===Biography

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eboric

'''Eboric''' or '''Euric''' was the last legitimate Suevic King of Galicia. He was the adolescent son of Miro and Sisegutia (or Siseguntia) and he succeeded his father in 583, ruling for a year before being deposed by his mother's second husband, Audeca, who threw him in a monastery. His deposition gave the Visigothic king Leovigild casus belli to invade Galicia and remove Audeca from power.

===Genealogy

https://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/VANDALS,%20SUEVI,%20VISIGOTHS.htm#Audicadied585

King Mirón & his wife had two children:
*a) EBORICO (-after 585). The Iohannis Abbatis Biclarensis Chronica names "Eboricus filius eius" when recording that he succeeded his father in 583 "in provincia Gallacciæ"[109]. Gregory of Tours names "Euric" as son of "Mir King of Galicia" when recording that he succeeded his father and sought to renew a pact with King Leovigildo[110]. He succeeded his father in 583 as EBORICO King of the Suevi at Lugo. He was deposed in 584 by Audica[111]. The Iohannis Abbatis Biclarensis Chronica records that he became a monk after he was deposed[112].
*b) daughter . Gregory of Tours records that Audica, a relation of Euric, married the sister of the latter[113]. m as his [first] wife, AUDICA, son of ---.

----
===References
* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eboric cites
** Arias, Jorge C. "Identity and Interactions: The Suevi and the Hispano-Romans." University of Virginia: Spring 2007. < [https://www.academia.edu/1523816/Identity_and_Interaction_the_Suevi_and_the_Hispano-Romans link] >
* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kingdom_of_the_Suebi
* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Galician_monarchs
* Medlands - KINGS of the SUEVI in SPAIN 411-585 https://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/VANDALS,%20SUEVI,%20VISIGOTHS.htm
* ''History of the Kings of the Goths, Vandals, and Suevi''. By Saint Isidore (of Seville). Page 42-43. < [https://books.google.com/books?id=AywVAAAAIAAJ&lpg=PP1&vq=Sisegutia&pg=PA42#v=onepage&q=Miro&f=false GoogleBooks] >

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]