== Notes for [[Item:Q89372|Q89372]] ==

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaius_Caeionius_Rufius_Volusianus - c. 246 – c. 330) was a Roman senator who had a lengthy political career and who was appointed consul twice, firstly in AD 311, and again in 314....It has been speculated that Rufius Volusianus may have been the son of Caeionius Varus, the Praefectus urbi of Rome in AD 284.[1] His early career is unknown, but it is speculated that he held a suffect consulship in around AD 280 under the emperor Probus.[2] In c. AD 282 he was appointed by the emperor Carinus to the proconsular position of Corrector Italiae, with his area of administration being centred on central and southern Italy. He held this post until c. AD 290. From AD 305–306, Volusianus was appointed the proconsular governor of Africa. When the Roman usurper Maxentius was recognized as emperor in Africa, Volusianus attached himself to his court. In around AD 309, Volusianus was made Maxentius’ Praetorian Prefect, which he held until 310. He was sent by Maxentius to recover the province of Africa, which had rebelled and acclaimed Domitius Alexander emperor, causing severe food shortages in Rome. He crossed over to Africa with a small but well trained force and proceeded to defeat the poorly armed rebels. His troops then wrought havoc in Carthage and other African cities. Volusianus then trapped Alexander in Cirta which was sacked. The captured Alexander was strangled, and his supporters were purged from their positions of authority and killed. Having reclaimed the province, Volusianus returned to Rome.

==Remembering Constantine at Milvian Bridge==
Author, Raymond van Dam
See pages 129-131, 162, 241
https://www.google.com/books/edition/Remembering_Constantine_at_the_Milvian_B/JS468l8Rnu0C?hl=en&gbpv=1&bsq=Volusianus

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]