== Notes for [[Item:Q88087|Q88087]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lysimachus_of_Thrace
--------------------
'''
=Lysimachus=
'''

Lysimachus (Greek: Λυσίμαχος, Lysimachos; c. 360 BC-281 BC) was a Macedonian officer and diadochus (i.e. "successor") of Alexander the Great, who became a basileus ("King") in 306 BC, ruling Thrace, Asia Minor and Macedon.

'''Early life and career'''

Lysimachus was born in 361 BC (or 355 BC), to a family of Thessalian Greek stock. He was the second son of Agathocles and his wife; there is some indication in the historical sources that this wife was perhaps named Arsinoe, and that Lysimachus' paternal grandfather may have been called Alcimachus. His father was a nobleman of high rank who was an intimate friend of Philip II of Macedon, who shared in Philip II’s councils and became a favourite in the Argead court. Lysimachus and his brothers grew up with the status of Macedonians; all these brothers enjoyed with Lysimachus prominent positions in Alexander’s circle and, like him, were educated at the Macedonian court in Pella.

He was probably appointed Somatophylax during the reign of Philip II. During Alexander's Persian campaigns, in 328 BC he was one of his immediate bodyguards. In 324 BC, in Susa, he was crowned in recognition for his actions in India. After Alexander’s death in 323 BC, he was appointed to the government of Thrace as strategos although he faced some difficulties from the Thracian dynast Seuthes.

'''Diadochi'''

In 315 BC, Lysimachus joined Cassander, Ptolemy I Soter and Seleucus I Nicator against Antigonus I Monophthalmus, who, however, diverted his attention by stirring up Thracian and Scythian tribes against him. However, he managed to consolidate his power in the east of his territories, suppressing a revolt of the cities on the Black Sea coast.

In 309 BC, he founded Lysimachia in a commanding situation on the neck connecting the Chersonese with the mainland which formed a bulwark against the Odrysians.

In 306/305 BC, Lysimachus followed the example of Antigonus I assumed the title of "King", which he held until his death at Corupedium in 281 BC.

In 302 BC, when the second affiance between Cassander, Ptolemy I and Seleucus I was made, Lysimachus, reinforced by troops from Cassander, entered Asia Minor, where he met with little resistance. On the approach of Antigonus I he retired into winter quarters near Heraclea, marrying its widowed queen Amastris, a Persian princess. Seleucus I joined him in 301 BC, and at the Battle of Ipsus Antigonus I was defeated and slain. Antigonus' dominions were divided among the victors. Lysimachus' share was Lydia, Ionia, Phrygia and the north coast of Asia Minor.

Feeling that Seleucus I was becoming dangerously powerful, Lysimachus now allied himself with Ptolemy I, marrying his daughter Arsinoe II of Egypt. Amastris, who had divorced herself from him, returned to Heraclea. When Antigonus I’s son Demetrius I renewed hostilities (297 BC), during his absence in Greece, Lysimachus seized his towns in Asia Minor, but in 294 BC concluded a peace whereby Demetrius I was recognized as ruler of Macedonia. He tried to carry his power beyond the Danube, but was defeated and taken prisoner by the Getae king Dromichaetes (or Dromihete), who, however, set him free in 292 BC on amicable terms in return for Lysimachus surrendering the Danubian lands he had captured.[1] Demetrius I subsequently threatened Thrace, but had to retire due to a sudden uprising in Boeotia, and an attack from King Pyrrhus of Epirus.

In 287 BC, Lysimachus and Pyrrhus in turn invaded Macedonia, and drove Demetrius I out of the country. Lysimachus left Pyrrhus in possession of Macedonia with the title of king for around seven months before Lysimachus invaded. For a short while the two ruled jointly but in 285 BC Lysimachus expelled Pyrrhus, seizing complete control for himself.

'''Later years'''

Domestic troubles embittered the last years of Lysimachus’ life. Amastris had been murdered by her two sons; Lysimachus treacherously put them to death. On his return, Arsinoe II asked the gift of Heraclea, and he granted her request, though he had promised to free the city. In 284 BC Arsinoe II, desirous of gaining the succession for her sons in preference to Lysimachus’ first child, Agathocles, intrigued against him with the help of Arsinoe II’s paternal half-brother Ptolemy Keraunos; they accused him of conspiring with Seleucus I to seize the throne, and Agathocles was put to death.

This atrocious deed by Lysimachus aroused great indignation. Many of the cities of Asia Minor revolted, and his most trusted friends deserted him. The widow of Agathocles and their children fled to Seleucus I, who at once invaded the territory of Lysimachus in Asia Minor. In 281 BC, Lysimachus crossed the Hellespont into Lydia and at the decisive Battle of Corupedium was killed. After some days his body was found on the field, protected from birds of prey by his faithful dog. Lysimachus' body was given over to another son Alexander, by whom it was interred at Lysimachia.

'''Marriages and children'''

# First marriage: Nicaea a Greek Macedonian noblewoman and daughter of the powerful Regent Antipater. Lysimachus and Nicaea married in c. 321 BC. Nicaea bore Lysimachus three children (one son, two daughter) : Agathocles, Eurydice, Arsinoe I
# Second marriage: Persian Princess Amastris. Lysimachus married her in 302 BC. Amastris and Lysimachus’ union was brief, as he ended their marriage and divorced her in 300/299 BC. Amastris had two sons from a previous marriage. During their brief marriage, Amastris may have borne Lysimachus a child, perhaps a daughter who may have been the first wife of Ptolemy Keraunos.
# Third marriage: Ptolemaic Greek Princess Arsinoe II. Arsinoe II married Lysimachus in 300/299 BC and remained with him until his death in 281 BC. Arsinoe II bore Lysimachus three sons: Ptolemy I Epigone, Lysimachus, Philip
# From an Odrysian concubine he had a son borne to him called Alexander.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lysimachus

The generals who succeed Alexander are Antigonus Cyclops orMonophthalmus, so-called because he lost an eye in battle, and his sonDemetrius Poliocertes, Antipater and his son Cassander, Seleucus,Ptolemy, Eumenes and Lysimachus. They argue bitterly among themselves foreach is determined to build a Hellenistic or Greek monarchy on the ruinsof Alexander's empire.

Ptolemy, son of a Macedonian nobleman and the most trusted of Alexander'sgenerals, was among the seven bodyguards attached to his person. In thedivision of the empire, Ptolemy takes Egypt as the safest and farthestplace to establish a dynasty. He even manages to carry off the body ofAlexander from Babylon to Egypt in order to bury him in Alexandria andthus enhance his own position.

Later Ptolemy mints a gold coin at Alexandria on which we see a car drawnby four elephants. Perhaps this is an attempt made by him to representAlexander's funeral cortege that included elephants.

Antipater establishes himself in Macedon. He dies soon after and issucceeded by Cassander, his son.

Seleucus Nicator, a youth of twenty-three of age when he accompaniesAlexander to Asia, wins distinction in the Indian campaign. Seleucus isgiven the government of the Babylonian satrapy.

Antigonus defeats Eumenes, installed as satrap of Cappadocia, and has himput to death. He thus gets rid of his most dangerous rival. OstensiblyAntigonus and his son Demetrius Poliocertes hope to reunify Alexander'scollapsing empire but for their own purposes. Antigonus also controlsparts of Greece, Asia Minor and Syria.

Lysimachus sets himself up in Thrace.

Military clashes eventually occur as each tries to encroach on theother's territory. Ptolemy annexes Phoenicia to his possessions andplaces garrisons in the Phoenician port cities. Antigonus too decides toenlarge his territory and set himself up as king of Asia Minor.

Returning from successful wars in Babylonia, Antigonus easily takes overthe cities of Phoenicia but meets with firm resistance from Tyre.Seventeen years have passed since Alexander took Tyre and the city hasrecovered rapidly. Antigonus has few ships as Ptolemy is holding allPhoenician vessels and their crews in Egypt, so he decides to build afleet of his own. He camps before Tyre, summons all the kings of thePhoenician cities and the viceroys of Syria and demands them to assisthim in building ships.

Antigonus blockades Tyre by land. He establishes three shipyards, one atTripolis, one at Byblos, one at Sidon. Diodorus Siculus records thatAntigonus collects wood-cutters, sawyers and shipwrights from all regionsand has wood carried from the mountains of Lebanon to the sea. Eightthousand men are employed to cut and saw the timber; one thousand pairsof draught animals are used to transport it. "This mountain range",Diodorus (19.58.3-5) writes, "extends along the territory of Tripolis,Byblos and Sidon and is covered with cedar and cypress trees of wonderfulbeauty and size." We thus have a description of the extent of theluxuriant forests covering the mountains of Lebanon about two thousandthree hundred years ago.

After a siege of fifteen months, Tyre is taken by Antigonus. He allowsPtolemy's garrison to leave and establishes his own in the city.

In order to enhance their personal prestige, Alexander's successorsstrike their own coins. On the obverse of his early silver coinage,Ptolemy has engraved the head of the newly deified Alexander with thesacred ram's horns of Ammon and an elephant headdress. Alexander's name,not his, appears on the reverse of his coins.

On the coins of Seleucus, Alexander is portrayed as the god Dionysuswearing a helmet covered with panther skin adorned with a bull's ear andhorns.

Lysimachus in his turn presents on his coins the diademed head ofAlexander, deified, wearing the sacred horns of Ammon. When Alexanderconquered Egypt, he was hailed by the high-priest of Ammon as the son ofthe god and Alexander's generals are determined to let no one forget it.

In 305 B.C. Antigonus and his son Demetrius assume the title of king.Ptolemy, Cassander, Lysimachus and Seleucus react to the challenge bydoing the same. Henceforth the effigies of these men, wearing theMacedonian diadem, appear on their gold and silver coins. Their patrongods appear on the reverse. This ushurs in the age of royal portraiture.

The battle of lpsus in Phrygia in 301, called the "battle of the kings",signals the great military clash between Alexander's generals. The warelephant plays an important role in the outcome of this battle and is thesymbol of military strength. The armies of Seleucus and Lysimachus withone hundred and fifty elephants cut off the infantry of Antigonus, leftmortally wounded on the battlefield.

Notwithstanding, his son Demetrius rules Phoenicia until 287 when it onceagain passes back to Ptolemy. It remains a dependency of the Ptolemiesfor nearly seventy years. In the year 285 Alexander's empire is neatlydivided between three of his former generals, Ptolemy in Egypt, Seleucusin Syria, Lebanon and Palestine, and Lysimachus in Thrace.

At his death at the age of eight-four Ptolemy leaves behind him a wellorganized kingdom and the great library at Alexandria. He is succeeded byhis son, Ptolemy 11 Philadelphus (285-246).

The persistent lug of war between Ptolemies and Seleucids over Phoenicia,Syria and Palestine also results in great cultural changes in the region.Phoenician is discarded as a literary language and is replaced by Greek.Greek religious practices and beliefs take root but at the same time aPhoenician god travels south to Egypt and is honored with great pomp inAlexandria.

Byblos is the center for the worship of Adonis, a youth of great beauty,loved by Aphrodite. In legendary tradition, Adonis is hunting the wildboar one day in the company of Aphrodite at Afka, the source of a riverhigh up in the mountains of Lebanon. The boar turns on him and gores histhigh. Adonis dies of the wound as his blood flows into the river turningthe waters red and the anemones in the river valley scarlet. Aphroditeappeals to Zeus, king of the gods, to bring her lover back to life. Zeuspities the youth and allows him to pass part of the year on earth, theother part underground in Hades. His death is mourned annually at Byblos.He returns in the spring time to the upper world and there is greatrejoicing. Adonis in Phoenician means "lord" and is the title given tothe young god of vegetation.

Theocritus, a Greek poet born in Syracuse c. 315 B.C., lived inAlexandria in the time of Ptolemy if Philadelphus. In his Idyll 15 hedescribes how the Festival of Adonis is celebrated in the city. On thefirst day a great procession forms as women and children pour out intothe crowded streets to watch. Adonis has come back to life for a briefreunion with Aphrodite and there is great rejoicing. The second day isone of mourning as the women bewail the god's departure once again forthe underworld.

In Alexandria, Adonis is represented by a graceful statue reclining on asilver couch in a temporary bower ornamented with birds and cupids. He isportrayed as a beautiful youth and the women cluster around him as he iscarried through the streets in the procession. The crowd enters the royalpalace as part of the ceremony is performed there. Praises are sung toQueen Berenice, the mother of Philadelphus and Arsinoë, his sister-wife,one way of eulogizing the family of Ptolemy who patronize the festival.

On the second day the women lament the departure of the youthful god. Atthe end of the festival the statue of Adonis is carried outside the cityand flung into the sea amidst the wailing and weeping of the women.

The years roll by...

In Egypt descendants of Ptolemy rule at Alexandria, one after the other.In Syria a line of Seleucid kings, usurpers and imposters alike, sit onthe throne of Antioch.

The Seleucid king Antiochus III the Great (223-187) makes Phoenicia abattlefield in his wars against the Ptolemies. Antiochus III drives theforces of Ptolemy IV Philopator out of Syria, takes Tyre and Acre(Ptolemais) and even threatens Egypt. In the following years the citiesof Phoenicia pass back and forth between the two powers. In 196 B.C.Phoenicia and Coele Syria (the Bekaa valley) pass into the possession ofthe Seleucid kings. The Phoenician cities welcome the change, for theestablishment and commercial expansion of Alexandria is a threat to theircommerce.

The discovery in 1897 of several painted funerary stelae in a gardensouth of Sidon point to the presence of Greek mercenaries in the armiesof the Seleucids during the second century B.C. These soldiers of fortunefrom the Greek mainland and cities of Asia Minor died here while onactive duty and were laid to rest forever in foreign land. The stelaetoday are exposed in the Archaeological Museum, Istanbul.

The Seleucid monarchy is now in a state of chronic civil war. In thestruggle to seize the throne between the usurper Tryphon and AntiochusVII Sidetes during the latter part of the second century B.C., thesituation becomes so unbearable that merchants of Beirut desert the cityand open commercial establishments on the Greek island of Delos wherethey conduct a flourishing business.

But in the West the rise of Rome presents a danger. The Italian wars of91-83 B.C. keep the Romans at home. The chaotic conditions in Syriapermit Tigranes 11 the Great, king of Armenia, to overrun Cappadocia andexpel one of the last feeble representatives of the Seleucid monarchy. By83 B.C. Tigranes sits on the throne at Antioch and his frontier extendsto Mount Lebanon.

In 69 B.C. the Roman general Lucullus arrives in the East, crosses theEuphrates in pursuit of Tigranes and invades Armenia. However his armydoes not support him so he withdraws to Asia Minor.

Pompey replaces Lucullus in 66 B.C. Syria is taken out of the hands ofthe Seleucids once and for all on the ground that they have virtuallyceased to rule. Pompey turns the districts of the Seleucid territory,including Phoenicia, Syria and Palestine into a new province named"Syria". Although this political move consolidates Roman authority in theEast and increases the annual revenue of the Roman treasury, in return ameasure of security is given to the peoples of the region that they hadnot enjoyed since the conquests of Alexander. Anarchy and piracy isbrought under control and the cities of Phoenicia turn to the sea andtrade.

SOURCE NOTES:
!INDIVIDUAL GENERAL RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Thrace

FORMER GENERAL OF ALEXANDER THE GREAT; KING OF THRACE; d. 281 BC

Lysimachus
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Lysimachus (c. 360 BC–281 BC, Greek: ??s?µa???) was a Macedonian officer and "successor" (diadochus) of Alexander the Great, later a king (306 BC) in Thrace and Asia Minor.

Son of Agathocles, he was from Pella in Macedonia. During Alexander's Persian campaigns he was one of his immediate bodyguard and distinguished himself in India. After Alexander’s death (323 BC) he was appointed to the government of Thrace and the Chersonese. For a long time he was chiefly occupied with fighting against the Odrysian king Seuthes III.

In 315 BC he joined Cassander, Ptolemy and Seleucus against Antigonus, who, however, diverted his attention by stirring up Thracian and Scythian tribes against him. In 309 BC, he founded Lysimachia in a commanding situation on the neck connecting the Chersonese with the mainland. He followed the example of Antigonus in taking the title of king. In 302 when the second affiance between Cassander, Ptolemy and Seleucus was made, Lysimachus, reinforced by troops from Cassander, entered Asia Minor, where he met with little resistance. On the approach of Antigonus he retired into winter quarters near Heraclea, marrying its widowed queen Amastris, a Persian princess. Seleucus joined him in 301 BC, and at the battle of Ipsus Antigonus was defeated and slain. His dominions were divided among the victors, Lysimachus receiving the greater part of Asia Minor.
Coin of Lysimachus. Greek inscription reads ??S???OS ??S?????? ([coin] of King Lysimachus).
Enlarge
Coin of Lysimachus. Greek inscription reads ??S???OS ??S?????? ([coin] of King Lysimachus).

Feeling that Seleucus was becoming dangerously great, Lysimachus now allied himself with Ptolemy, marrying his daughter Arsinoe II of Egypt. Amastris, who had divorced herself from him, returned to Heraclea. When Antigonus’s son Demetrius I of Macedon renewed hostilities (297 BC), during his absence in Greece, Lysimachus seized his towns in Asia Minor, but in 294 BC concluded a peace whereby Demetrius was recognized as ruler of Macedonia. He tried to carry his power beyond the Danube, but was defeated and taken prisoner by the Getae king Dromichaetes (Dromihete), who, however, set him free on amicable terms. Demetrius subsequently threatened Thrace, but had to retire in consequence of a rising in Boeotia, and an attack from Pyrrhus of Epirus.

In 288 BC Lysimachus and Pyrrhus in turn invaded Macedonia, and drove Demetrius out of the country. Pyrrhus was at first allowed to remain in possession of Macedonia with the title of king, but in 285 BC he was expelled by Lysimachus.

Domestic troubles embittered the last years of Lysimachus’s life. Amastris had been murdered by her two sons; Lysimachus treacherously put them to death. On his return Arsinoe asked the gift of Heraclea, and he granted her request, though he had promised to free the city. In 284 BC Arsinoe, desirous of gaining the succession for her sons in preference to Agathocles (the eldest son of Lysimachus), intrigued against him with the help of her brother Ptolemy Keraunos; they accused him of conspiring with Seleucus to seize the throne, and he was put to death.

This atrocious deed of Lysimachus aroused great indignation. Many of the cities of Asia revolted, and his most trusted friends deserted him. The widow of Agathocles fled to Seleucus, who at once invaded the territory of Lysimachus in Asia. In 281 BC, Lysimachus crossed the Hellespont into Lydia, and at the decisive Battle of Corupedium was killed. After some days his body, watched by a faithful dog, was found on the field, and given up to his son Alexander, by whom it was interred at Lysimachia.
[edit]

References

* Arrian, Anabasis v. 13, vi. 28
* Justin xv. 3, 4, xvii. I
* Quintus Curtius V. 3, x. 30
* Diodorus Siculus xviii. 3
* Polybius v. 67
* Plutarch, Demetrius, 31. 52, Pyrrhus, 12
* Appian, Syriaca, 62
* Connop Thirlwall, History of Greece, vol. viii. (1847)
* J. P. Mahaffy, Story of Alexander’s Empire
* Droysen, Hellenismus (2nd ed., 1877)
* Adolf Holm, Griechische Geschichte, vol. iv. (1894)
* Benediktus Niese, Geschichte der griechischen und makedonischen Staaten, vols. i. and ii. (1893, 1899)
* Karl Julius Beloch, Griechische Geschichte vol. iii. (1904)
* Hunerwadel, Forschungen zur Gesch. des Könige Lysimachus (1900)
* Possenti, Il Re Lisimaco di Tracia (1901)
* Ghione, "Note sul regno di Lisimaco" (Atti d. real. Accad. di Torino, xxxix.)
* This article incorporates text from the Encyclopædia Britannica Eleventh Edition, a publication now in the public domain.

{{succession box|title=Governor of Thrace|before=—|after=became king|years=323–306 BC
Preceded by:
Alexander IV King of Thrace
306–281 BC Succeeded by:
Ptolemy Keraunos
Preceded by:
Antigonus I Monophthalmus King of Asia Minor
301–281 BC Succeeded by:
Seleucus I Nicator
Preceded by:
Demetrius I Poliorcetes King of Macedon
with Pyrrhus of Epirus
288–281 BC Succeeded by:
Ptolemy Keraunos

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]