== Notes for [[Item:Q87030|Q87030]] ==

* from Wikipedia

'''Lucius Nonius Asprenas''' (fl. 1st century AD) was a Roman Senator who was brought to trial during the reign of the emperor Augustus.

=Biography=

The son of Lucius Nonius Asprenas, the suffect consul of 36 BC, Asprenas was a member of the Nobiles and an intimate friend of the emperor Augustus.[1]

In around 9 BC, Nonius Asprenas was brought to trial after a number of his guests (reportedly some 130 people) died after attending a party which he hosted. Cassius Severus brought the charges against him, alleging that Asprenas had poisoned them. His defence was conducted by Gaius Asinius Pollio.[2] Augustus expressed his concern over the charges in the Senate and made an appearance at court, but did not make any statement while present. Nevertheless, the emperor’s auctoritas was sufficient to win an acquittal for Asprenas.

=Ruination=

The fact that charges had been brought against him meant that his political career was ruined; not only did he forfeit his seat as one of the Septemviri, but he also was prevented from contesting the consulship.[3][4]

=Issue=

Nonius Asprenas married Quinctilla, a sister of Publius Quinctilius Varus, and they had at least one son, Lucius Nonius Asprenas, the suffect consul of 6 AD. He was also the biological, or possibly adoptive, father of Sextus Nonius Quinctilianus, the Roman consul of AD 8.[5] He was the brother-in-law of Lucius Volusius Saturninus, the suffect consul of 12 BC.[6]

=Sources=

* Syme, Ronald, "The Augustan Aristocracy" (1986). Clarendon Press. Retrieved 2012-11-01 – via Questia (subscription required)

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]