== Notes for [[Item:Q3352|Q3352]] ==

Garcia Perez Polanco was Mayor of La Vega, Villa del Cotui around 1575 according to Utrera, Fray Cipriano de. "Heredia: Centenario de Jose Maria Heredia, Pag. 139". Editorial Franciscana, Ciudad Trujillo 1939 (attached in media section)

He figures as a witness in Concepcion de la Vega in 1575 along with Antonio de Henao, his brother Hernan Perez Polanco and Juan Daza Davila, who was originally from Aranda de Dueros, Burgos, Spain, also mayor of La Vega and whose son Luis de Avila Guillen married Christopher Columbus granddaughter Maria Magdalena Colon de Toledo y Guzman. (Utrera, Fray Cipriano de. "Noticias Históricas de Santo Domingo Vol. Vl page 241". Editora Taller, 1983). (attached profile picture)

He was Alguacil Mayor of La Vega according to the Relacion de Meritos of his grandson Capt. Garcia Perez Polanco of 1646 [http://pares.mcu.es/ParesBusquedas20/catalogo/show/397774 "Méritos del Capitan y Sargento Mayor Don Pedro Perez Polanco. Carta del Gobernador Francisco Segura Sandoval y Castilla (1680)". Archivo General de Indias, Santo_Domingo, 64,R.2,N.39] Image no.141

He also appears on the list of rescatadores of 1594 along with his brother Juan Sanchez de Onsijera Polanco. [https://en.calameo.com/read/000345214ba22b5666e13 Rodriguez Demorizi, Emilio "Relaciones Historicas de Santo Domingo. Vol II"] (p.156-160)

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051ADA2F9221EFBBFA9822EF79916C0501
geni:6000000064526403824


[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]