== Notes for [[Item:Q112643|Q112643]] ==

Jimeno Garcés (m. 29 de mayo de 931) fue hijo de García Jiménez y de su segunda esposa, Dadildis de Pallars, y miembro de la dinastía Jimena.

A la muerte de su hermano, también hijo del segundo matrimonio de su padre, Sancho Garcés I en diciembre de 925, Jimeno Garcés ejerció de regente la potestas regia con diversidad de títulos como rey, ayo, tutor o baiulus de su sobrino García Sánchez I, que era hijo de su difunto hermano, menor de edad en el momento de su fallecimiento.

A su muerte la reina Toda Aznárez aseguró el trono para García frente a las intenciones de Íñigo Garcés, hermanastro de Sancho Garcés I y Jimeno Garcés.

La mayor parte de su vida, según se desprende de la documentación medieval, transcurrió en las tierras patrimoniales de Lumbier-Sangüesa.

Contrajo matrimonio con Sancha Aznárez, hija del conde Aznar Sánchez de Larraún y Onneca Fortúnez,​ que eran primos hermanos,​ hermana de la reina viuda Toda Aznárez y nieta de Fortún Garcés, rey de Pamplona, de quien tuvo:

García Jiménez de Pamplona.— Según el Códice de Roda, García mató a su madre «in Galias», en la villa llamada Laco, y fue muerto a su vez en Salazar por Iohannes Belascones y Cardelle Belascones (Velasco o Velázquez). Sancho Jiménez de Pamplona.— Contrajo matrimonio con Quixilo Garcés, hija de García, conde de Bailo. Dadildis Jiménez de Pamplona.— Esposa de Muza Aznar ibn al-Tawil, valí de Huesca.

https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jimeno_Garc%C3%A9s_de_Pamplona

===============================
[source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jimeno_Garcés_of_Pamplona]

--------------------

(Redirected from Jimeno II of Pamplona)

Jimeno II Garcés (d. 931) was the brother of King Sancho I of Pamplona and son of García Jiménez by his second wife, Dadildis of Pallars. He reigned from 925 until his death (931). While sometimes said to have been regent for his nephew, García, the oldest sources make no distinction between him and other kings of the time. Only in the last year of his reign does García also appear with the royal title. In 927, he took an army south to support his Banu Qasi kinsman, causing, Abd-ar-rahman III, Emir of Córdoba, nephew of Jimeno's wife, to retreat without offering battle.

Jimeno married Sancha Aznárez, sister of Sancho's queen Toda Aznárez and granddaughter of king Fortún Garcés. He had by her: García, who went with his mother to Gascony; Sancho, who married Quissilo, daughter of García, count in Bailo; and Dadildis, wife of Muza Aznar, wali of Huesca (grandson of Aznar Galíndez II of Aragón). By a mistress he had another son named García, who died at Córdoba.
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jimeno_Garc%C3%A9s_of_Pamplona

Jimeno Garcés of Pamplona

Preceded by Sancho I King of Pamplona 925-931 Succeeded by García Sánchez I

This page was last modified on 10 April 2010 at 20:46.
--------------------
* [NAVA261] Jimeno Garcez of Navarre m. ?
>* [ALAV271] Count Vela Jimenez of Alava m. ?
>>* [ALAV281] Nuno Velaz m. ?
>>>* [ALAV293] Vela Nunez m. Todile Nunez
>>>>* [ALAV303] Jimena Velaz m. [GUND291] Count Piniolo Gundemariz
>>>* [ALAV291] Count Vermudo Nunez of Cea m1. Argilo
>>>>* [ALAV302] Froiloba Vermudez de Cea m. [LOIS301] Munio Flainiz
>>>>* [ALAV301] Count Fernando Vermudez of Cea m. [SALD302] Countess Elvira Diaz
>>>>>* [ALAV312] Justa Fernandez m. [LOIS311] Count Flain Munoz
>>>>>* [ALAV313] Gotina Fernandez m. [RODP311] Count Pelayo Rodrigez
>>>>>* [ALAV314] Jimena Fernandez de Cea m. [NAVA311] King Garcia II Sanchez of Navarre

38. [ALAV271] Vela Jimenez (born c.834, son of [NAVA261] Jimeno Garcez, see NAVARRE (HOUSE OF JIMENO) KINGDOM), Count of Alava.

37. [ALAV281] Nuno Velaz. He died c.926.

36. [ALAV293] Vela Nunez (born c.900, son of Nuno Velaz) married Todile Nunez. He died 945.

35. [ALAV303] Jimena Velaz (daughter of Vela Nunez) possibly married [GUND291] Count Piniolo (see PINIOLO GUNDEMARIZ below).

36. [ALAV291] Vermudo Nunez (son of Nuno Velaz), Count of Cea, married 1. Argilo; then 2. (c.946-49) Velasquite Velsaquez (daughter of Vela Nunez).

35. [ALAV302] Froiloba Vermudez (daughter of Vermudo [& Argilo]) married (before 947) [LOIS301] Munio Flainiz (see LOIS).

35. [ALAV301] Count Fernando Vermudez of Cea (son of Vermudo & Argilo) married [SALD302] Countess Elvira Diaz (see SALDANA COUNTY).

34. [ALAV312] Justa Fernandez (daughter of Fernando) married (before 975) her first-cousin [LOIS311] Flain Munoz (see LOIS).

34. [ALAV313] Gotina Fernandez (daughter of Fernando) married [RODP311] Count Pelayo Rodrigez (see below).

34. [ALAV314] Jemima Fernandez (daughter of Fernando) married [NAVA311] King Garcia II Sanchez (see NAVARRE (HOUSE OF JIMENO) KINGDOM).

in: ALAVA COUNTY <http://mauriceboddy.org.uk/Alava.htm>

Sucedio como Regente de Navarra (925-931) a la muerte de su hermano Sancho I Garcés de Pamplona y tutor de su sobrino, el futuro García I Sánchez

Sucedio como Regente de Navarra (925-931) a la muerte de su hermano Sancho I Garcés de Pamplona y tutor de su sobrino, el futuro García I Sánchez

Source: Codex de Roda

Name Prefix:<NPFX> Count Name Suffix:<NSFX> of Navarre

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]