== Notes for [[Item:Q87522|Q87522]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Julia_Caesaris_(sister_of_Julius_Caesar)
--------------------
ID: I6885 Name: Julia of Rome Caesar Given Name: Julia of Rome Surname: Caesar Sex: F _UID: BA0B2AFA5118D811BE490080C8C142CC5942 Change Date: 16 Nov 2003 Death: 49 BC (9951=10000-49)

Father: Caius Julius III of Rome Caesar Mother: Aurelia (Cornelia) of Rome

Marriage 1 Marcus Atius Balbus of Rome Married: Children
Atia\Atila of Rome

Forrás / Source: http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I6885
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Julia_Caesaris_(sister_of_Julius_Caesar)
--------------------
Died : 51 BC
--------------------
Died : 51 BC
--------------------
Died : 51 BC
--------------------
Died : 51 BC
--------------------
Died : 51 BC
--------------------
Died : 51 BC
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Julia_Caesaris_(sister_of_Julius_Caesar)

--------------------
ID: I6875

Name: Julia of Rome

Given Name: Julia

Surname: of Rome

Sex: F

_UID: B00B2AFA5118D811BE490080C8C142CC4FA2

Change Date: 18 Oct 2005 1 2 3 4

Birth: 103 BC

Death: deceased

Father: Lucius Julius III Caesar of Rome

Mother: Fulvia of Rome

Marriage 1 Marcus Antonius Creticus of Rome b: 100 BC

Married: 5 6 7 4

Children

Gaius Antonius

Lucias Antonius

MARC @@ ANTHONY OF ROME b: 83 BC

Sources:

Abbrev: Ancestry of Richard Plantagenet & Cecily de Nevill

Title: Ernst-Friedrich Kraentzler, Ancestry of Richard Plantagenet & Cecily de Neville (published by author 1978)evilleeville. published by author 1978.

Note:

Call number:

J.H. Garner

Page: Chart 1826, p 393

Text: no parents

Abbrev: PrenticeNet: A Lineage to Caesar

Title: PrenticeNet: A Lineage to Caesar (WWW)

Note:

Call number:

webmaster@@PrenticeNet.com

http://www.prenticenet.com/roots/surnames/ancient/2caesar.htm

Text: d of Lucius Julius Caesar, no mother

Abbrev: Our Family Tree

Title: Jordan & Kimble, Our Family Tree (1929)

Note:

Call number:

Text: d of Lucius Julius Caesar, no mother

Abbrev: Pullen010502.FTW

Title: Pullen010502.FTW

Note:

Call number:

Text: Date of Import: Jan 5, 2002

Abbrev: Ancestry of Richard Plantagenet & Cecily de Nevill

Title: Ernst-Friedrich Kraentzler, Ancestry of Richard Plantagenet & Cecily de Neville (published by author 1978)evilleeville. published by author 1978.

Note:

Call number:

J.H. Garner

Page: Chart 1826, p 393

Abbrev: Our Family Tree

Title: Jordan & Kimble, Our Family Tree (1929)

Note:

Call number:

Abbrev: PrenticeNet: A Lineage to Caesar

Title: PrenticeNet: A Lineage to Caesar (WWW)

Note:

Call number:

webmaster@@PrenticeNet.com

http://www.prenticenet.com/roots/surnames/ancient/2caesar.htm

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I6875
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Julia_Antonia
--------------------
33740611072440469. Julia Caesonia ROMAN EMPIRE,1601,1746 daughter of Ceasar Lucius Julius III ROMAN EMPIRE and Unknown, was born in , , Roma, Italy. Another name for Julia was Julia Antonia of ROMAN EMPIRE.3470

General Notes:

Julia Caesaris, known in the sources as Julia Antonia, was the wife of Marcus Antonius Creticus and mother of Gaius, Lucius and Marcus Antonius, the triumvir. She was a cousin of Julius Caesar and through these family ties, her son's early military career was supported by Caesar. She married for the second time to Publius Cornelius Lentulus Sura, a politician involved in and executed during the Catiline conspiracy of 63 BC.

3470

Julia married Marcus Antonius II "Creticus" Praetor ROMAN EMPIRE 1601 in <, , Rome, Italy>. Marcus was born in , , Roma, Italy and died in 68 B.C. in , , Roma, Italy.

http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.com/~mgholler/Caden/a55.htm#i547458851
--------------------
The elder of the two sisters of Julius Caesar the dictator, married, but in what order is uncertain, L. Pinarius, of a very ancient patrician family, and Q. Pedius, by each of whom she had at least one son. It is doubtful whether it was the elder or the younger of the dictator's sisters who gave her evidence against P. Clodius, when impeached for impiety in 61 BC.

--------------------
Död 51 f.Kr
--------------------
'''
=Julia Caesaris=
'''

Julia Caesaris (101-51 BC) was the second of two daughters of Gaius Julius Caesar III and Aurelia Cotta. Their third and last child was Julius Caesar. Both sisters were named Julia Caesaris and were born and raised in Rome.

'''Siblings'''

The elder of the two sisters of Julius Caesar is sometimes called Julia Major (Major Latin for the elder) by historians (but she should not be confused with Julia the Elder, daughter of Emperor Augustus). Likewise, the younger is sometimes called Julia Minor, (Minor Latin for the younger) and should not be confused with Julia the Younger, Augustus' first granddaughter (also the former Julia's great-great-granddaughter).

It is not known if it was the elder or the younger of the dictator's sisters who gave evidence against Publius Clodius Pulcher when he was impeached for impiety in 61 BC. Julia and her mother gave the legal courts a detailed account of the affair he had with Pompeia, Julius Caesar's wife. Caesar divorced Pompeia over the scandal.

'''Marriage and offspring'''

Caesar's youngest sister married Marcus Atius Balbus, a praetor and commissioner who came from a senatorial family of plebeian status. Julia bore him three (or two, according to other sources) daughters. The second daughter, known as Atia Balba Caesonia was the mother of Octavia Minor (fourth wife of triumvir Mark Antony) and of first Emperor Augustus. Atia Balba Caesonia' sister, Atia Balba Prima (or Atia Balba Tertia) was the wife of Lucius Marcius Philippus. Their daughter, Marcia, later married to Paullus Fabius Maximus and bore him a son, Paullus Fabius Persicus. Fabia Numantina was either Marcia's daughter with Maximus or a daughter of his brother Africanus Fabius Maximus.

Another Atia, who may have been her daughter or her husband's daughter with a woman named Claudia, was married to Gaius Junius Silanus. Their son, also named Gaius Junius Silanus, became consul in AD 10. Though, Atia may have been the emendation of "Appia". Sons of the consul in 10 were Appius Junius Silanus, consul in 28, Decimus Junius Silanus, who involved in the disgrace of Julia the Younger, and Marcus Junius Silanus, consul suffectus in 15.

'''Death'''

Balbus died in 52 BC and Julia died a year later. At age 12 Octavius, her youngest grandson, the future Emperor Augustus, delivered her funeral oration.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Julia_Caesaris_(youngest_sister_of_Julius_Caesar)

JULIA LUCIUS JULIUS. She was the daughter of Lucius Julius III. (Wurts,1945)
She married MARCUS ANTONIUS CRETICUS OF ROME. He was the son of MarkAntony, born 143 BC and died 87 BC. Creticus was the grandson of GaiusAntonius. Creticus was Praetor in UC 682, BC 71. He died in UC 685, BC68. (Wurts, 1945)

Child: Mark Antony II, Lucius Antonius (Wurts, 1945)


ROMAN EMPERORS-CAESAR
(Ancestral line of John Talbot, 10th Earl of Shrewsbury, Ancestral lineof descendants of Rev. John Knox, William d' Albini, Hugh Bigod, RogerBigod, Henry de Bohun, Gilbert de Clare, Richard de Clare, John FitzRobert, John de Lacie, William de Lanvallei, William de Mowbray, Saire deQuincey, Robert de Roos, Robert de Vere)

JULIA (Caesar) married Marcus Antonius Creticus Praetor. Julia was thedaughter of

LUCIUS JULIUS CAESAR, Consul, was the son of

LUCIUS JULIUS CAESAR was the son of

SEXTUS JULIUS CAESAR, Roman Ambassador and Consul, was the Son of

SEXTUS JULIUS CAESAR, Military Tribune in Liguria, was the Son of

LUCIUS JULIUS CAESAR was the son of

NUMERIUS JULIUS CAESAR, 1st of the Caesars, was the son of

LUCIUS JULIUS LIBO, Consul, was the Son of

LICIUS JULIUS LIBO was the son of

LUCIUS JULIUS JULUS, Military Tribune, was the Son of

LUCIUS JULIUS JULUS, Military Tribune, was the son of

CAIUS JULIUS JULUS, Consul, was the Son of

CAIUS JULIUS JULUS, Consul, was the son of

CAIUS JULIUS JULUS, Consul, was the Son of

LUCIUS JULIUS JULUS was the son of

NUMERIUS JULIUS JULUS was descended from Julus (Julii Juli).

Note: Pedigree line of this family is unknown for about 560 years duringboth the Latin and Roman Kings. Some think that the office of High Priestcontinued in family down to Julins Caesar the Dictator.

JULUS (Julii Juli), High Priest, was the son of

ASCANIUS the Trojan, King of Latium, died in 1170 B.C. He married Roma,daughter of Italus ahd Lucretia. Ascanius was the son of

AENEAS, King of Latium in 1177 B.C., "the Father of the Roman Nation,"who married Creusa. "Aeneas was the brother-in-law of Paris and Helen ofTroy, and it is said that when Troy was taken,

"Aeneas with a band of his fellow citizens, defended bravely their partof the City, till the Greeks gave them leave to depart in safety with asmuch of their goods as each could carry. Accord- ingly, all of themcarried off gold and silver and other precious things portable; exceptAeneas, who only carried off his own father, Anchises, upon hisshoulders. Upon which, the wondering Greeks generously allowed him tocarry off likewise what goods he pleased. But Aeneas ouly chose hishousehold goods, which made the Greeks' admiration still more, and theygave him leave to go with his Trojans to what place he pleased."

"After the destruction of Troy, Aeneas came into Italy and after manyvaliant exploits, he was given Lavinia, daughter of Latinus, King ofLatium, as his second wife. He built a city calling it Lavinium, in honorof his Queen, and caused his subjects to be called Latines in honor ofhis father-in-law, whom he succeeded as King of Latium."

Aeneas was the son of

PRINCE ANCHYSES married Venus. Anchyses was the son of

PRINCE CAPYS married Themis, daughter of nus, King of Troy. Capys was theson of

ASSARACUS, King at Dardanum, was the son of

TROS, King of Troy in 1314 B.C. He married Callirhoe, daughter ofScamander. He built City of Troy and from him the people were calledTrojans. Tros was the son of

ERIOTHONIUS, King of Troy in 1374 B.C., married Astyoche. Eriothonius wasthe son of

DARDANUS, King of Troy in 1449 B.C., married Basia Asia (see below).Dardanus was the son of

JUPITER or CORYTUS who married Electra, daughter of ATLAS.

* * *

BASIA ASIA (Batea) married Dardanus, King of Troy. Basia Asia was thedaughter of

TEUCER, King of Troy in 1480 B.C., was the son of the river

SCAMANDER, King of Troy in 1502 B.C., and his wife, the "Nymph Idaea."Scamander was the son of

CORYBAS married Demonice.

Ref: Royal Genealogies, pps. 219 and 350; Your Family Tree, p. 61;Sovereigns of the World, CXIX and CVIII.

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per03768.htm#0

SISTER OF THE FAMED JULIUS CAESAR, DICTATOR

AKA:
JUDITH DE ROME
JULIA OF ROME CAESAR
JULIA I ROMAN EMPIRE
JULIA MINOR CAESAR
JULIA CAISONIA CAESAR

Name Suffix:<NSFX> I

Name Suffix:<NSFX> I

Sister of Julius Caesar
Julia Caesaris was the beloved elder sister of Julius Caesar. She was born in Rome in 101BC and had an elder sister of the same name who died young.

Julia married Marcus Atius Balbus, a man from a senatorial family. They had 3 daughters Atia Balba Prima, Atia Balba Caesonia and Atia Balba Tertia. Through her second daughter she became the grandmother of Caesar Augustus. Her husband died in 52BC and she died in 51BC. Augustus at age 12 delivered her funeral eulogy.

From Wikipedia.com

Julia Caesaris (wife of Marius)
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Julia Caesaris (c.130 BC - 69 BC) was a daughter of Gaius Julius Caesar II and Marcia (daughter of consul Quintus Marcius Rex). She was a sister of Gaius Julius Caesar III (the father of Julius Caesar) and Sextus Julius Caesar III.

At about 110 BC she married Gaius Marius; as a result, she is sometimes referred to as Julia Maria. They had a son, Gaius Marius the Younger.

According to Plutarch, it was by marrying her, a patrician woman, that the up-start Marius got the snobbish attention of the senate and launched his political career[1]. Julia is remembered as a virtuous woman devoted to her husband and their only child. Her reputation alone permitted her to keep her status, even after Sulla's persecutions against Marius himself and his allies.

Julia Caesaris died in 69 BC and received a devoted funeral eulogy from her nephew Julius Caesar[2].


[edit] See also
Julii Caesares
Julio-Claudian family tree

[edit] References
^ Plutarch, Parallel Lives, "(The Life of) (Caius) Marius", VI
^ Plutarch, Parallel Lives, "(The Life of) (Julius) Caesar", V; Also: Suetonius, The Twelve Caesars, "I. Julius Caesar", VI:
When quaestor, he pronounced the customary orations from the rostra in praise of his aunt Julia and his wife Cornelia, who had both died. And in the eulogy of his aunt he spoke in the following terms of her paternal and maternal ancestry and that of his own father: "The family of my aunt Julia is descended by her mother from the kings, and on her father's side is akin to the immortal Gods; for the Marcii Reges (her mother's family name) go back to Ancus Marcius, and the Julii, the family of which ours is a branch, to Venus. Our stock therefore has at once the sanctity of kings, whose power is supreme among mortal men, and the claim to reverence which attaches to the Gods, who hold sway over kings themselves."


[edit] Sources
Plutarch, Parallel Lives, written approx. 75 CE:
"(The Life of) (Caius) Marius"
John Dryden translation at MIT classics
Stewart/Long translation at Project Gutenberg
Loeb translation at LacusCurtius
"(The Life of) (Julius) Caesar"
John Dryden translation at MIT classics
Stewart/Long translation at Project Gutenberg
Loeb translation at LacusCurtius
Bernadotte Perrin (ed.) translation at Perseus project
Thomas North (ed.) translation at Perseus project
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Julia_Caesaris_%28wife_of_Marius%29"

Julia Caesaris
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.
Jump to: navigation, search

Julia CaesarisJulia Caesaris is the name of all women in the Julii Caesares patrician family (to which, for instance Julius Caesar and Caesar Augustus belonged), since feminine names were their father's gens and cognomen declined in the female form.

In Roman history, there are at least six Juliae Caesares cited by the ancient sources.

Contents [hide]
1 Augustus' daughter
2 Augustus' granddaughter
3 Caesar's daughter
4 Marius' wife
5 Sister of Julius Caesar
6 Mother of Antony



[edit]
Augustus' daughter
Julia Caesaris, also known as Julia the Elder (39 BC - AD 15), was the only child of Caesar Augustus, from his second marriage with Scribonia. She was born only a few days before her father divorced her mother to marry Livia Drusilla.

In 25 BC, Julia married her cousin Marcus Claudius Marcellus. Marcellus died in September 23 BC. In 21 BC, Julia married Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa, a man from a modest family that became his most trusted general. The marriage resulted in five children: Vipsania Julia, Agrippina Major (mother of Emperor Caligula), Lucius Caesar, Gaius Caesar and Agrippa Postumus (a posthumous son). Augustus, who took care of their education personally, adopted the boys Lucius and Gaius Caesar.

Even when Agrippa was alive as pater familias, Augustus exerted an enormous influence on the family. His kin should be the perfect example of Roman virtue, especially his daughter and granddaughters. They were forced to be role models of modesty and chastity, they spent their days taking care of the house, spinning and weaving the men's clothes, dressing with simplicity. After the death of Agrippa, Augustus nominated his stepson Tiberius as heir. To secure the claim, Tiberius then married Julia, but to do this he had to divorce Vipsania Agrippina (daughter of a previous marriage of Agrippa), the wife he dearly loved. Due to this, Tiberius and Julia's marriage was unhappy from the start. Not a long time after, Julia was arrested for adultery charges and Tiberius divorced her immediately. Augustus was deeply disappointed and considered her execution. He then decided for Julia's exile, in the harshest conditions possible. She was confined on an island named Pandataria, with no men in sight, deprived of every luxury. Five years later she was brought back to Italy but never again admitted into the imperial family. Augustus never forgave her and in his will he explicitly excluded her to be buried in his Mausoleum and ordered to remain confined to an Italian city. Tiberius, who still detested her, pulled the punishment forward and ordered that she could not leave one room and see nobody. Later, Caligula, who loathed the idea of being grand-son of the up-start Agrippa, invented that his mother Agrippina was the product of an incestuous union between Julia and Augustus.

Julia was well known for her quick wit and sharp tongue. Once, when asked her secret for having affairs, while bearing children resembling her husband, she stated that she only took on new passengers when the boat was already full, numquam enim nisi navi plena tollo vectorem (Macrobius, Saturnalia, II, 5, 9-10). Some have speculated that her sexual exploits were part of a grander scheme to create a loyal group of followers to help her overthrow her father, and that it was this plot, and not her adulterous behaviour, that led Augustus to banish her.

[edit]
Augustus' granddaughter
Daughter of the previous, a.k.a. Julia Caesaris minor, a.k.a. Vipsania Julia.

[edit]
Caesar's daughter
Julia Caesaris was a child of Julius Caesar, born from his first marriage with Cornelia Cinna. She was born in 83 BC. In April 59 BC, Caesar married his daughter to Pompey, although some say she was promised to Faustus Cornelius Sulla (Sulla's heir) and others that she was promised to Marcus Brutus himself. The motives were purely political, as both men needed to solidify their alliance (triumvirate) against the conservative faction of the senate, led by Cato the Younger. But according to Plutarch, Pompey fell in love with his young wife and, because wives were not supposed to accompany their husbands on duty, he decided to rule Hispania Tarraconensis by proxy. Julia died in childbirth in 54 BC. Her death left her father, then in Gaul (see Gallic Wars) and her husband devastated by grief. Against the strong opposition of the plebeian tribunes (Pompey's political enemies), Julia was given a state funeral and buried in Campus Martius. After her death, the alliance between Pompey and Caesar faded, which eventually led to civil war. In 45 BC already ruling as dictator without opposition, Caesar offered the city a series of games and gladiatorial fights in her honour. After Caesar's assassination in March 15, 44 BC, he was cremated and buried side by side in his daughter's grave.

[edit]
Marius' wife
Julia Caesaris was the paternal aunt of Julius Caesar and the wife of Gaius Marius; as a result, she is sometimes referred to as Julia Maria. According to Plutarch, it was by marrying her, a patrician woman, that the up-start Marius got the snobbish attention of the senate and launched his political career. Julia is remembered as a virtuous woman devoted to her husband and their only child, Gaius Marius the Younger. Her reputation alone permitted her to keep her status, even after Sulla's persecutions against Marius himself and his allies. Julia died in 69 BC and received a devoted funeral eulogy from her nephew Julius Caesar.

[edit]
Sister of Julius Caesar
Julia Caesaris was the beloved elder sister of Julius Caesar. She was born in Rome in 101BC and had an elder sister of the same name who died young.

Julia married Marcus Atius Balbus, a man from a senatorial family. They had 3 daughters Atia Balba Prima, Atia Balba Caesonia and Atia Balba Tertia. Through her second daughter she became the grandmother of Caesar Augustus. Her husband died in 52BC and she died in 51BC. Augustus at age 12 delivered her funeral eulogy.

[edit]
Mother of Antony
Julia Caesaris, known in the sources as Julia Antonia to distinguish her from the previous, was the wife of Marcus Antonius Creticus and mother of Gaius and Lucius Antonius and Mark Antony, the triumvir. She was a cousin of Julius Caesar and through these family ties, her son's early military career was supported by Caesar. She married for the second time to Publius Cornelius Lentulus Sura, a politician involved in and executed during the Catiline conspiracy of 63 BC.

Julia was the daughter of Lucius Julius Caesar III and sister to Lucius Julius Caesar IV. She was born in Rome about 104 BC and died sometime after 43 BC. Plutarch describes her as one of 'most nobly born and admirable women of her time'.


wtf 4:565


wtf 4:565

[4632] "Bloodline ...", p 409, sister of Julius Ceasar

d 52 BC

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]