== Notes for [[Item:Q110589|Q110589]] ==

Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abdul-Qadir_Gilani

'''Ancestry From Father'''

Abdul Qadir al-Jilani son of Abu Salih Musa son of Abi Abdullah son of Yahya Zahid son of Muhammad son of Dawud son of Musa Sani son of Abdullah Sani son of Musa al-Jaun son of Abdullah al-Mahaz son of Hasan Musanna son of Hasan ibn Ali

'''Ancestry From Mother'''

Abdul Qadir al-Jilani son of Um-ul-Khayr Fatima daughter of Abdullah as-Soma'i Muhammad son of Abu Mahmood Muhammad Tahir son of Abdul Ata Abdullah son of Abu Kamaluddin Isa son of Muhammad al-Taqi son of Ali al-Ridha son of Musa al-Kadhim son of Jaffar al-Sadiq son of Muhammad al-Baqir son of Zayn al-Abidin son of Husayn ibn Ali

Within al-Jilani's full name, al-Sayyid Muhiyudin Abu Muhammad Abdal Qadir al-Jilani al-Hasani wal-Hussaini, the word Sayyid denotes his descent from Muhammad.[10] The name Muhiyudin describes him as a "reviver of religion".[11] The phrase, al-Jilani refers to Al Gilani's region of birth.[12][13] However, Al-Gilani also carried the epithet, al-Baghdadi.[14][15][16] referring to his residence and burial in Baghdad. The phrase al-Hasani wal-Hussaini affirms his lineal descent from both Hasan ibn Ali and Hussein ibn Ali, the grandsons of Muhammad.[3][17]

'''Paternal Heritage'''

Abdul Qadir al-Jilani's father was a sharif.[18][19] He was respected as a saint would be, by the people of his day and was known as "Jangi Dost", (one who loves God), thus "Jangidost" was his sobriquet.[20][1] [21]

'''Maternal Heritage'''

Abdul Qadir al-Jilani's mother, Umm al-Khair Fatima, was the daughter of Sayyid Abdullah Sawmai az-Zaid and Zain ul Abideen[22][23][24][25] Abideen was known as, "a great saint of his time and a direct descendant of Hazrat Imam Husain, the great martyr of Karbala."[26] Abideen professed his greatness as a Sufi scholar,

"I am Hassani and my abode is my cell, And my feet are on the neck of each Saint. Abdul Qdir is my famous name. And my ancestor is one possessed of an insight Perfect." (Qaseedada-tul-Gausia). Education

Abdul Qadir al-Jilani spent his early life in Naif, the town of his birth. In 1095, at the age of eighteen years, Al Gilani went to Baghdad. There, he pursued the study of Hanbali law. Abu Ali al-Mukharrimi gave Al Gilani lessons about Fiqh. He was given lessons about Hadith by Abu Bakr ibn Muzaffar. He was given lessons about Tafsir by Abu Muhammad Ja'far, a commentator. In Tasawwuf, his spiritual instructor was Abu'l-Khair Hammad ibn Muslim al-Dabbas. After completing his education, Gilani left Baghdad. He spent twenty-five years as a reclusive wanderer in the desert regions of Iraq.[27]

'''Later Life'''

In 1127, al-Jilani returned to Baghdad and began to preach in public. He joined the teaching staff of the school belonging to his teacher al-Mukharrimii and was popular with students. In the morning he taught hadith and tafsir, and in the afternoon held discourse on the science of the hearts and the virtues of the Qur'an. From 521 to 561 AH.

During this period hundreds of thousands of people converted to Islam because of him and organized several teams to go abroad for dawah purposes.[citation needed]

al-Jilani was also the teacher of Ibn Qudamah. Al Gilani made Qudamah a Caliph of his Sufi order. Qudamah later fought as a general in Sultan Saladin Ayyubi's army which took rule in Jerusalem from the Christians.

'''Death & Burial'''

Al Galini died in the evening on Saturday 1166 (11 Rabi'us sani 561AH) at the age of ninety-one years (by the Islamic calendar).[28] His body was entombed in a shrine within his madrassa in Babul-Sheikh, Resafa (East bank of the Tigris) in Baghdad, Iraq.[29][30][31] Worldwide, the Sufi orders celebrate "Ghouse-al-azham day" on al-Jilani's birthday rather than on his date of death.

'''Legacy'''

Abdul Qadir al-Jilani continued the spiritual chain of ''Junayd Baghdadi''. His contribution to thought in the Muslim world earned him the title Muhiyuddin, meaning, "the reviver of the faith". al-Jilani, along with his students and associates laid the groundwork for the society which later produced stalwarts like Nur ad-Din and Saladin.[citation needed]

'''Descendants'''

Abdul Qadir al-Jilani took four wives. He had forty-nine children, twenty-seven sons and twenty-two daughters.[citation needed] Among his sons are: Shaikh Abdul-Wahab, Sheikh Abdul-Razzaq, Shaikh Abdul-Aziz, Shaikh Isa, Shaikh Musa, Sheikh Yahya, Sheikh Abdullah, Sheikh Muhammed and Sheikh Ibrahim. Since al-Jilani's time, his sons and grandsons have travelled to the Indian sub-continent to preach Islam by his method (Arabic=Tareqa,طريقة).One of the most famous descendents is Syed Abdul Razzaq Nur-ul-Alyn who is the nephew and Sajjada Nasheen of Ashraf Jahangir Semnani starting the Qadiriyyah Ashrafiya Silsila. They have reached North Africa, Morocco, and parts of the Horn of Africa. These areas include Ethiopia, Eritrea, and Somalia. In Somalia, the Qadiriyyah order is dominant although there are small areas where Ahmed ibn Idris' order is found. Again, in Somalia, the order is divided into the Zaylaiyyah order and the Uwaisiyyah order. The daughters of Syed Jalaluddin Hasan (Raees Hasan and Anees Khan) are the custodians of al-Jilani's namaz (prayer) cap (the "Kulhe Mubarak"). A ziyarat (pilgrimage) is made for al-Jilani each year.

--------------------

'''In Defence of The Imaam,'''

Shaikh Abdul-Qaadir Jeelaanee (d.561H)

(Rahimahullah)

http://ahlulhadeeth.wordpress.com/category/in-defense-of-ahlul-hadeeth/

Compiled

Series compilers and Trans: Abu Hibbaan & Abu Khuzaimah Ansaari

''' Introduction'''

Ahlul-Bid’ah Waz-Zaigh have attributed all sorts of heretical and innovative beliefs to Shaikh Abdul-Qaadir Jeelaanee, more so in our times especially by the soofee’s of the world, the bareilwee’s the deobandee’s. Some of these individuals have distorted and misinterpreted the teachings of the Shaikh in as much portraying the shaikh to be from amongst the propagator’s of Soofism, Wahdatul-Wajood, Fana, Baqa and Wahdatash-Shahood and other heretical beliefs. These individuals from Zaytuna institute in California, the translator of the reliance of the traveler and their foot soldiers are all upon this, this is their way and this what they propagate. So we humbly ask them show us the uniformity of your beliefs and the beliefs of Shaikh Abdul Qaadir Jeelaanee.

'''His Life (Summarised)'''

Shaikh Abdul-Qaadir Jeelaanee’s full name is Abdul-Qaadir bin Abee Saaleh Abdullah bin Jankee Daust al-Jailee (al-Jeelaanee). His kunyah was Abu Muhammad and his title’s were Muhi ud deen and Shaikh ul-Islaam. (Siyar A’laam an-Nabula (20/439), al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (12/252). Fawaat al-Wafyaat (2/373), Shadhraat adh-Dhahab (4/198).

Imaam Sama’anee referred to him as Imaam al-Hanaabillah (Imaam of the Hanbalee’s) (Dhail A’la Tabqaat al-Hanaabillah (1/291) of Ibn Rajab)

The author of Shadhraat traced his lineage to Hussain bin Alee (Radhiallaahu Anhuma) and he was born in 471H and according to some 470H in the place of Jeelaan. (Siyar A’laam an-Nabula (20/439).

Imaam Dhahabee mentioned he came to Baghdaad in his childhood. (Siyar A’laam an-Nabula (20/439).

'''His Teachers and Students'''

Haafidh Dhahabee mentioned the following as his teachers. Qaadheee Abu Sa’eed Makhramee, Abu Ghaalib (Muhammad bin Hussain) Baqalaanee, Ahmad bin Muzaffar bin Saus, Abu Qaasim bin Bayaan, Ja’afar bin Ahmad Siraaj, Abu Sa’ad bin Khasheesh, Abu Taalib Yoosufee and others. (Siyar A’laam an-Nabula (20/440).

From his students Imaam Dhahabee has mentioned, Abu Sa’ad Sama’anee, Umar bin Alee Qurashee, Shaikh Muwaffiq ud deen ibn Qudaamah (the author of the monumental book, Lu’matul Ei’tiqaad), Abdur-Razzaaq bin Abdul-Qaadir and Moosaa bin Abdul Qaadir (both are the sons of the Shaikh), Alee bin Idrees, Ahmad bin Mu’tee Abu Hurairah, Muhammad bin Laith Wastaanee, Akmal bin Mas’ood Haashimee, Abu Taalib Abdul-Lateef bin Muhammad bin Qabeetee and others. (Siyar A’laam an-Nabula (20/440).

After learning the Shaikh began to admonish and cultivate the people with sincerity. As a result Allaah aided him and put much blessing in his work and his circles and his admonishes became very famous, to the extent that the rulers of the time would also participate in his circles aswell as major people of knowledge of his time. The affect of the Shaikh’s admonishing was such that many a people repented for their sins and mistakes. (Siyar A’laam an-Nabula (20/441).

Haafidh Ibn Katheer said, “After he came to Baghdaad he started seeking knowledge of hadeeth and Fiqh from Abu Sa’eed Makhramee Hanbalee. Abu Sa’eed had a small institution, which he handed over to Shaikh Abdul Qaadir. In this institution the Shaikh would deliver lectures of knowledge and would admonish the people, many people benefited from him.” (al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (12/252).

The Shaikh died in 561H and the age of 90. (Siyar A’laam an-Nabula (20/450)

The Shaikh authored a number of books (which will be quoted from) however many books are also attributed to him which he himself did not write and it is these books which Ahlul-Bid’ah have utilized in disparaging the Shaikh and his Aqeedah.

'''Al-Ghuniyyah ut-Taalibeen'''

This the Shaikh’s most famous work and his beliefs, his way and ideology are mentioned in this book. Its proper name chosen by the Shaikh as al-Ghuniyyah ut-Taaliben Tareeq al-Haqq. However some latter people (from the Soofiyyah) have denounced this book and denied it to be a work of the Shaikh on the account of its contents. So in order to repel this fallacy, Haajee Khaleefah said,

“al-Ghuniyyatuh ut-Taalibeen Tareeq al-Haqq is the work of Abul-Qaadir Jeelaanee who died in 561H.” (Kashf adh-Dhanoon (2/121).

Haafidh Ibn Katheer and Shaikh ul-Islaam Imaam Ibn Taymiyyah have mentioned this to be the book of Shaikh Abdul-Qaadir Jeelaanee (al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (12/252), Majmoo Fatwaa (5/15).

He also wrote Fatooh al-Gayb, Fath ur-Rabbaanee Wal-Faidh ar-Rehmaanee and a number of other works.

'''The Shaikhs Belief’s and Teachings'''

From the works of the Shaikh his belief’s and teaching were the same as Ahlus-Sunnah Wal-Jama’ah. The Shaikh said,

“My belief’s are the belief’s which were upheld by the Companions and the (Salaf us-Saaleh) Pious Predecessors.” (Siyar A’laam an-Nabula (20/442).

Similarly he would also instruct and advise others to adhere to this madhab and the belief of the companions and Salaf us-Saaleh, he would say,

“Upon you is Ittibaa (following and obeying) and not innovation and upon you is the madhab of the Salaf as-Saaleh and this is the straight path you should firmly adhere to.” (al-Fath ur-Rabbaanee (p.35)

'''He also said'''

“It is upon the believer to follow and obey the Sunnah and those upon the Sunnah, the Jama’ah. The Sunnah is what the Messenger of Allaah (Sallalahu Alayhee Was-Sallam) declared to be Sunnah and the Jama’ah is that, which the companions are agreed upon.” (al-Ghuniyyah (1/165)..

'''Concerning Eemaan'''

There are differences in the Issue of Eemaan between Ahlus-Sunnah and the deviated sects. Shaikh Abdul-Qaadir explained Eemaan just as Ahlus-Sunnah described it. He said,

“We believe Eemaan is the statement of the tongue, the affirmation of the heart and action of the limbs, it increases with obedience and decreases with disobedience. It is strengthened with knowledge and weakened with ignorance…” (al-Ghuniyyah (1/135).

'''Concerning Tawheed'''

The Shaikh said concerning Tawheed ar-Raboobiyyah and Tawheed al-Uloohiyyah,

“The soul is inclined to obey its creator because The Rabb is his creator and master and it (the soul) is dependent in worshipping its Rabb.” (Fatooh al-Gayb (pg.21)

'''He also said'''

“The person who wishes to enter into Islaam, it is obligatory upon him that he must first say the Shahadah that None has the right to be worshipped except Allaah and Muhammad (Sallalahu Alayhee Was-Sallam) is his Messenger. He must also dissociate himself from all the other religions other than Islaam and believe in the oneness of Allaah with his heart.” (al-Ghuniyyah (1/13).

'''Concerning Asmaa Was-Sifaat'''

'''The Shaikh said'''

“In regard to this we do not leave the Book and the Sunnah. We recite the verses and the narrations and have faith in them and we leave the kayfiyyah (howness-of these) attributes to Allaah.” (al-Ghuniyyah (1/125).

The Shaikh has refuted the deviated sects on their beliefs of the attributes of Allaah in detail in his book (al-Ghuniyyah (1/125-140) so please refer to it.

'''Concerning The Qur’aan'''

'''Shaikh Abdul-Qaadir said'''

“Our belief is the Qur’aan is the speech of Allaah, the holy book and it is revelation which was revealed upon the Messenger of Allaah (Sallalahu Alayhee-Wasallam) by Jibraa’eel.” (al-Ghuniyyah (1/125-140).

'''In Refutation of Shirk and Innovations'''

The Shaikh was a firm propagator of Tawheed and a destroyer of Shirk and innovations as was evident from his statements. Some of them are,

1. “Man should supplicate to Allaah, praise and glorify him, then send salutations upon the Messenger of Allaah and then finally ask Allaah for his needs.” (al-Ghuniyyah (1/92).

2. “It is unlawful to swear by anyone other than Allaah so if someone wishes to swear then let him do so by Allaah only or otherwise let him remain silent.” (al-Ghuniyyah (1/92).

3. “When you visit the graves then do not put your hands on them or kiss them as this is the habit of the jews, nor sit on the graves or rest against them. Then ask Allaah for your needs.” (al-Ghuniyyah (1/91).

4. “Follow and obey and do not innovate. Agree with the religion and do not differ, obey and do not disobey, have sincerity and do not do Shirk. Accept Allaah as one and do not turn away from him. Ask Allaah and do not ask others. Ask him for help and do not anyone else for help. Have reliance and trust in him and do not have reliance in anyone else.” (al-Fath ur-Rabbaanee (pg.151).

5. “The whole creation is dependent upon him and helpless without him. No can benefit or harm you…” (Fath ur-Rabbaanee (pg.89).

Shaikh ul-Islaam Imaam Ibn Taymiyyah On Shaikh Abdul Qaadir.

It also appears the Shaikh was an upholder of the Salafee Aqeedah as he has in his al-Ghuniyyah refuted and censured all the deviated sects from the Shee’ah Rawaafidh, Murjee’ah, Qadariyyah, Jahmiyyah, Karamiyyah, Mu’tazilah and others. The only one left are the Ashaabul Hadeeth or Ahlus-Sunnah and it is this group of people the Shaikh informed the people to adhere to.

Shaikh ul-Islaam in his refutation of the deviated sects, and he has a recognized status in this, used the statements of Shaikh Abul-Qaadir as supports and witnesses. (see Majmoo Fataawa (5/85), (10/455, 524, 548), (11/604).

So if there were any problems with the Aqeedah of Shaikh Abdul-Qaadir then Shaikh ul-Islaam Ibn Taymiyyah would have most definitely indicated or clarified them. Rather, we see the contrary to this as he refers and addresses Shaikh Abdul-Qaadir al-Jeelaanee as, The Major Shaikh, ash-Shaikh, the Imaam, One of the Imaams and so on. (see Majmoo Fataawa (5/85), (11/604).

'''Zuhd and Tasawwuf'''

It should be known that concepts such as Hulool, Wahdatal-Wajood, Wahdash-Shahood and other were found amongst the soofee’s like Ibn Arabee and Abdul-Kareem Jailee, the later soofees and in Mansoor al-Hallaaj. This is the reason why earlier books of so-called Soofee’s had correct Aqeedah in them also but they also fell short in aspects of purifying their souls.

The term soofism was not found amongst the earlier generations especially during the first period. However in the second and third periods the words Zuhd, Aabid and Saaleh would be used for highly pious people and later the word soofee began being used for these people. (See Majmoo Fataawa (6/11).

Shaikh Abdul-Qaadir has a detailed discussion in his al-Ghuniyyah (2/269-336) which is nothing but concerning Zubd and Taqwaa, trust, hope, love and truthfulness in Allaah.

The Shaikh himself refuted Wahdatal-Wajood and said,

“Allaah rises over his throne.. Allaah is upon his throne…..and he is separate from the creation and nothing is hidden from his knowledge and it is not correct to say he is present everywhere and this is what Allaah has mentioned in the Qur’aan, “The most Merciful rose over the Throne.” (Tahaa:5)” (al-Ghuniyyah (1/121-124).

Karamah And Miracles (Mu’ajizah)

The Difference between the two is that a miracle is performed at the hands of the Prophets like the splitting of the moon by our Messenger (Sallahu Alayhee Was-Sallam) and the cooling of the Fire for Ibraaheem (Alyahis-Salaam). A karamah on the other hand is something amazing performed at the hands of a Walee. Howeverthe following need to be understood,

1. A mu’ajizah is performed at the hand of a prophet and a karamah in the hands of a Walee.

2. Just as a walee’s status cannot reach the status of a Prophet, similarly a walee’s karamah cannot be considered to be synonymous with a Prophets miracle. (Dalaa’il an-Nabuwwah (pgs.109-112).

3. The Prophets or walee’s do not have any authority in performing the miracles or karamah’s, their occurrence is due to the command of Allaah. (Soorah al-Israa:90-93).

4. It is not permissible for a muslim at all to deny a miracle of a Prophet however a walee’s karamah can be accepted OR rejected. (See Majmoo Fataawa (11/208).

There is no doubt Shaikh Abdul-Qaadir was a pious and righteous individual and it is possible some of the karamah’s attributed to him maybe correct, however so many have been attributed to him by extreme soofee’s who pass the limits and enter the realms of Ghuloo in doing so and most of these are without evidence or authentic chains. So the affair is that many of the karamah’s attributed to him are not true but mere blind love of the soofee’s who forged them and attributed them to him.

Haafidh Dhahabee said,

“I say there is not a shaikh from the major Shayookh’s whose karamah’s are more well known than the karamah’s of Shaikh Abdul-Qaadir, however most of them are not correct and some of them are from the things which are impossible.” (Siyar (20/450).

Haafidh Ibn Katheer also said something very similar. (al-Bidaayah Wan-Nihaayah (12/252).

Some of the people who had extreme love for Shaikh Abdul-Qaadir compiled his karamah’s in a book. One such person was Alee bin Yoosuf ash-Shatnoofee who died 150 years after the death of Shaikh Abdul-Qaadir in approximately 713H. (see al-A’laam (5/188), Kashf adh-dhanoon (1/257).

Shatnoofee mentioned the karamah’s of Shaikh Abdul-Qaadir in such a manner as if he was from the Shaikh’s time and the reader is fooled into thinking this. Shatnoofee also attempted to mention these karamah’s with his own chains and most of these are weak due to the narrators in the chain. This is the reason why the research scholars reprimanded Shatnoofee strongly.

So Haafidh Ibn Hajr mentioned from Shaikh al-Kamaal Ja’afar, “Shatnoofee has mentioned very strange and odd things in this book and the people have criticized most of the incidences he has mentioned and their chains.” (ad-Durr al-Kaaminah (3/142).

Ibn al-Wardee mentioned in his Taareekh, “Bahjatul-Israar (the name of Shatnoofee’s book) contains such things which cannot be accepted and such exaggerated things have been mentioned about Shaikh Abdul-Qaadir that are not possible for anyone except Allaah.” (Kashf adh-Dhanoon (1/257).

Haafidh Ibn Rajab said, “Shatnoofee has written a three volume book on Shaikh Abdul-Qaadir and in it he has compiled a mountain of lies. Whereas it is sufficient for a person be declared a liar for him to narrate everything he hears. I have seen some of the quotes in the book but my soul was not content in believing them because firstly the narrations have been taken from unknown people. Secondly not only are their mountains of lies and allegations on Shaikh Abdul-Qaadir but it is also contrary to the status of the Shaikh if attributed to him. The statement of Shaikh al-Kamaal has also passed by me where he says the things Shanoofee has mentioned in his book Bahjatul-Israar have caused him to be accused (of lying).” (Dhail Tabaqaat (1/293) of Ibn Rajab).

Although Shaikh Abdul-Qaadir Jeelaanee also had mistakes like every son of Adam, Haafidh Dhahabee the student of Imaam Ibn Taymiyyah described them as,

“The summary is Shaikh Abdul-Qaadir was a man of great respect however some of his statements still need looking into and weighed up, which we leave to Allaah, and from some of them are lies which have been attributed to him.” (Siyar (20/451).

Shaikh ul-Islaam Imaam Ibn Taymiyyah said, “Such statements and actions have been mentioned from some of the Mujtahid’s from the Salaf us-Saaliheen which are included as innovations. However the people of knowledge did not take them as innovations rather they took them on the basis of weak narrations thinking the narration was authentic. Similarly they extrapolated from verses and these extrapolations were not correct and they were unable to find specific texts in some of these issues. When someone has fear of Allaah in his heart then he falls under the saying of Allaah, “Oh Rabb if w err or make a mistake then do not account us for it.” And the Saheeh mentions, “Allaah says I accept.” (Majmoo Fataawa (19/191).

http://ahlulhadeeth.wordpress.com/category/in-defense-of-ahlul-hadeeth/

--------------------
Hadhrat Shaikh Sayyid 'Abd al-Qadir al-Hasani al-Hussaini al-Jilani was born in ramazan 471H (CE:1078) in a small town of Gilan Province, to Syed Abu-Saleh Musa al-Hasani and Syeda Fatima. Shaikh's father passed away a few days after his birth. Shaikh was a descendant of Muhammad(SAW) from both of his parents - his father was a descendant of Imam Hasan and his mother was a descendant of Imam Husayn, the most beloved grand sons of our beloved prophet(SAW). Hence he is called, al-Hasani wal Husaini. The family tree of the Shaikh is given below:

Syed Abdul-Qadir, son of Syed Abu-Saleh Musa, son of Syed Zahid, son of Syed Abdullah al-jeeli, son of Syed Yahya Az-Zahid Syed Muhammad Syed Dawood Syed Musa Al-joon Syed Abdullah Al-Mahadh(Al-Majal) Syed Hasan Al-Mathnaa Syed Hasan Ibn Ali Ali Ibn Abi_Talib (Fourth rightly guided Caliph)

His spiritual chain is Shaikh Abdul Qadir Jilani, disciple of Shaikh Qadi Abi Said Al-Mubarak al-Mukhrami, disciple of Shaikh Abul Hasan Ali Ahmad Qareshi al-Hankari, disciple of Shaikh Abu Farah Muhammad Yusuf Tartusi, disciple of Shaikh Raziuddin Abul Fazl Abdul Wahid Abdul Aziz, disciple of Shaikh Abu Bakr Abdullah Shibli, disciple of Shaikh Abul Qasim Junaid of Bagdad, disciple of Shaikh Abul Hasan Siri Saqti, disciple of Shaikh Maroof Al-Karkhi, disciple of Shaikh Sulaiman Dawood Tai, disciple of Shaikh Habib ul Ajami, disciple of Shaikh Hasan al-Basri, disciple of Sayyidina Ali ibn Abi Talib, Khalifa of Sayyidina Muhammad Ibn Abdullah (Peace Be Upon Him), The Prophet of Allah.

He died on Saturday night 1166 (8th Rabi' al-Awwal 561AH on the Islamic calendar) at the age of eighty-nine years, and was entombed in a shrine within his Madrassa in Baghdad.

Some of his works are given below:

Al-Ghunya li-talibi tariq al-haqq wa al-din (Sufficient Provision for Seekers of the Path of Truth and Religion) Al-Fath ar-Rabbani (The Sublime Revelation) Malfuzat (Utterances) Futuh al-Ghaib (Revelations of the Unseen) Jala' al-Khatir (The Removal of Care)

Source: http://anwariya.com/Pages/Our%20Tradition.html
--------------------
Abdul-Qadir Gilani From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Question book-new.svg This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding reliable references. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2011) This article may contain original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding references. Statements consisting only of original research may be removed. More details may be available on the talk page. (March 2011)

Jilani redirects here. For others of the same name, see Gilani Abdul Qadir Gilani Religion Islam School Hanbali Personal Born 1077 CE (Common Era) Gilan, Iran Died 1166 CE Baghdad, Iraq Senior posting Title Sheikh, Ghaus-e-Azam Religious career Works Al-Ghunya li-talibi tariq al-haqq wa al-din, etc.

Al-Syed Muhiyudin Abu Muhammad Abdal Qadir al-Gilani al-Hasani wal-Hussaini ,[1][2] (Persian: عبد القادر گیلانی,Urdu: عبد القادر گیلانی Abdolqāder Gilāni) (also spelled Abdulqadir Gaylani, Abdelkader, Abdul Qadir, Abdul Khadir - Jilani, Jeelani, Jilali, Gailani, Gillani, Gilani, Al Gilani) or simply known as Ghaus-e-Azam (470–561 AH) (1077–1166 CE) was a Persian[3] Hanbali preacher, Sufi sheikh and the figurehead of the Qadiri Sufi order. He was born on a Wednesday the 10th Rabi at-Thani in 470 AH, 1077 CE,[4] in the Persian province of Gilan (Iran) south of the Caspian Sea. Contents [hide]

1 Lineage and Biography
1.1 Education
1.2 Later life
1.3 Death
2 Family
3 Works
4 Bibliography
5 See also
6 List of notable personalities
7 References
8 External links
8.1 His Works
8.2 Branches and affiliated organisations of the Qadiri Order

[edit] Lineage and Biography

Abdul-Qadir ibn Abi Salih Musa ibn Abdullah ibn Yahya ibn Muhammad ibn Abu Muhammad AbuBakr Dawud ibn Musa ibn Abdullah ibn Musa Jawni ibn Abdullah ibn Hassan al-Muthanna ibn Hassan ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib , and this on his father side so you can see why they call him al-Hassani due to his tracing up to Muhammad's grandson Hassan ibn Ali. On his mother side, she is the daughter of a saintly person Abdullah Sawmai who was a direct descendant of Imam Husain ibn Ali making the Shaykh also al-Husayni due to this.

Al-Gilani was born in 1078 CE (471 AH) in a small town of Iranian Gilan Province. His ancestors were Syeds who settled in Gilan (arabacized to Jilan) hence the epiphet of al-Jilani.[5][6] “ Sayyid Abu Muhammad Abdul Qadir R.A was born in Naif in the District of Gilan in Persia (Iran) in the month of Ramadan....His father's name was Abu Salih, a God-fearing man and a direct descendant of Hazrat Imam Hasan R.A., the eldest son of Ali R.A, the Holy Prophet's (SAW) first cousin, and of Fatima R.A his beloved daughter. His mother was the daughter of a saintly person- Abdullah Sawmai who was a direct descendant of Imam Husain A.S, the younger son of Ali R.A and Fatima R.A. Thus Sayyid Abdul Qadir was both a Hasani and Hussaini[7] ”

His complete name Al-Syed Muhiyudin Abu Muhammad Abdal Qadir al-Gaylani al-Hasani wal-Hussaini,[1][2] Syed denoting his honorific title of descendancy from the Islamic prophet Muhammad,[8] Muhiyudin his title for being known popularly as "the reviver of religion",[9] Abu Muhammad his Kunya or nick name (meaning 'father of Muhammad'), al-Gaylani denoting the region he hailed from[10][11] although however he also had the epiphet al-Baghdadi. [12][13][14] (denoting also the city of Baghdad where he was now residing in and therefore also geographically recognised through, eventually being buried there), and al-Hasani wal-Hussaini affirming his lineal descent from both Syed Imam Hasan and Imam Hussain, the grandsons of Muhammad.[1][15]

His father, Syed Abu Saleh Musa al-Hasani[16] was a direct descendant of the Syed Imam Hasan.[15][17] He was an acknowledged saint of his day "..and was popularly known as Jangi Dost, because of his love for Jihad"[18] Jangi dost thereby being his sobriquet[5][19]

His mother Ummal Khair Fatima,[20] daughter of Syed Abdullah Sawmai az-Zaid a descendant of Syed Imam Hussain[15][21] through Imam Zain ul Abideen,[22] he was known himself as a "great saint of his time and a direct descendant of Hazrat Imam Husain, the Great Martyr of Karbala"[23]

Ghous e Azam Shrine [edit] Education

He spent his early life in the town of his birth. At the age of eighteen he went to Baghdad (1095), where he pursued the study of Hanbali law under several teachers. The Shaikh received lessons on Fiqh from Abu Ali al-Mukharrimi, Hadith from Abu-Bakar-bin-Muzaffar, and tafsir from the renowned commentator, Abu Muhammad Jafar. When he was on the way going to "Baghdad" with a large convoy (Qafila), a group of thieves attacked the convoy and took all of their precious belongings, one of the thieves came to him (Sheikh Abdul-Qadir Gilani) and asked him "Boy, tell me what you have in your luggage". He replied "I have forty dinars." The thief searched all of his luggage and could not find the dinars. He then took the boy to his sardar (master) and told him that this boy (Sheikh Abdul-Qadir Gilani) claims he has forty dinars, but after searching his belongings I could not find the dinars. The sardar (master) then asked, "Boy, do you lie?" He replied "No, I am not lying, the dinars were sewn by my mother into my shalwar." Then one of the thieves checked and found the money. The sardar then asked him. "Boy, you could have lied to us and could have saved your money, why you didn't you lie?" Sheikh Abdul-Qadir Gilani replied "Before I started my journey, my mother advised me to tell the truth even if someone tries to kill me as Allah frowns upon those who do not speak the truth." After listening to this the sardar began to cry, as this little boy had so much fear of Allah that he did not lie in such a situation. He felt guilt for all his wrongdoings and felt the fear of Allah so the sardar then gave back all of the looted things to their owners.

In Tasawwuf (the sciences of the heart), his spiritual instructor was Shaikh Abu'l-Khair Hammad bin Muslim al-Dabbas. From him, he received his basic training, and with his help he set out on a spiritual journey.

After completion of education, Abdul-Qadir Gilani abandoned the city of Baghdad, and spent twenty-five years as a wanderer in the desert regions of Iraq as a recluse.[24] [edit] Later life

He was over fifty years old by the time he returned to Baghdad in 1127, and began to preach in public. He moved into the school belonging to his old teacher al-Mukharrimii; there he engaged himself in teaching. Soon he became popular with his pupils. In the morning he taught hadith and tafsir, and in the afternoon held discourse on science of the hearts and the virtues of the Qur'an.

He busied himself for forty years in the service of Islam from 521 to 561 AH. During this period hundreds of thousands of people converted to Islam because of him and organized several teams to go abroad for dawah purposes.

He was also the teacher of Ibn Qudamah whom he also designated as a Caliph of his Qadri order (amongst others). Ibn Qudamah also later fought as a general in Sultan Saladin Ayyubi's army and conquered Jerusalem from the Christian dominance. His work and jurisprudent works influenced Ibn Taymiyyah who referred to both Ibn Qudamah and Shaikh Al-Gilani as his Shaikhs with full honorifics. [edit] Death

The sheikh died on Saturday night 1166 (8th Rabi' al-Awwal 561AH) [25] at the age of ninety one years (by the Islamic calendar), and was entombed in a shrine within his Madrassa in Baghdad.[26][27][28] His Shrine and Mosque are in what used to be the school he preached in, located in Babul-Sheikh, Resafa (East bank of the Tigris) in Baghdad, Iraq. Worldwide the Qadiriyyah celebrate Ghouse-al-azham day on Wednesday closest to his birthday not his death-date for respect and elevation of their Shaykh which is 10th of Rabi at-Thani in the islamic calendar[25]

Al-Gilani succeeded the spiritual chain of Junayd Baghdadi. His contribution to thought in the Muslim world earned him the title Muhiyuddin (lit. "The reviver of the faith"), as he along with his students and associates laid the groundwork for the society which later produced stalwarts like Nur ad-Din and Saladin. His Sufi order named after him is generally thought to be one of the most popular Sufi orders of the Islamic world.[29]

The tomb of Abdul Qadir Gilani and other Sunni sites including tomb of Imam Abu Hanifa were destroyed by Shia zealot Shah Ismail of Safavi empire in 1508.[30] In 1533, Ottomans reconquered Iraq and rebuilt the tomb of Abdul Qadir Gilani and other Sunni sites.[31]

Aulia Ghaus-e-Azam [edit] Family

The Shaikh had four virtuous wives and forty-nine children, twenty-seven sons and twenty-two daughters.[citation needed] The most famous of his sons are Shaikh Abdul-Wahab, Sheikh Abdul-Razzaq, Shaikh Abdul-Aziz, Shaikh Isa, Shaikh Musa, Sheikh Yahya, Sheikh Abdullah, Sheikh Muhammed and Sheikh Ibrahim. His sons and grandsons reached the Indian sub-continent throughout the years preaching Islam in his method (Arabic=Tareqa,طريقة). As they have reached the Western part of the Arab world of North Africa and Morocco, and parts of the Horn of Africa (Ethiopia, Eritrea, and Somalia (a country that predominantly professes to the Qadiriyyah order only in the Sufi sect though small patches of Ahmed ibn Idris' order is found) ). In Somalia the order is subdivided to Zaylaiyyah order and Uwaisiyyah order.

Among the Sufis, who came to India from Baghdad, and who belonged to the family of Shaykh Abd-ul-Qadir Jilani Hz. Shah Badr Dewan whose real name was Hasan, and whose honorific title was Badr-ud-Din, is one of the top most Sufis. He stayed near Batala, and laid the foundation of Masania, a kind of inn in his times, but later populated by his children, grand children and great grand children, became a village of its own culture. The progeny of Baba Shah Badr Dewan is one of the biggest Syed Families, whose origin goes straight to Shaykh Syed Abd-ul-Qadir Jilani His shajara is as follows:

1.Hz. Syed Hasan Badr -ud- Din alias Shah Badar Deewan Baghdadi s/o 2.Hz. Syed Sharaf-ud-Din s/o 3.Hz. Syed Muhayy-ud-Din Abd-ul-Qaadir (II) s/o 4.Hz. Syed Shams-ud-Din Muhammad (II) s/o 5.Hz. Syed Alaa-ud-Din Ali s/o 6.Hz. Syed Shams-ud-Din Muhammad (I) s/o 7.Hz. Syed Sayf-ud-Din Yahya s/o 8.Hz. Syed Zaheer-ud-Din Ahmad s/o 9.Hz. Syed Shahaab-ud-Din Ali an-Nasr s/o 10.Hz. Syed Imaad-ud-Din Saalih an-Nasr s/o 11.Hz. Syed Taaj-ud-Din Abd-ur-Razzaaq s/o 12.Qutb-e-Rabbani, Ghouth-e-Samadani, Mehboob-e-Subhani, Miran Mohayy-ud-Din, Syed Abd-ul-Qadir Jailaani Al-Hasani, Al-Husaini, Al-Hanbali, Al-Baghdadi Radi Allahu Anhu. Education

Hz. Syed Hasan Badr-ud-Din r.a. had given bay’at to his father Hz. Syed Sharaf-ud-Din r.a. s/o Hz. Syed Muhayy-ud-Din Abd-ul-Qaadir r.a. (II), who, a man of extra ordinary caliber in the generation of Huzoor Ghouth-e-Azam r.a, had taught him the knowledge of inner (Baatin) and outer (Zaahir), even in his twenties, and had raised him to the level of a Wali of Allah Taala.

Stays in Lahore and Amritsar

He left his home in 908 of Hijra and came to Lahore where he spent some years in preaching. A lot of people from Lahore, in particular, and Punjab, in general, embraced Islam on his hands, and became his followers. He then went to Amritsar, and spent somewhat equal amount of time there. Again, in few years, a lot of people gathered around him as his followers or devotees. As in Lahore, he observed a Chilla in Amritsar, too.

Arrival to Batala, India

From Amritsar, probably in 920 of Hijra, he came to Batala and stayed at place called Mian Muhalla. He spent some years in ibaadat and tableegh in Mian Muhalla, and then moved to another place that had no name by then and that had not been inhabited also. He settled down at this nameless place and laid the foundation of Masanian ( also called Masani ), the sacred abode of the children of Baba Shah Badr Dewan r.a. for so many coming years.

Marriage and Children

He got married to Hz. Syeda Bibi Murass’a Fatima r.a, daughter of Hz. Syed Shahaab-ud-Din Daood Bukhari r.a. of village Sohal in Gurdaspur, and had four sons and a daughter.

1.Syed Ali Saabir Shah Gailaani Qaadri r.a. 2.Syed Habeebullah Shah Gailaani Qaadri r.a. 3.Syed Abd-ul-Lateef Shah Gailaani Qaadri r.a. 4.Syed Muhammad Saadiq Gailaani Qaadri r.a. 5.Syeda Bibi Fatima alias Allah Bandi (Allah’s servant) also known as Bibi Pak Daman r.a.

Wisaal

He died on 12th of Rabi-ul-Awwal, 1018 of Hijra in Masanian. On his grave a majestic Rauda or Mazaar was built by his grand son Shah Abd-ush-Shukur Gailaani Qaadri r.a. It has four minarets, two courtyards and many domes. Annual festival (Urs) is held on 12th Rabi-ul-Awwal and the monthly fair or nau-chandi is arranged on first Thursday of each new moon in Masanian and Lahore.

Note: To know about the sons of Hz. Shah Badr Dewan r.a. or his progeny click the above links. If you want to know your lineage or shajara go on clicking the links to your respective forefathers in the posts untill you come to your father’s or your own name. [edit] Works

Some of Jilani's more well known works include:

Al-Ghunya li-talibi tariq al-haqq wa al-din (Sufficient Provision for Seekers of the Path of Truth and Religion)
Al-Fath ar-Rabbani (The Sublime Revelation)available for download (urdu)
Malfuzat (Utterances)
Futuh al-Ghaib (Revelations of the Unseen) available for download (urdu) (English)
Jala' al-Khatir (The Removal of Care)
Bahajja-Tul Asrar (Ground Secerets)

[edit] Bibliography

Utterances of Shaikh Abd al-Qadir al-Jīlānī (Malfūzāt) / transl. from the Arabic by Muhtar Holland Malfūzāt

Author: Muhtar Holland (1935-) Year: 1994, Publisher: Kuala Lumpur : S. Abdul Majeed & Co, ISBN 1-88221-603-2

Fifteen letters, khamsata ashara maktūban / Shaikh Abd Al-Qādir Al-Jīlānī ; translated from the Persian into Arabic by Alī usāmu ́D-Dīn Al-Muttaqī ; and from Arabic into English by Muhtar Holland, Kamsata ašara maktūban

Author: ʿAlāʾ al-Dīn ʿAlī b. ʿAbd al-Malik al- Muttaqī al-Hindī (ca1480-1567); Muhtar Holland (1935-) Year: c1997 Edition: 1st ed Publisher: Hollywood, Fla : Al-Baz Pub ISBN 1-88221-616-4

The removal of cares = Jalā Al-Khawātir : a collection of forty-five discoures / Shaikh Abd Al-Qādir Al-Jīlānī ; transl. from the Arabic by Muhtar Holland

Jalā al-Khawātir Author: Muhtar Holland (1935-) Year: c1997 Publisher: Ft. Lauderdale, Fla : Al-Baz Pub Extent: xxiii, 308 p Size: 22 cm ISBN 1-88221-613-X

The Sultan of the saints : mystical life and teachings of Shaikh Syed Abdul Qadir Jilani / Muhammad Riaz Qadiri

Author: Muhammad Riyaz Qadiri Year: 2000, Publisher: Gujranwala : Abbasi Publications, Size: 22 cm, ISBN 969-851016-8

The sublime revelation = al-Fath ar-Rabbānī : a collection of sixty-two discourses / Abd al-Qādir al- Jīlānī ; transl. from the Arabic by Muhtar Holland, al-Fath al-Rabbānī

Year: 1998 Edition: 2nd ed, Publisher: Ft. Lauderdale : Al-Baz Publishing, ISBN 1-88221-602-4

Al-Ghunya li-talibi tariq al-haqq wa al-din (Sufficient Provision for Seekers of the Path of Truth and Religion) ,(Arabic),PartI,II,Abd Al-Qadir Al-Gaylani,Pub.Dar Al-Hurya, Baghdad, Iraq, 1988.
Al-Ghunya li-talibi tariq al-haqq wa al-din (Sufficient Provision for Seekers of the Path of Truth and Religion)

(Arabic), Introduced by Dr. Majid Irsan Al-Kilani, Pub. Dar Al-Khair, Damascus-Bairut, 2005.



----

='''Seikh Abdul Qadir Jaelani'''=
Sulthonul Auliya (rajanya para wali) - Sulthonul Thoriqah (ahli Thoriqah) - Sulthonul Arifin (ahli ma'rifah) -
Shohibul Wafa (selalu menunaikan).
'''Lahir : Rabu 1 1 Ramadan di 470 H, 1077 M
Wafat : Sabtu malam / setelah magrib, 9 Rabiul Akhir 561H / 1166 M'''

*Ayah (Al Hasani) : Abu Shalih Musa Janki Dausat bin Abu Abdillah bin Yahya az-Zahid bin Muhammad Al Akbar bin Dawud bin Musa At-tsani bin Abdullah Tsani bin Musa al-Jaun bin Abdullah Mahdhi bin Hasan al-Mutsanna bin Hasan as-Sibthi bin Ali bin Abi Thalib, Suami Fatimah binti Rasulullah Shallallahu 'alaihi Wassalam
* Ibu (Al- Husaini) : Ummul Khoir Ummatul Jabbar Sayyidah Fatimah binti Sayyid Muhammad, bin Abdullah As-Sumi Az-Zahid, bin Sayyid Muhammad Abi Jamaluddin, bin Al-Imam Sayyid Mahmud, bin Thohir, bin Al-Imam Abi Atho As-Sayyid Abdullah, bin Al-Imam Sayyid Kamaludin Isa, bin Al-Imam Abi Alaudin Muhammad Al-Jawad, bin Al-Imam Ali Ridho, bin Al-Imam Abi Musa Al-Kadzim, bin Al-Imam Ja'far Shodiq, bin Al-Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir, bin Al-Imam Zaenal Abidin, bin Abi Abdillah Al-Husain putra Sayyidina Ali bin Abi Thalib dengan Sayyidah Fatimah Az-Zahra binti Rasulullah Saw.

'''Genealogi'''
Abdul Qadir Jaelani dilafalkan Abdulqadir Gaylani, Abdelkader, Abdul Qadir, Abdul Khadir - Jilani, Jeelani, Gailani, Gillani, Gilani, Al Gilani, Keilany. Abd al-Qadir al-Gilani[1][2] (bahasa Kurdi: Evdilqadirê Geylanî, bahasa Persia: عبد القادر گیلانی, bahasa Urdu: عبد القادر آملی گیلانی Abdolqāder Gilāni) (470–561 H) (1077–1166 M) adalah seorang ulama fiqih yang sangat dihormati oleh Sunni dan dianggap wali dalam dunia tarekat dan sufisme.
Ibnul Imad menyebutkan bahwa nama lengkap syekh ini adalah Abdul Qadir bin Abi Sholeh bin Janaky Dausat bin Abi Abdillah Abdullah bin Yahya bin Muhammad bin Dawud bin Musa bin Abdullah bin Musa Al-Huzy bin Abdullah Al-Himsh bin Al-Hasan bin Al-Mutsanna bin Al-Hasan bin Ali bin Abi Tholib Al-Jailany.[7]

Ada dua riwayat sehubungan dengan tanggal kelahiran al-Ghauts al_A'zham Syekh Abdul Qodir al-Jilani Amoli. Riwayat pertama yaitu bahwa ia lahir pada 1 Ramadhan 470 H. Riwayat kedua menyatakan Ia lahir pada 2 Ramadhan 470 H. Tampaknya riwayat kedua lebih dipercaya oleh ulama. Silsilah Syekh Abdul Qodir bersumber dari Khalifah Sayyid Ali al-Murtadha, melalui ayahnya sepanjang 14 generasi dan melaui ibunya sepanjang 12 generasi. Syekh Sayyid Abdurrahman Jami memberikan komentar mengenai asal usul al-Ghauts al-A'zham sebagi berikut: "Ia adalah seorang Sultan yang agung, yang dikenal sebagial-Ghauts al-A'zham. Ia mendapat gelar sayyid dari silsilah kedua orang tuanya, Hasani dari sang ayah dan Husaini dari sang ibu. Silsilah Keluarganya adalah Sebagai berikut:

Ayahnya(Hasani):
Syeh Abdul Qodir bin Abu Shalih bin Abu Abdillah bin Yahya az-Zahid bin Muhammad bin Dawud bin Musa bin Abdullah Tsani bin Musa al-Jaun bin Abdul Mahdhi bin Hasan al-Mutsanna bin Hasan as-Sibthi bin Ali bin Abi Thalib, Suami Fatimah binti Rasulullah Shallallahu 'alaihi Wassalam

Ibunya(Husaini)
Syeh Abdul Qodir bin Ummul Khair Fathimah binti Abdullah Sum'i bin Abu Jamal bin Muhammad bin Mahmud bin Abul 'Atha Abdullah bin Kamaluddin Isa bin Abu Ala'uddin bin Ali Ridha bin Musa al-Kazhim bin Ja'far al-Shadiq bin Muhammad al-Baqir bin Zainal 'Abidin bin Husain bin Ali bin Abi Thalib, Suami Fatimah Az-Zahra binti Rasulullah Shallallahu 'alaihi Wassalam

'''Biografi'''
Dalam usia 8 tahun ia sudah meninggalkan Jilan menuju Baghdad pada tahun 488 H/1095 M. Karena tidak diterima belajar di Madrasah Nizhamiyah Baghdad, yang waktu itu dipimpin Ahmad al Ghazali, yang menggantikan saudaranya Abu Hamid al Ghazali. Di Baghdad beliau belajar kepada beberapa orang ulama seperti Ibnu Aqil, Abul Khatthat, Abul Husein al Farra' dan juga Abu Sa'ad al Muharrimiseim. Beliau menimba ilmu pada ulama-ulama tersebut hingga mampu menguasai ilmu-ilmu ushul dan juga perbedaan-perbedaan pendapat para ulama.
Dengan kemampuan itu, Abu Sa'ad al Mukharrimi yang membangun sekolah kecil-kecilan di daerah Babul Azaj menyerahkan pengelolaan sekolah itu sepenuhnya kepada Syeikh Abdul Qadir al Jailani. Ia mengelola sekolah ini dengan sungguh-sungguh. Bermukim di sana sambil memberikan nasihat kepada orang-orang di sekitar sekolah tersebut. Banyak orang yang bertaubat setelah mendengar nasihat beliau. Banyak pula orang yang bersimpati kepada beliau, lalu datang menimba ilmu di sekolah beliau hingga sekolah itu tidak mampu menampung lagi.

'''Murid'''
Murid-muridnya banyak yang menjadi ulama terkenal, seperti al Hafidz Abdul Ghani yang menyusun kitab Umdatul Ahkam Fi Kalami Khairil Anam, Syeikh Qudamah, penyusun kitab fiqih terkenal al Mughni.
'''Perkataan Ulama tentangnya'''
Syeikh Ibnu Qudamah sempat tinggal bersama beliau selama satu bulan sembilan hari. Kesempatan ini digunakan untuk belajar kepada Syeikh Abdul Qadir al Jailani sampai beliau meninggal dunia.[9]

Syeikh Ibnu Qudamah ketika ditanya tentang Syeikh Abdul Qadir menjawab, "Kami sempat berjumpa dengan beliau di akhir masa kehidupannya. Ia menempatkan kami di sekolahnya. Ia sangat perhatian terhadap kami. Kadang beliau mengutus putra beliau yang bernama Yahya untuk menyalakan lampu buat kami. Ia senantiasa menjadi imam dalam salat fardhu."

=Penerus=
Syekh Abdul Qadir tidak menikah hingga beliau bermimpi bertemu Rasulullah SAW dan menyuruhnya untuk menikah dan Beliau menikah pada usia 51 tahun.
Ibnu Najjar menulis dalam kitabnya, Abdur Razzaq putra Syekh Abdul Qadir Al Jailani berkata, Ayahku memiliki 49 anak. 27 pria dan 22 wanita. Akan tetapi hanya tersisa 13 orang putra dan 1 orang putri.

Namun, Syekh Abdul Qadir diuji dengan kematian putra dan putrinya. Sebanyak 14 laki-laki dan 21 perempuan meninggal dunia dihadapan beliau. Putra putri Syekh Abdul Qadir, meninggal tepat dimalam jadwal pengajian beliau, Namun beliau tidak meliburkannya. Akan tetapi, Syekh Abdul Qadir Al Jailani mendoakan jenazah anak-anaknya di dalam majelis.
Menurut Syekh Yunus al-Samarrai, Syekh Abdul Qadir al Jailani dikaruniai Allah 27 anak laki-laki dan 22 anak perempuan, namun yang kemudian diketahui meneruskan keturunan sebanyak 13 anak laki-laki dan 1 anak perempuan.

Anak perempuan satu-satunya Syekh Abdul Qadir al Jailani bernama Syarifah Fatimah, yang dikemudian hari menikah dengan anak dari Syekh Abdul Rahman al Tafsunji Al Asadi.

Adapun ke-13 anak laki-laki Syekh Abdul Qadir al Jailani adalah:
01. Syekh Abdullah
02. Syekh Abdul Wahab
03. Syekh Abdul Razzaq
04. Syekh Abdul Aziz
05. Syekh Abdul Jabbar
06. Syekh Ibrahim
07. Syekh Muhammad
08. Syekh Abdul Rahman
09. Syekh Issa
10. Syekh Musa
11. Syekh Shaleh
12. Syekh Abdul Ghani
13. Syekh Yahya

Setelah Wali Allah ini tutup usia pada 10 Rabiul Akhir 561 H dalam usia 91 tahun, anak-anak dan murid-muridnya mendirikan suatu organisasi yang bertujuan menanamkan ruh ke-Islaman yang sejati dan membetulkan ajaran-ajaran Islam di tengahtengah umat manusia. Organisasi ini disebut ‘Thariqah Qadiriyyah’, yang hingga hari ini terkenal dengan keteguhannya di dalam memegang syariat Islam.

Thariqah inipun telah memberikan andil yang besar kepada Islam. Ada tiga ajaran dan nasehatnya yang terkenal di seluruh dunia, yang paling agung adalah Futuhul Ghaib, yang kedua Fathul Rabbani, yaitu kumpulan enam puluh delapan ajaran yang disusun pada 545 - 546 H. Sedangkan, yang ketiga adalah qashidah atau puisi yang menceritakan peranan dan keberadaan Aulia Allah, yang menurut istilah sufisme dinamakan Qasidatul Ghautsiyyah.

ZURIAT KETURUNAN SYEKH ABDUL QADIR al JAILANI di NUSANTARA

1. Salah satu tokoh yang terkemuka dan merupakan keturunan Syekh Abdul Qadir al Jailani di Nusantara adalah Syarif Muhammad Ainul Yaqin Sunan Giri.

Melalui Pusat Pendidikan Giri Kedaton yang didirikannya, Sunan Giri memiliki pengaruh yang sangat besar pada perkembangan Islam di abad ke 15-17 Masehi di Nusantara.

2. Kesultanan Demak didirikan oleh Raden Fattah yang ber-ibu Nyai Ratna Su Ban Ci binti Syarif Abdullah bin Syekh Quro al Qadiri al Hasani.

3. Kesultanan Palembang didirikan oleh Sultan Abdul Rahman yang merupakan zuriat Sunan Giri bin Pangeran Wali Lanang bin Maulana Abu Ishaq al Qadiri al Hasani.

Dalam versi yang lain, Kesultanan Palembang berasal dari zuriat Suhunan Cirebon bin Syekh Suta Maharaja bin Maulana Abu Ishaq al Qadiri al Hasani.

4. Kesultanan Jambi didirikan Sultan Abdul Kadir yang merupakan zuriat Datuk Paduka Berhalo bin Syarif Ismail Pulau Besar al Qadiri al Hasani.

5. Kerajaan Atas Angin yang dipimpin oleh Syarif Abdurrahman bin Abdullah bin Zainal Abidin bin Zainal Alim bin Syarif Muhammad Yusuf as Siddiq Champa al Qadiri al Hasani.

Kerajaan Atas Angin diperkirakan berada di pesisir barat Sumatera. Sebagian pemerhati sejarah menyebutnya sebagai Negeri Minangkabau Timur.

6. Kesultanan Banten dan Cirebon yang berasal dari Nyai Subang Larang binti Syekh Quro al Qadiri al Hasani. Dimana Nyai Subang Larang menikah dengan Prabu Siliwangi, yang melahirkan Nyai Rara Santan.

Nyai Rara Santan adalah ibu dari Syarif Hidayatullah leluhur Kesultanan Benten dan Cirebon.

Namun versi lain mengatakan Nyai Subang Larang adalah anak angkat Syekh Quro, sehingga jalur keturunan Syekh Abdul Qadir al Jailani berasal dari Nyai Ratna Su Ban Ci binti Syarif Abdullah bin Syekh Quro al Qadiri al Hasani.

Nyai Ratna Subanci melalui cucunya yakni Ratu Ayu Kirana binti Raden Fattah menikah dengan Sultan Banten Hasanuddin bin Syarif Hidayatullah, yang menurunkan penguasa Kesultanan Banten.

Sementara cucunya yang lain yakni Ratu Ayu Wulan binti Raden Fattah menikah dengan Pangeran Pasarean bin Syarif Hidayatullah, yang menurunkan penguasa Kesultanan Cirebon.

7. Di kalangan keluarga pondok pesantren terutama yang berada di Pulau Madura, Jawa Timur, Jawa Tengah dan Jawa Barat banyak yang tercatat sebagai keturunan Syarif Muhammad Ainul Yaqin (Sunan Giri) dan Syarif Hidayatullah (Sunan Gunung Jati).

Demikian halnya, para ulama di pulau Sumatera, Semenanjung (Malaysia), Kalimantan, Sulawesi, Nusa Tenggara dan Maluku, berdasarkan kepada kisah-kisah lama, disinyalir banyak yang berasal dari zuriat keturunan Syaikh Abdul Qadir al Jailani.


'''Karya'''
Imam Ibnu Rajab juga berkata, "Syeikh Abdul Qadir al Jailani Rahimahullah memiliki pemahaman yang bagus dalam masalah tauhid, sifat-sifat Allah, takdir, dan ilmu-ilmu ma'rifat yang sesuai dengan sunnah."
Karya karyanya:
# Tafsir Al Jilani
# al Ghunyah Li Thalibi Thariqil Haq,
# Futuhul Ghaib.
# Al-Fath ar-Rabbani
# Jala' al-Khawathir
# Sirr al-Asrar
# Asror Al Asror
# Malfuzhat
# Khamsata "Asyara Maktuban
# Ar Rasael
# Ad Diwaan
# Sholawat wal Aurod
# Yawaqitul Hikam
# Jalaa al khotir
# Amrul muhkam
# Usul as Sabaa
# Mukhtasar ulumuddin

Murid-muridnya mengumpulkan ihwal yang berkaitan dengan nasihat dari majelis-majelis beliau. Dalam masalah-masalah sifat, takdir dan lainnya, ia berpegang dengan sunnah. Ia membantah dengan keras terhadap orang-orang yang menyelisihi sunnah.

=Awal Kemasyhuran=
Al-Jaba'i berkata bahwa Syeikh Abdul Qadir pernah berkata kepadanya, "Tidur dan bangunku sudah diatur. Pada suatu saat dalam dadaku timbul keinginan yang kuat untuk berbicara. Begitu kuatnya sampai aku merasa tercekik jika tidak berbicara. Dan ketika berbicara, aku tidak dapat menghentikannya. Pada saat itu ada dua atau tiga orang yang mendengarkan perkataanku. Kemudian mereka mengabarkan apa yang aku ucapkan kepada orang-orang, dan merekapun berduyun-duyun mendatangiku di masjid Bab Al-Halbah. Karena tidak memungkinkan lagi, aku dipindahkan ke tengah kota dan dikelilingi dengan lampu. Orang-orang tetap datang di malam hari dengan membawa lilin dan obor hingga memenuhi tempat tersebut. Kemudian, aku dibawa ke luar kota dan ditempatkan di sebuah mushalla. Namun, orang-orang tetap datang kepadaku, dengan mengendarai kuda, unta bahkan keledai dan menempati tempat di sekelilingku. Saat itu hadir sekitar 70 orang para wali radhiallahu 'anhum.

Dalam beberapa manuskrip didapatkan bahwa Syeikh Abdul Qadir berkata, "Sebuah suara berkata kepadaku saat aku berada di pengasingan diri, "kembali ke Baghdad dan ceramahilah orang-orang". Aku pun ke Baghdad dan menemukan para penduduknya dalam kondisi yang tidak aku sukai dan karena itulah aku tidak jadi mengikuti mereka". "Sesungguhnya" kata suara tersebut, "Mereka akan mendapatkan manfaat dari keberadaan dirimu". "Apa hubungan mereka dengan keselamatan agamaku/keyakinanku" tanyaku. "Kembali (ke Baghdad) dan engkau akan mendapatkan keselamatan agamamu" jawab suara itu.

Aku pun membuat 70 perjanjian dengan Allah. Di antaranya adalah tidak ada seorang pun yang menentangku dan tidak ada seorang muridku yang meninggal kecuali dalam keadaan bertaubat. Setelah itu, aku kembali ke Baghdad dan mulai berceramah.

'''Hubungan Guru & Murid'''

Syeikh Abdul Qadir berkata, "Seorang Syeikh tidak dapat dikatakan mencapai puncak spiritual kecuali apabila 12 karakter berikut ini telah mendarah daging dalam dirinya.
# Dua karakter dari Allah yaitu dia menjadi seorang yang sattar (menutup aib) dan ghaffar (pemaaf).
# Dua karakter dari Rasulullah Shallallahu 'alaihi Wassalam yaitu penyayang dan lembut.
# Dua karakter dari Abu Bakar yaitu jujur dan dapat dipercaya.
# Dua karakter dari Umar yaitu amar ma'ruf nahi munkar.
# Dua karakter dari Utsman yaitu dermawan dan bangun (tahajjud) pada waktu orang lain sedang tidur.
# Dua karakter dari Ali yaitu alim (cerdas/intelek) dan pemberani.
Masih berkenaan dengan pembicaraan di atas dalam bait syair yang dinisbatkan kepadanya dikatakan: Bila lima perkara tidak terdapat dalam diri seorang syeikh maka ia adalah Dajjal yang mengajak kepada kesesatan.

Dia harus sangat mengetahui hukum-hukum syariat zhahir, mencari ilmu hakikah dari sumbernya, hormat dan ramah kepada tamu, lemah lembut kepada si miskin, mengawasi para muridnya sedang ia selalu merasa diawasi oleh Allah.

Syeikh Abdul Qadir juga menyatakan bahwa Syeikh al Junaid mengajarkan standar al Quran dan Sunnah kepada kita untuk menilai seorang syeikh. Apabila ia tidak hafal al Quran, tidak menulis dan menghafal Hadits, dia tidak pantas untuk diikuti.

Syeikh Abdul Qadir berkata, "Kalimat tauhid akan sulit hadir pada seorang individu yang belum di talqin dengan zikir bersilsilah kepada Rasullullah oleh mursyidnya saat menghadapi sakaratul maut".

Karena itulah Syeikh Abdul Qadir selalu mengulang-ulang syair yang berbunyi: Wahai yang enak diulang dan diucapkan (kalimat tauhid) jangan engkau lupakan aku saat perpisahan (maut).

Pada tahun 521 H/1127 M, dia mengajar dan berfatwa dalam semua madzhab pada masyarakat sampai dikenal masyarakat luas. Selama 25 tahun Syeikh Abdul Qadir menghabiskan waktunya sebagai pengembara sufi di Padang Pasir Iraq dan akhirnya dikenal oleh dunia sebagai tokoh sufi besar dunia Islam. Selain itu dia memimpin madrasah dan ribath di Baghdad yang didirikan sejak 521 H sampai wafatnya pada tahun 561 H. Madrasah itu tetap bertahan dengan dipimpin anaknya Abdul Wahab (552-593 H/1151-1196 M), diteruskan anaknya Abdul Salam (611 H/1214 M). Juga dipimpin anak kedua Syeikh Abdul Qadir, Abdul Razaq (528-603 H/1134-1206 M), sampai hancurnya Baghdad pada tahun 656 H/1258 M.

=='''Kontroversi'''==
'''al-Muqri' Abul Hasan asy-Syathnufi'''
Syeikh Abdul Qadir al Jailani adalah seorang yang diagungkan pada masanya. Diagungkan oleh para syeikh, ulama, dan ahli zuhud. Ia banyak memiliki keutamaan dan karamah. Tetapi, ada seorang yang bernama al-Muqri' Abul Hasan asy-Syathnufi al-Mishri (nama lengkapnya adalah Ali bin Yusuf bin Jarir al Lakhmi asy Syathnufi) yang mengumpulkan kisah-kisah dan keutamaan-keutamaan Syeikh Abdul Qadir al Jailani dalam tiga jilid kitab. Judul asli Kiab itu cukup panjang, yaitu Bahjatu Al-Asraar wa Ma’dinu Al-Anwar fi Ba’di Manaqib Al-Quthb Ar-Rabbani Abdul Qadir jailani.

Al Muqri' lahir di Kairo tahun 640 H, meninggal tahun 713 H. Dia dituduh berdusta dan tidak bertemu dengan Syeikh Abdul Qadir al Jailani. Dia telah menulis perkara-perkara yang aneh dan besar (kebohongannya).

'''Imam Adz-Dzahabi'''
Sam'ani berkata, "Syeikh Abdul Qadir Al Jailani adalah penduduk kota Jailan. Ia seorang Imam bermadzhab Hambali. Menjadi guru besar madzhab ini pada masa hidup beliau." Imam Adz Dzahabi menyebutkan biografi Syeikh Abdul Qadir Al Jailani dalam Siyar A'lamin Nubala, dan menukilkan perkataan Syeikh sebagai berikut, "Lebih dari lima ratus orang masuk Islam lewat tanganku, dan lebih dari seratus ribu orang telah bertaubat."

Imam Adz Dzahabi menukilkan perkataan-perkataan dan perbuatan-perbuatan Syeikh Abdul Qadir yang aneh-aneh sehingga memberikan kesan seakan-akan beliau mengetahui hal-hal yang ghaib. Kemudian mengakhiri perkataan, "Intinya Syeikh Abdul Qadir memiliki kedudukan yang agung, tetapi terdapat kritikan-kritikan terhadap sebagian perkataannya dan Allah menjanjikan (ampunan atas kesalahan-kesalahan orang beriman). Namun sebagian perkataannya merupakan kedustaan atas namanya."[10] Imam Adz Dzahabi juga berkata, " Tidak ada seorangpun para kibar masyayikh yang riwayat hidup dan karamahnya lebih banyak kisah hikayat, selain Syeikh Abdul Qadir Al Jailani, dan banyak di antara riwayat-riwayat itu yang tidak benar bahkan ada yang mustahil terjadi".

Syeikh Rabi' bin Hadi Al Madkhali berkata dalam kitabnya, Al Haddul Fashil,hal.136, "Aku telah mendapatkan aqidahnya di dalam kitabnya yang bernama Al Ghunyah. (Lihat kitab Al-Ghunyah I/83-94) Maka aku mengetahui bahwa dia sebagai seorang Salafi. Ia menetapkan nama-nama dan sifat-sifat Allah dan aqidah-aqidah lainnya di atas manhaj Salaf. Ia juga membantah kelompok-kelompok Syi'ah, Rafidhah, Jahmiyyah, Jabariyyah, Salimiyah, dan kelompok lainnya dengan manhaj Salaf."[11]

Ibnu Rajab Al-Hambali

Dalam mengomentari kitab kontroversial di atas, Ibnu Rajab Al-Hambali menegaskan: "Cukuplah seorang itu berdusta, jika dia menceritakan yang dia dengar", demikian kata Imam Ibnu Rajab. "Aku telah melihat sebagian kitab ini, tetapi hatiku tidak tentram untuk berpegang dengannya, sehingga aku tidak meriwayatkan apa yang ada di dalamnya. Kecuali kisah-kisah yang telah masyhur dan terkenal dari selain kitab ini. Karena kitab ini banyak berisi riwayat dari orang-orang yang tidak dikenal. Juga terdapat perkara-perkara yang jauh dari agama dan akal, kesesatan-kesesatan, dakwaan-dakwaan dan perkataan yang batil tidak berbatas, seperti kisah Syeikh Abdul Qadir menghidupkan ayam yang telah mati, dan sebagainya. Semua itu tidak pantas dinisbatkan kepada Syeikh Abdul Qadir al Jailani rahimahullah."[12]

Kemudian didapatkan pula bahwa al Kamal Ja'far al Adfwi (nama lengkapnya Ja'far bin Tsa'lab bin Ja'far bin Ali bin Muthahhar bin Naufal al Adfawi), seorang ulama bermadzhab Syafi'i. Ia dilahirkan pada pertengahan bulan Sya'ban tahun 685 H dan wafat tahun 748 H di Kairo. Biografi beliau dimuat oleh al Hafidz di dalam kitab Ad Durarul Kaminah, biografi nomor 1452. al Kamal menyebutkan bahwa asy-Syathnufi sendiri tertuduh berdusta atas kisah-kisah yang diriwayatkannya dalam kitab ini.[11]

'''Pranala luar'''
Abdul Qadir Jailani: Antara Akidah dan Karamahnya di Hidayatullah.com
Siapakah Abdul Qadir al-Jailani di al-Atsariyyah.com
Toko Buku Terjemah Karya-Karya Syeh Abdul Qadir Al Jaelani
Situs Tarekat Qadiriyah di Al-GIlani.org
Syeh Abdul Qadir Al Jaelani di Aljlees.com
'''Referensi'''
# Biographical encyclopaedia of Sufis: Central Asia and Middle East by N. Hanif, 2002, p123
# The Sultan of the saints: mystical life and teaching of Shaikh Syed Abdul Qadir Jilani, Muhammad Riyāz Qādrī, 2000, p24
# The works of Shaykh Umar Eli of Somalia of al-Tariqat al-Qadiriyyah 1260H
# From the 12th century onward, Sufism spread amongst the Kurds. The main Sufi orders amongst them are the Qadiriya who trace their origin to the Kurdish Sufi 'Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani
# Philip Khuri Hitti, "Islam, a way of life ", University of Minnesota Press (August 12, 1970). pg 64: "The earliest and most attractive Sufi order was al-Qadiri, named after its founder, the Persian ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jili (al-Jilani 1077–1166)
# A Great Saint: Sheikh Abdul Qadir Jilani
# Seorang ahli sejarah Islam, Ibnul Imad menyebutkan tentang nama dan masa hidup Syaikh Abdul Qadir Al-Jailany: “Pada tahun 561 H hiduplah Asy-Syaikh Abdul Qadir bin Abi Sholeh bin Janaky Dausat bin Abi Abdillah Abdullah bin Yahya bin Muhammad bin Dawud bin Musa bin Abdullah bin Musa Al-Huzy bin Abdullah Al-Himsh bin Al-Hasan bin Al-Mutsanna bin Al-Hasan bin Ali bin Abi Tholib Al-Jailany”. (Lihat Syadzarat Adz-Dzahab (4/198) oleh Ibnul Imad Al-Hanbaly)
# MA Cassim Razvi dan Siddiq Osman NM: "Syekh Abdul Qadir al-Jailani Pemimpin Para Wali", halaman 1-4.Yogyakarta : Pustaka Sufi. ISBN : 979-97400-100-8
# Siyar A'lamin Nubala XX/442.
# Siyar XX/451
# Kitab At Tashawwuf Fii Mizanil Bahtsi Wat Tahqiq, hal. 509, karya Syeikh Abdul Qadir bin Habibullah As Sindi, Penerbit Darul Manar, Cet. II, 8 Dzulqa'dah 1415 H / 8 April 1995 M.
# Lihat Ibnu Rajab, Adz-DZail Ala Thabaqaat Al-Hanabilah, jilid 1 hal. 290. Manakib Syekh Abdul Qodir Al Jailani, Perjalanan Spiritual Sulthanul Auliya, Pustaka Setia, Bandung, 2003 Al Ghunyah, 2010.

Sumber:
1. Syaikh Abdul Qadir Jailani, Kunci Tasawuf Menyingkap Rahasia Kegaiban Hati (Terjemahan dari buku asli Futuhul Ghaib), Penerbit Husaini, Bandung (1985)
2. Tim UIN Syarif Hidayatullah, Ensiklopedi Tasawuf, Penerbit Angkasa, Bandung (2008)
3. Grup FB Kajian Nasab Qabilah Al Hasani dan Sejarah Ahlul Bayt Nusantara https://m.facebook.com/groups/953011948494045
4. Fanpages Kajian Tasawuf https://www.facebook.com/…/a.592002530898…/645193128912457/…
Dan beberapa referensi lainnya.
WaLlahu a’lamu bishshawab

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]