== Notes for [[Item:Q107925|Q107925]] ==

* Martyred in Battle of Fujjar

Source 1: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Khuwaylid_ibn_Asad

Source 2: http://www.islamswomen.com/articles/khadijah_bint_khuwaylid.php

--------------------
Abdullah ibn Abi Quhaafah (Arabic: عبد الله بن أبي قحافة‎, translit. ʿAbd Allāh ibn Abī Quḥāfah), c. 573 CE – 23 August 634 CE, popularly known by his nickname Abu Bakr (أبو بكر),[1] was a senior companion (Sahabi) and the father-in-law of the Islamic prophet Muhammad. He ruled over the Rashidun Caliphate from 632 to 634 CE, when he became the first Muslim Caliph following Muhammad's death.[2] As caliph, Abu Bakr succeeded to the political and administrative functions previously exercised by Muhammad. He was also commonly known as The Truthful (الصديق Al-Siddiq).[3]

see: the Naqshbandi Golden Chain.

As a young man, Abu Bakr became a merchant and he travelled extensively in Arabia and neighboring lands in the Middle East, through which he gained both wealth and experience. He eventually came to be recognized as the chief of his clan.[4] On his return from a business trip to Yemen, he was informed that in his absence Muhammad had openly declared his prophethood. Not long after, Abu Bakr accepted Islam and was the first person outside the family of Muhammad to openly become a Muslim. He was instrumental in the conversion of many people to the Islamic faith[5] and early in 623, Abu Bakr's daughter Aisha was married to Muhammad, strengthening the ties between the two men.[3] Abu Bakr served as a trusted advisor and was the father-in-law to Muhammad. During the lifetime of Muhammad, he was involved in several campaigns such as the Battle of Uhud, the Battle of the Trench, the Invasion of Banu Qurayza, Battle of Khaybar, the Conquest of Mecca, the Battle of Hunayn, the Siege of Ta'if and the Battle of Tabuk, where he was reported to have given all of his wealth for the preparation of this expedition.[6] He also participated in the Treaty of Hudaybiyyah and was made one of the witnesses over the pact.[6] Abu Bakr's Caliphate lasted for a little over two years (or 27 months), ending with his death after an illness. Though the period of his caliphate was not long, it included successful invasions of the two most powerful empires of the time, a remarkable achievement in its own right. He set in motion a historical trajectory that in a few decades would create one of the largest empires in history.

Naqshbandi (Persian: نقشبندی‎‎, Arabic: نقشبندي‎ naqshbandī;) also written Naqshibandi, an-Naqshbandiyyah, Nakşibendi, or Naksibendi) is a major Sunni spiritual order of Sufism. It is one of the Sufi way that traces its spiritual lineage to the Islamic prophet Muhammad, through Abu Bakr, the first Caliph and Muhammad's companion. Some Naqshbandi masters trace their lineage through Ali,[1] Muhammad's cousin, son-in-law and the fourth Caliph, in keeping with most other Sufis.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000002997957567

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]