== Notes for [[Item:Q87636|Q87636]] ==

ID: I82410

Name: Ptolemy I of Commagene

Prefix: King

Given Name: Ptolemy I

Surname: of Commagene

Sex: M

_UID: 2E24F676B909234EA9808879A8860BE63A1C

he was the last satrap of Commagene

Change Date: 26 Nov 2005

Death: Y

Father: Xerxes I of Armenia

Mother: Antiochis of Syria

Marriage 1 Spouse Unknown

Children

Samus I of Commagene

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I82410
--------------------
Ptolemaeus, First King of Commagene, was the First King of Commagene.

He died circa 130 BC.
--------------------
Ptolemaeus (Greek: Πτολεμαῖος) was a man of Armenian[1] descent who lived between the 3rd century BC and 2nd century BC, and became the first King of Commagene. He was of Orontid Armenian descent, being related to the king of Sophene Arsames I.[1] His father was King Orontes IV of Armenia, son of Arsames I. Ptolemy was the last Satrap (Governor) of the state of Commagene, a province in the Seleucid Empire. He served under the Syrian Greek Kings Antiochus III the Great, Seleucus IV Philopator, Antiochus IV Epiphanes and Antiochus V Eupator. Ptolemy served as a Satrap of Commagene between 201–163 BC. When the Seleucid Empire began to disintegrate in 163 BC, Ptolemy decided to revolt and make Commagene an independent kingdom. Ptolemy also declared Samosata, which was the capital of Commagene, under Seleucid rule as the capital of the new kingdom. Ptolemy was in fact a relative to the King Mithridates I of Parthia and related to the Parthian King dynasty. According to fragments of inscribed reliefs found at Mount Nemrut, archaeologists have discovered that Ptolemy was a descendant of Persian King Darius I of Persia. Ptolemy died in 130 BC and his wife is unknown. His son and successor was Sames II Theosebes Dikaios.

From Wikipedia
--------------------
'''
=Ptolemaeus of Commagene=
'''

Ptolemaeus (Armenian: Պտողեմեոս; Greek: Πτολεμαῖος) was a man of Armenian[1] descent who lived between the 3rd century BC and 2nd century BC, and became the first King of Commagene. He was of Orontid Armenian descent, being related to the king of Sophene Arsames I. His father was King Orontes IV of Armenia, son of Arsames I.

Ptolemy was the last Satrap (Governor) of the state of Commagene, a province in the Seleucid Empire. He served under the Syrian Greek Kings Antiochus III the Great, Seleucus IV Philopator, Antiochus IV Epiphanes and Antiochus V Eupator.

Ptolemy served as a Satrap of Commagene between 201-163 BC. When the Seleucid Empire began to disintegrate in 163 BC, Ptolemy decided to revolt and make Commagene an independent kingdom. Ptolemy also declared Samosata, which was the capital of Commagene, under Seleucid rule as the capital of the new kingdom.

Ptolemy was in fact a relative to the King Mithridates I of Parthia and related to the Parthian King dynasty. According to fragments of inscribed reliefs found at Mount Nemrut, archaeologists have discovered that Ptolemy was a descendant of Persian King Darius I of Persia. Ptolemy died in 130 BC and his wife is unknown. His son and successor was Sames II Theosebes Dikaios.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ptolemaeus_of_Commagene

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per01064.htm#0

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Commagene 163-130 BCE

"PTOLEMAEUS"

Event: Ruled c. 130 BC, Satrap of Commagene 1
Note: Revolted and deposed the king of Commagene

Event: Ruled c. 130 BC, Satrap of Commagene 1
Note: Revolted and deposed the king of Commagene

Event: Ruled c. 130 BC, Satrap of Commagene 1
Note: Revolted and deposed the king of Commagene

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]