== Notes for Q964 ==

("Aura" for air and light, reflecting the ethereal quality of angel insects, and "Pteros" for wings, linking to the evolution of insects with flight-related features.)<b>Myth of Aurapteros:</b>
<p>In the ancient times of <b>Protoarthropoda</b>, when the world was young and the skies teemed with primordial insects, there emerged a being unlike any other—a hybrid of grace and grit. <b>Aurapteros</b> was born from the union of <b>Zyphira</b>, the goddess of silent winds, and <b>Carapex</b>, the guardian of burrowed shadows. This union symbolized the balance of two extremes: the airy transcendence of the heavens and the gritty resilience of the earth.
<p>Aurapteros was said to be a wanderer, seeking to unify the divided realms of light and shadow. Their wings were delicate and translucent, shimmering like the wings of an angel, but their body was armored and strong, capable of burrowing through the earth. They were revered as the progenitor of adaptability, embodying both ethereal flight and grounded tenacity.<b>The Legend of the Great Rift:</b>
<p>Aurapteros's journey began in a time of chaos when the Great Rift split the ancient insect clans. One faction sought to ascend to the skies, embracing light and simplicity, while the other delved into the earth, mastering darkness and resilience. The goddess Zyphira demanded loyalty to the air, and Carapex demanded allegiance to the soil.
<p>Aurapteros, caught between the two, defied both their parents. They chose to embrace <b>duality</b>, believing that life thrived in the harmony of opposites. To prove their belief, Aurapteros challenged the ancient elementals of <b>Wind and Earth</b> to a trial.
<p>1.</p>
<p><b>The Trial of Wind:</b></p>
<p>Aurapteros scaled the legendary tree <b>Aetherion</b>, where the winds were sharp enough to strip flesh from bone. Using their delicate wings, they danced between the cutting gales, retrieving the sacred feather of Zyphira.
<p>2.</p>
<p><b>The Trial of Earth:</b></p>
<p>They then descended into the <b>Abyssal Warren</b>, where creatures of darkness hunted in silence. Aurapteros used their armored body to tunnel deep and retrieve the gem of Carapex.<b>The Clades Emerge:</b>
<p>Having succeeded in both trials, Aurapteros’s wings shattered into countless fragments, each becoming a seed of the <b>Zoraptera</b>—ethereal beings who would carry their light and spirit. Their armored body dissolved into the soil, giving rise to the <b>Dermaptera</b>, who inherited their strength and cunning.
<p>To this day, Zoraptera are said to carry the whispers of Aurapteros's celestial grace, while Dermaptera embody the unyielding will of their earthen resolve. Together, they are seen as sibling clades, forever linked by the mythical legacy of Aurapteros—the balance of air and earth.


[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]