== Notes for [[Item:Q143499|Q143499]] ==

Otherwise known as '''King Sancho ''the Great'' of Pamplona:'''
Sancho de Navarra, Emperador , Rey de Navarra (entre 1000 y 1004-1035), Conde de Aragón (1004-1035), Conde de Sobrarbe (1018-1035), Conde de Ribagorza (1018), Conde de Castilla (1029-1035)

http://www.friesian.com/perifran.htm#castile

https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sancho_Garc%C3%A9s_III_de_Pamplona

http://genealogics.org/getperson.php?personID=I00093521&tree=LEO

O Sancho Garcés, Rey de Pamplona que unificó temporalmente la España cristiana (?, n. 992 - ?, Navarra, 1035). Era hijo de García Sánchez, el Trémulo, a quien sucedió en el Trono en el año 1000, inicialmente bajo un consejo de regencia. Aprovechando la desintegración del Califato de Córdoba, dirigió toda su atención hacia la unificación de los principados cristianos de la península Ibérica y algunos del otro lado de los Pirineos: siguiendo las ideas feudales dominantes en la Europa del siglo XI, estableció una red de relaciones de vasallaje y parentesco que le hizo rey -teóricamente- de un extenso territorio que iba «desde Zamora hasta Barcelona», incluyendo Gascuña. Se casó con la hija del conde de Castilla en 1010, lo cual facilitó un acuerdo favorable sobre las fronteras entre ambos estados (1016). Anexó a su reino los condados de Sobrarbe y Ribagorza, alegando derechos dinásticos para intervenir en sus conflictos internos contra las pretensiones del conde de Barcelona (1019). Más tarde, sometió también a este último a vasallaje, a cambio de la ayuda prestada en el conflicto contra su propia madre (hacia 1023). Por las mismas fechas, el apoyo al conde de Gascuña en su lucha contra el Condado de Toulouse, le proporcionó al rey de Pamplona el vizcondado del Labourd y el vasallaje de Gascuña (que teóricamente heredó Sancho al morir el conde, que era su tío). Su parentesco con la familia condal castellana le permitió igualmente intervenir en aquel estado, apoyando la autoridad de su cuñado (el conde Niño don García) frente a los nobles y a la intromisión del rey de León; Sancho casó a su hermana Urraca con el rey leonés para pacificar las relaciones con él y poder así ejercer libremente su influencia sobre Castilla. Al morir asesinado el conde, don García durante un viaje a León (1029), Sancho ocupó Castilla alegando los derechos sucesorios de su mujer, a pesar de que existían herederos masculinos con más derechos para regir aquel Condado. Esto hizo estallar la guerra con el rey de León, que también ambicionaba la anexión de Castilla; la suerte de la guerra entre los dos reyes favoreció al de Pamplona, que ocupó León, Zamora y Astorga (1034). De ese momento data una acuñación de moneda en la que Sancho se titula emperador. Sin embargo, su «imperio» fue efímero: en 1035 el rey leonés reconquistaba su capital (que era la ciudad que daba derecho a usar el título imperial). Y en aquel mismo año moría Sancho, dejando sus estados repartidos entre sus hijos: Pamplona, las Vascongadas y la Bureba para García; Castilla para Fernando; Sobrarbe y Ribagorza para Gonzalo; y Aragón para Ramiro. Nota: Rey de Pamplona (1000-1035) y Conde de Aragón (1000-1035), de Sobrarbe-Ribagorza (1018-1035) y de Castilla (1029-1035). Fue asesinado. No se casó con Sancha de Aybar, pero tuvo un hijo natural Ramiro I°, quien llegó a ser el Primer Rey de Aragón. (Bajado del Internet por Rolando Rivero Lavayén, 2012.)

--------------------
Sancho Garcés III de Pamplona Sancho Garcés III (c. 990/92 – 18 de octubre de 1035), apodado el Mayor o el Grande, fue rey de Pamplona desde el año 1004 hasta su muerte. Dominó por matrimonio en Castilla, Álava y Monzón (1028–1035), que aumentó con el Condado de Cea (1030–1035), a lo que añadió los territorios de Sobrarbe y Ribagorza desde 1015 y 1018, respectivamente. Su intervención en el corazón del Reino de León en 1034-1035 ha sido objeto de interpretaciones opuestas, desde una guerra relámpago a una colaboración más o menos voluntaria con Bermudo III (ya que la documentación no menciona luchas entre leoneses y navarros). Designado en una carta como Rex Ibericus por el Abad Oliva y Sancio rege Navarriae Hispaniarum por el cronista galo Rodolfus Glaber, autores como Germán de Iruña sostuvieron en 1935 la discutida interpretación de que en 1034, tras la toma de León, se hizo proclamar Imperator totius Hispaniae, en base a una moneda con la inscripción «Imperator» acuñada en Nájera y atribuida a este monarca. Dicha moneda actualmente es considerada posterior a Sancho el Mayor, y las afirmaciones que sostenían que se intituló imperator carecen de fundamento. Reinado Sus padres fueron García Sánchez II el Temblón y la reina Jimena Fernández, hija de Fernando Bermúdez, conde de Cea, y la condesa Elvira Díaz de la casa de Saldaña. Ascendió al trono entre el año 1000 y el 1004, heredando el reino de Pamplona con el condado de Aragón, bajo la tutoría de un consejo de regencia integrado por los obispos, su madre y su abuela Urraca Fernández. Tenía su residencia en Nájera y se le considera el primer rey europeísta, extendiendo sus relaciones más allá de los Pirineos, con el ducado de Gascuña, y aceptando las nuevas corrientes políticas, religiosas e intelectuales. Su reinado coincidió con la crisis del mundo califal, iniciado a la muerte de Almanzor y terminado con el principio de los Reino de Taifas. Pretendió la unificación de los Estados cristianos, bien por vínculos de vasallaje o bajo su propio mando. Condado de Castilla Inició un período de relaciones cordiales con el Condado de Castilla, facilitadas por su matrimonio con Munia, también conocida como Mayor, hija del conde castellano Sancho García. De este matrimonio nacieron Fernando (conde de Castilla), Gonzalo (régulo de Sobrarbe y Ribagorza) y las hijas Mayor y Jimena, reina de León al casarse con Bermudo III. En el año 1016 Fortún Ochoa de Cameros en el nombre de Sancho el Mayor y Nuño Álvarez de Bureba, enviado del conde de Castilla Sancho García, establecían mediante acuerdo y conveniencia los límites entre el Reino de Navarra y el Condado de Castilla en el tramo riojano-soriano, frontera que arrancaba desde el Monte San Lorenzo hasta Garray. Concluyendo a favor del reino navarro las disputas sobre el control de la zona riojana de San Millán de la Cogolla, donde Castilla tenía gran influencia desde los tiempos de Fernán González, como se puede comprobar en la documentación de San Millán. Sancho III apoyó el matrimonio entre García Sánchez de Castilla (hijo de Sancho García) y Sancha de León. Cuando García se dirigía a León para desposarse, fue asesinado. Por su matrimonio con Muniadona de Castilla (hermana de García Sánchez), correspondió a Sancho regir los destinos de Castilla y Álava, si bien parece ser que se le exigió que fuera su segundogénito quien fuera designado como conde de Castilla, y aunque Sancho nunca fuera conde de Castilla, pasó a gobernar su territorio. Desde el año 1030 aparece rigiendo sobre las tierras del condado de Cea, «Regnante rege Sanctio in Ceia et rege Ueremudo in Legione». El territorio de Cea además entraba dentro de su influencia, ya que la madre de Sancho el Mayor era hermana del conde de Cea Pedro Fernández, muerto alrededor del año 1028. Conquistó Astorga y León (1034). Si bien durante mucho tiempo se consideró que Sancho se tituló imperator, se trata de una teoría que sostuvo en 1935 Germán de Iruña y fue seguida por numerosos autores, tomando como base una moneda atribuida a su reinado con la inscripción «Imperator» acuñada en Nájera. Pero dicha moneda sería un ejemplar único y actualmente es considerada posterior a Sancho el Mayor, tratándose de una emisión del reinado de Alfonso VII de León, por lo que la base que sostenía que se intituló imperator carece de fundamento. El 21 de diciembre de 1034 Sancho restauró la sede palentina, encomendando al obispo Ponce la organización de la misma. Condado de Ribagorza Aprovechó las dificultades internas de Sobrarbe-Ribagorza para hacer valer sus intereses como descendiente de Dadildis de Pallars y marido de Muniadona, que era nieta de Ava de Ribagorza. Las tierras de Sobrarbe, asoladas por el califato, fueron incorporadas al reino de Pamplona hacia 1015. A la muerte de Guillermo Isárnez de Ribagorza, entre finales de 1017 y comienzos de 1018, Sancho Garcés se hizo con el control del territorio ribagorzano correspondiente a Guillermo Isárnez, en base a que su esposa era su legítima heredera. El resto del territorio ribagorzano correspondiente a Mayor de Ribagorza en base al reparto de 1010, fue incorporado por el rey de Pamplona hacia 1025. Gascuña Bajo su mandato el reino cristiano de Nájera-Pamplona alcanzó su mayor extensión territorial, abarcando casi todo el tercio norte peninsular, desde Astorga hasta Ribagorza. A la muerte de Sancho Guillermo, conde de Gascuña, el 4 de octubre de 1032, trató de extender su autoridad sobre la antigua Vasconia ultrapirenaica comprendida entre el Pirineo y el Garona, aunque no lo consiguió, al heredar el ducado Eudes: Por el Norte, la frontera del reino pamplonés está clara, los Pirineos (caso de haberse extendido la autoridad de los reyes navarros hasta el Baztán, lo que es lo más probable, pero que no se puede acreditar hasta el 1066), y no se modificó. No es cierto, pese a todas las veces que se ha dicho, que Sancho III lograra el dominio de Gascuña (la única Vasconia de entonces, es decir, el territorio entre los Pirineos y el Garona, en el que la población que podemos considerar vasca por su lengua sólo era una minoría). El rey navarro únicamente pretendió suceder en 1032 al duque de Gascuña Sancho Guillermo, muerto sin descendencia, lo que bastó para que en algunos documentos se le cite reinando en Gascuña. Pero la verdad es que la herencia recayó en Eudes. Su lugar de enterramiento aún constituye objeto de controversia, puesto que tanto el Monasterio de San Salvador de Oña (Oña) como la Panteón de los Reyes de San Isidoro (León) tienen tumbas que afirman corresponden a este monarca, y fuentes escritas que documentan ambos. Aun así, la mayoría de los historiadores consideran que Sancho está enterrado en Oña. Reparto entre sus hijos Antes de morir (1035) realizó testamento según el derecho navarro, por el que el reino patrimonial de Pamplona sería heredado por su primogénito, García, que gobernaría directamente en Pamplona, más algunas tierras en Aragón. El condado de Castilla, herencia de su mujer pero vinculado al reino de León, fue repartido entre dos hijos legítimos: a García le correspondió Álava y gran parte del Condado de Castilla (La Bureba, Montes de Oca, Trasmiera, Encartaciones y Castilla Vieja); mientras que Fernando, que ya había sido designado como conde de Castilla en 1029, recibió un mermado condado de Castilla (la zona burgalesa hasta el Duero). y dependientes del rey de Pamplona: así Ramiro recibió tierras en Aragón y en Navarra, y Gonzalo en Sobrarbe, Ribagorza y en otros puntos distantes de Aragón. Así lo sostiene Philippe Sénac: «On a longtemps supposé, à partir de sources telles que la Crónica Silense ou la Crónica Najerense, que Sanche III divisa son royaume entre ses fils selon des parts qui reflétaient la hiérarchie des droits à l'intérieur de la famille royale. Ramire, né avant le mariage de son père avec domna Muña, la fille du comte de Castille, aurait reçu l'Aragon, puis, suivant l'ordre de primogéniture, García la Navarre, Fernando la Castille, et Gonzalo le Sobrarbe et la Ribagorce. Cette thèse repose sur un document daté de 1035, dans lequel Sanche III remit le territoire aragonais à son fils Ramire, Loarre, San Emitier et les villas qui en relevaient à Gonzalo, et Ruesta et Pitiella à García. Cette thèse fut d'abord mise en cause par J.-M. Ramos Loscertales pour lequel elle semblait contraire aux traditions employées á l'époque en matière de transmission successorale, puis définitivament rejetée par A.Ubieto. Selon cet auteur, l'emsemble du royaume de Sanche III revint a García; Fernando reçut le titre de comte de Castille, Gonzalo de regulus en Sobrarbe et Ribagorce, et Ramire celui de regulus en Aragon». Algunos autores como Tomás Urzainqui sostienen que: «Sancho III el Mayor no tuvo que adjudicar nada a su hijo Fernando en forma testamentaria, ya que el condado de Castilla lo había recibido éste, en 1029, directamente por los derechos de su tío el "infant" García, derechos que habían correspondido a la madre de aquél doña Mayor». De hecho, Fernando tras la muerte de su tío García Sánchez en León aparece en la documentación como conde de Castilla: «regnante rex Sancio In Legione et comite Fernando in Castella», «Fredinando Sánchez comitatum gerente», «regnante gratia Dei, principe nostro Sanctio et prolis eis [sic] Fredenandus comes». No obstante, la herencia de Sancho el Mayor ha sido motivo de polémica entre los historiadores, dado que algunos no aplican el derecho navarro a dicha herencia. Así José María Lacarra afirma que: «Lo cierto es que la tradición jurídica pirenaica, establecida ya en el siglo X por la dinastía de Sancho Garcés, se basaba precisamente en la no desintegración del Reino, es decir, en transmitir al sucesor todos los territorios. En el Reino de Pamplona, territorios distantes como Aragón y Nájera se mantienen bajo las mismas riendas a la muerte de Sancho Garcés I (905–925). Ahora bien, aun cuando el primogénito era el único que heredaba los bienes patrimoniales, es decir, el Reino, con los acrecentamientos que éste hubiese obtenido, el deseo de dotar a los demás hijos había introducido la costumbre de constituirles un patrimonio con bienes territoriales que podían trasmitir a su herederos, aunque sin desvincularlos del Reino, ya que éstos estaban sometidos a la fidelidad debida al Soberano, y los bienes eran tenidos "sub manu" del primogénito». El desmembrado condado de Castilla heredado por Fernando I volvería a estar, tras la muerte de Sancho, bajo la autoridad del rey de León, como pone de manifiesto la documentación castellana, donde se sigue consignando el nombre y título del rey de León. Descendencia Sancho el Mayor. Obra del siglo XVII de Juan Ricci. Monasterio de San Millán de Yuso. De soltero tuvo un primer hijo con Sancha de Aibar: • Ramiro I de Aragón (c. 1006/1007-8 de mayo de 1063), régulo de Aragón (tenido en aquellos tiempos por bastardo), casado con Gilberga (Hermesenda) Roger de Bigorra (m. 1049) y con Inés de Aquitania. Contrajo matrimonio con Muniadona de Castilla hacia 1011, con quien tuvo cinco hijos: • García Sánchez III de Pamplona «el de Nájera», rey de Pamplona (c. 1012-1054), casado con Estefanía de Foix. • Fernando Sánchez «el Grande» (c. 1016–1065), conde de Castilla (1029–1037) y rey de León (1037–1065), casado con Sancha de León, hermana del reyBermudo III. • Jimena Sánchez (1018-1063), que contrajo matrimonio con el rey Bermudo III. • Gonzalo Sánchez (c. 1020-1045), régulo de Sobrarbe y Ribagorza.

(Fuente: Wikipedia)
--------------------
De Wikipedia:

Sancho Garcés III (c. 990/92 – 18 de octubre de 1035), apodado el Mayor o el Grande, fue rey de Pamplona desde el año 1004 hasta su muerte. Dominó por matrimonio en Castilla, Álava y Monzón (1028–1035), que aumentó con el Condado de Cea (1030–1035), a lo que añadió los territorios de Sobrarbe y Ribagorza desde 1015 y 1018, respectivamente. Su intervención en el corazón del Reino de León en 1034-1035 ha sido objeto de interpretaciones opuestas, desde una guerra relámpago a una colaboración más o menos voluntaria con Bermudo III (ya que la documentación no menciona luchas entre leoneses y navarros).
--------------------
'''''Sancho III Garcés (c. 992 – 18 October 1035), called the Great (Spanish: el Mayor, Basque: Nagusia), succeeded as a minor to the Kingdom of Navarre in 1004, and through conquest and political maneuvering increased his power, until at the time of his death in 1035 he controlled the majority of Christian Iberia, bearing the title of rex Hispaniarum. Having gone further than any of his predecessors in uniting the divided kingdoms of Iberia, his life's work was undone when he divided his domains shortly before his death to provide for each of his sons. The Kingdom of Navarre existed for almost six centuries after his death, but was never as powerful again.'''''

'''''Regency and early acquisitions'''''

'''''Sancho was born around 992 to García Sánchez II the Tremulous and Jimena Fernández, daughter of the count of Cea on the Galician frontier. He was raised in Leyra. His father last appears in 1000, while Sancho is first found as king in 1004, inheriting the kingdom of Pamplona (later known as Navarre). This gap has led to speculation as to whether there was an interregnum, while one document shows Sancho Ramírez of Viguera reigning in Pamplona in 1002, perhaps ruling as had Jimeno Garcés during the youth of García Sánchez I three generations earlier. On his succession, Sancho initially ruled under a council of regency led by the bishops, his mother Jimena, and grandmother Urraca Fernández.'''''

'''''Sancho aspired to unify the Christian principalities in the face of the fragmentation of Muslim Spain into the taifa kingdoms following the Battle of Calatañazor. In about 1010 he married Muniadona Mayor, daughter of Sancho García of Castile, and in 1015 he began a policy of expansion. He displaced Muslim control in the depopulated former county of Sobrarbe. In Ribagorza, another opportunity arose. The 1010 partition of the county left it divided between William Isarn, illegitimate son of count Isarn, and Raymond III of Pallars Jussà and his wife, Mayor of Castile, who was both niece of Isarn and aunt of Sancho's wife. In 1018, William Isarn tried to solidify his control over the Arán valley, but was killed, and Sancho jumped on the opportunity to take his portion, presumably based on some loose claim derived from his wife. Raymond and Mayor annulled their marriage, creating a further division finally resolved in 1025 when Mayor retired to a Castilian convent and Sancho received the submission of Raymond as vassal. He also forced Berengar Raymond I of Barcelona to become his vassal, though he was already a vassal of the French king. Berengar met Sancho in Zaragoza and in Navarre many times to confer on a mutual policy against the counts of Toulouse.'''''

'''''Acquisition of Castile'''''

'''''In 1016, Sancho fixed the border between Navarre and Castile, part of the good relationship he established by marrying Muña Mayor Sánchez (Muniadona), daughter of Sancho García of Castile. In 1017, he became the protector of Castile for the young García Sánchez. However, relations between the three Christian entities of León, Castile, and Navarre soured after the assassination of Count García in 1027. He had been bethrothed to Sancha, daughter of Alfonso V, who was set thus to gain from Castile lands between the rivers Cea and Pisuerga (as the price for approving the marital pact). As García arrived in León for his wedding, he was killed by the sons of a noble he had expelled from his lands.'''''

'''''Sancho III had opposed the wedding and the expected expansion of Leonese power to Castile, and used García's death to reverse this. Using the pretext of the protectorship he had exercised over Castile, he immediately occupied the county and named as successor his own younger son Ferdinand, who was nephew of the deceased count, bringing it fully within his sphere of influence.'''''

'''''Gascon suzerainty'''''

'''''Sancho established relations with the Duchy of Gascony, probably of a suzerain–vassal nature, him being the suzerain. In consequence of his relationship with the monastery of Cluny, he improved the road from Gascony to León. This road would begin to bring increased traffic down to Iberia as pilgrims flocked to Santiago de Compostela. Because of this, Sancho ranks as one of the first great patrons of the Saint James Way.'''''

'''''Sancho VI of Gascony was a relative of Sancho of Navarre and he spent a portion of his life at the royal court in Pamplona. He also partook alongside Sancho the Great in the Reconquista. In 1010, the two Sanchos appeared together with Robert II of France and William V of Aquitaine, neither of whom was the Gascon duke's suzerain, at Saint-Jean d'Angély. After Sancho VI's death in 1032, Sancho the Great extended his authority definitively into Gascony, where he began to mention his authority as extending as far as the Garonne in the documents issued by his chancery.'''''

'''''Acquisition of León'''''

'''''After the succession of Bermudo III to León, Sancho negotiated the marriage of his son Ferdinand of Castile to Sancha, the former fiance of García Sánchez and Bermudo's sister, and along with it a dowery that included disputed Leonese lands. Sancho was soon engaged in a full-scale war with León, and combined Castilian and Navarrese armies quickly overran much of Bermudo's kingdom, occupying Astorga. By March 1033, he was king from Zamora to the borders of Barcelona.'''''

'''''In 1034, even the city of León, the imperiale culmen (imperial capital, as Sancho saw it), fell, and there Sancho had himself crowned again. This was the height of Sancho's rule which now extended from the borders of Galicia in the west to the county of Barcelona in the east. In 1035, he refounded the diocese of Palencia, which had been laid waste by the Moors. He gave the see and its several abbacies to Bernard, of French or Navarrese origin, to whom he also gave the secular lordship (as a feudum), which included many castles in the region. However, he was assassinated at Aguilar de Bureba [dubious – discuss] on 18 October 1035 and was buried in the monastery of San Salvador of Oña, an enclave in Burgos, under the inscription Sancius, gratia Dei, Hispaniarum rex.'''''

'''''Legacy'''''

'''''Taking residence in Nájera instead of the traditional capital of Pamplona, as his realm grew larger, he considered himself a European monarch, establishing relations on the other side of the Pyrenees.'''''

'''''He introduced French feudal theories and ecclesiastic and intellectual currents into Iberia. Through his close ties with the count of Barcelona and the duke of Gascony and his friendship with the monastic reformer Abbot Oliva, Sancho established relations with several of the leading figures north of the Pyrenees, most notably Robert II of France, William V of Aquitaine, William II and Alduin II of Angoulême, and Odo II of Blois and Champagne. It was through this circle that the Cluniac reforms first probably influenced his thinking. In 1024 a Navarrese monk, Paterno from Cluny, returned to Navarre and was made abbot of San Juan de la Peña, where he instituted the Cluniac custom and founded thus the first Cluniac house in Iberia west of Catalonia, under the patronage of Sancho. The Mozarabic rite continued to be practiced at San Juan, and the view that Sancho spread the Cluniac usage to other houses in his kingdom has been discredited by Justo Pérez de Urbel. Sancho sowed the seeds of the Cluniac reform and of the adoption of the Roman rite, but he did not widely enact them.'''''

'''''Sancho also began the Navarrese series of currency by minting what the Encyclopædia Britannica calls "deniers of Carolingian influence." The division of his realm upon his death, the concepts of vassalage and suzerainty, and the use of the phrase "by the grace of God" (Dei gratia) after his title were imported from France, with which he tried to maintain relations. For this he has been called the "first Europeaniser of Iberia."'''''

'''''His most obvious legacy, however, was the temporary union of all Christian Iberia. At least nominally, he ruled over León, the ancient capital of the kingdom won from the Moors in the eighth century, and Barcelona, the greatest of the Catalan cities. Though he divided the realm at his death, thus creating the enduring legacy of Castilian and Aragonese kingdoms, he left all his lands in the hands of one dynasty, the Jiménez, which kept the kingdoms allied by blood until the twelfth century. He made the Navarrese pocket kingdom strong, politically stable, and independent, preserving it for the remainder of the Middle Ages. It is for this that his seal has been appropriated by Basque nationalism. Though, by dividing the realm, he isolated the kingdom and inhibited its ability to gain land at the expense of the Moslems. Summed up, his reign defined the political geography of Iberia until its union under the Catholic Monarchs.'''''

'''''Titulature'''''

'''''Throughout his long reign, Sancho used a myriad of titles. After his coronation in León, he styled himself rex Dei gratia Hispaniarum, or "by the grace of God, king of the Spains", and may have minted coins with the legend "NAIARA/IMPERATOR". The use of the first title implied his kingship over all the independently founded Iberian kingdoms and the use of the form Dei gratia, adopted from French practice, stressed that his right to rule was of divine origin and sustenance. The latter, imperial title was only rarely employed, for it is not documented, being found only on coins only probably datable to his reign. It is not unlikely, however, that he desired to usurp the imperial title which the kings of León had thitherto carried.'''''

'''''Despite this, the contemporary ecclesiastic Abbot Oliva only ever acknowledged Sancho as rex Ibericus or rex Navarrae Hispaniarum, while he called both Alfonso V and Vermudo III emperor. The first title considers Sancho as king of all Iberia, as does the second, though it stresses his kingship over Navarre alone as if it had been extended to authority over the whole Christian portion of the peninsula.'''''

'''''Succession'''''

'''''Before his death in 1035, Sancho divided his possessions among his sons. Of the three surviving sons by Mayor, the eldest, García, had already appeared as regulus in Navarre, inheriting the kingdom including the Basque country as well as exercising suzerainty over the kingdom's lands given his brothers. Gonzalo had been placed in control of the counties of Sobrarbe and Ribagorza, which he would hold as regulus. Ferdinand had been given Castile on the death of count García Sánchez in 1127, holding it first under his father and later of Vermudo III of León, before killing that king to take León and the royal title. Ramiro, the eldest but illegitimate son of Sancho by mistress Sancha of Aybar, was given property in the former county of Aragón with the provision that he should ask for no more lands of García, under whom he first acted as baiulus but from whom he later achieved de facto independence. Documents report two further sons, a second Ramiro and Bernard, but scholarship is divided on whether they were legitimate sons who died in youth, or if their appearance instead results from either scribal error or forgery. Sancho left two daughters, Mayor and Jimena, the former perhaps the wife of Pons, Count of Toulouse, the latter wife of Vermudo III.'''''

'''http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sancho_III_of_Navarre'''
--------------------
Marriage and family[edit] [show]Ancestors of Sancho III of Pamplona Sancho III was married to Muniadona of Castile, daughter of Sancho García of Castile, count of Castile and Álava. They had the following children:

García Sánchez III, nicknamed "the one from Nájera", King of Pamplona from 1035 until his death in 1054 and married to Stephanie of Foix. Fernando Sánchez, King of León from 1037 until 1065 and Emperor of all Spain from 1056 until 1065, nicknamed "the Great", married to Sancha of León. Jimena Sánchez, Queen consort of León by her marriage to Bermudo III of León.[7] Gonzalo Sánchez, petty king of Sobrarbe and Ribagorza. Before marrying Muniadona of Castile, Sancho III had a son with Sancha de Aibar:

Ramiro Sánchez, king of Aragon from 1035 until 1063.

Sources[edit] Besga Marroquín, Armando (2003). "Sancho III el Mayor, un rey pamplonés e hispano". Historia. 16 (327): 42–71. Bishko, Charles Julian. "Fernando I and the Origins of the Leonese–Castilian Alliance with Cluny". Studies in Medieval Spanish Frontier History (PDF). London: Variorum Reprints. pp. 1–66. Originally published in Spanish in Cuadernos de Historia de España 47 (1968): 31–135 and 48 (1969): 30–116. Bull, Marcus Graham (1993). Knightly Piety and the Lay Response to the First Crusade: The Limousin and Gascony, c. 970–c. 1130. Oxford: Clarendon Press. Cañada Juste, Alberto (1988). "Un posible interregno en la monarquía pamplonesa (1000–1004)". Príncipe de Viana. Anejo. 8: 15–18. ISSN 1137-7054. Collins, Roger (1990). The Basques. London: Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 9780631175650. Donovan, Richard B. (1958). Liturgical Drama in Medieval Spain. Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies. ISBN 9780888440044. Higounet, Charles (1963). Bordeaux pendant le haut moyen âge. Bordeaux: Fédération Historique de Sud-Ouest. OCLC 2272117. Ibarra y Rodríguez, Eduardo (1942). "La reconquista de los Estados pírenaicos hasta la muerte de don Sancho el Mayor (1034)". Hispania. 2 (6): 3–63. Mann, Janice (2003). "A New Architecture for a New Order: The Building Projects of Sancho el Mayor (1004–1035)". In Hiscock, Nigel. The White Mantle of Churches. Turnhout: Brepols. pp. 233–248. ISBN 978-2-503-51230-3. Martínez Díez, Gonzalo (2007). Sancho III el Mayor Rey de Pamplona, Rex Ibericus (in Spanish). Madrid: Marcial Pons Historia. ISBN 978-84-96467-47-7. Menéndez Pidal, Ramón (1929). La España del Cid (in Spanish). Madrid: Editorial Plutarco. OCLC 1413407. Martín Duque, Ángel J. (2002). "Del reino de Pamplona al reino de Navarra" (PDF). Príncipe de Viana (in Spanish). 63 (227): 841–850. ISSN 0032-8472. Salas Merino, Vicente (2008). La Genealogía de Los Reyes de España [The Genealogy of the Kings of Spain] (in Spanish) (4th ed.). Madrid: Editorial Visión Libros. pp. 216–218. ISBN 978-84-9821-767-4. Salazar y Acha, Jaime de (1988). "Una hija desconocida de Sancho el Mayor". Príncipe de Viana, Anejo (in Spanish) (8): 183–192. ISSN 1137-7054. Ubieto Arteta, Antonio (1960). "Estudios en torno a la división del Reino por Sancho el Mayor de Navarra" (PDF). Príncipe de Viana (in Spanish). 21 (80-81): 5–56, 163–236. ISSN 0032-8472.

Rey de Navarra (1000-1035) y Conde de Aragón (999-1035)
Conde de Castilla (1029-1035)
Aprovechó las discordias existentes entre los musulmanes para extender sus dominios hasta Cataluña.
A la muerte de su suegro, Sancho de Castilla, en 1022, le sucedió su hijo García Sánchez, que fue asesinado en 1028. Sancho El Mayor pudo entonces conquistar todos los estados castellanos. En 1032 atacó al rey de León, Bermudo III, pero algunos prelados intervinieron para llegar a la paz, que se logró por poco tiempo. Sancho conquistó luego el reino de Galicia y fue, al parecer, el primero que se tituló emperador de las Españas, por la extensión de sus dominios. Su testamento destruyó la unidad española que había fundado, pues su hijo García heredó Navarra y la actual Vizcaya; Fernando, Castilla; Ramiro, hijo natural, Aragón y Gonzalo el señorí de Sobrabe y Ribagorza. Además de guerrero, Sancho III fue legislador y se le debe el fuero de Nájera, el primero de su clase.

Sancho the Great of Navarre: aka Sancho Garces el Mayor o

--Other Fields

Ref Number: 4268

SOURCE NOTES:
www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal07686

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Pamplona (1004-1035), Count of Aragon, Ribagorza, & Sobrarbe

"Imperator Totias Hispaniae". Emperor of Hispania.
Put down the Moslem Rule to the point of weakening it even further.

"GARCIA/GARCES"; KNOWN AS "EL MAYER"; KING OF NAVARRE 970-1035

He was Navarre's mightiest king. He conquered all his surrounding territories.

852677960. Konge Sancho III den Store over de spanske lande(19152) was born about 965. (19153) He was a Konge in 1000 in Navarra og Aragon.(19154) Da han ble konge i N og A, forenet han distriktene Sobrarbien og Robagorza.Han viste å dra fordel av muselmennenes svakhet etter Almanzors død i 1008. Han utvidet sine grenser mot syd og forbredte sin intervensjon i det kristne Spanias affærer ved å forstøte sin første hustru, for å ekte Nunia av Kastiljen. Da hennes far døde 1017 eller 1021, ble han etterfulgt av hennes bror Garica Sanches. man da han var blitt myrdet av sønnene til grev Vela av Alvada i 1028, to Sancho den Store herredømmet over alle kalstijanske land. Derpå angrep han Brmudo III, konge av Leon. men prestene fremtvang fred. Sanchos eldste sønn ble g.m en datter av Bermudo. Men straks etter brøt krigen ut igjen. Sancho tok hele Leon og lot Bermudo bare beholde kongeriket Galician. han antok nå titelen konge over de spanske land. He died in Feb 1035. (19155) Ved sitt testamente ødela han det spanske enhetsrike han hadde skapt. hans sønn Garcia fikk Navarra og Vascongades. Fernando fikk Kastiljen, Gonzalo Sobrarbien og Ramiro, sann av hans forstøtte hustru, fikk Argonien. Hvem Ramiros mor var, er ikke helt på det rene, noen mener det var hans første hustru dona Urraca, andre at det var en illegitim forbindelse. He was married to Dronning Nunnia SANCHO av Kastiljen.

1 NAME el Major //
2 GIVN el Major
2 SURN
2 NICK el Major


1 NAME Sancho III King of /Aragon/ 1 DEAT 2 DATE 1035

Rey de Navarra (1000-1035) y Conde de Aragón (999-1035)
Conde de Castilla (1029-1035)
Aprovechó las discordias existentes entre los musulmanes para extender sus dominios hasta Cataluña.
A la muerte de su suegro, Sancho de Castilla, en 1022, le sucedió su hijo García Sánchez, que fue asesinado en 1028. Sancho El Mayor pudo entonces conquistar todos los estados castellanos. En 1032 atacó al rey de León, Bermudo III, pero algunos prelados intervinieron para llegar a la paz, que se logró por poco tiempo. Sancho conquistó luego el reino de Galicia y fue, al parecer, el primero que se tituló emperador de las Españas, por la extensión de sus dominios. Su testamento destruyó la unidad española que había fundado, pues su hijo García heredó Navarra y la actual Vizcaya; Fernando, Castilla; Ramiro, hijo natural, Aragón y Gonzalo el señorí de Sobrabe y Ribagorza. Además de guerrero, Sancho III fue legislador y se le debe el fuero de Nájera, el primero de su clase.

The Aragón of 1035 was created at the death of Sancho III Garces, King ofNavarre, Emperor of Spain. Navarre, the patrimony, was passed to hiseldest son Garcia, Castile (acquired as a county through Sancho's wife)went to Fernando (the favorite, who through his marriage to the heiressof Leon/Asturias became king of the biggest chunk), teen age Gonzalo gotthe counties of Sorbrabe and Ribagorza (the claim to which also came toSancho through Castile), while his bastard Ramiro was given Aragón, whichhad it's origins in a County of Aragón dating to the 9th century whichcame to Navarre through the marriage of Sancho's great-grandfather.Ramiro was to be vassal of Garcia, but in a series of squabbles in thefollowing
years, he first threw off his brother's overlordship, and the absorbedGonzalo's territories (Gonzalo having died under mysteriouscircumstances). In the following generation, Sancho Ramirez was able totake control of the Kingdom of Navarre following the murder of its king,Sancho IV Garces, (the western portion of that kingdom falling to theKing de Castile, cousin Sancho Fernandez, hence Menendez Pidal's 'War ofthe Three Sanchos'). This was held by two sons of Sancho Ramirez, but waslost when both died without surviving issue, and a third brother, Ramiro
II was reluctantly recalled from a monastery. He married, had a daughterPetronilla, and engaged the infant to the adult Count of Barcelona,immediately returning to the monastic life. Petronilla's son Alfonso IIinherited both territories. Thus the Aragón of 1035 was little more thanthe mountain county of the 9th century, and it was an
agressive policy of the first several generations which brought about thekingdom of status.[Custer February 1, 2002 Family Tree.FTW]

[merge G675.FTW]

The Aragón of 1035 was created at the death of Sancho III Garces, King ofNavarre, Emperor of Spain. Navarre, the patrimony, was passed to hiseldest son Garcia, Castile (acquired as a county through Sancho's wife)went to Fernando (the favorite, who through his marriage to the heiressof Leon/Asturias became king of the biggest chunk), teen age Gonzalo gotthe counties of Sorbrabe and Ribagorza (the claim to which also came toSancho through Castile), while his bastard Ramiro was given Aragón, whichhad it's origins in a County of Aragón dating to the 9th century whichcame to Navarre through the marriage of Sancho's great-grandfather.Ramiro was to be vassal of Garcia, but in a series of squabbles in thefollowing
years, he first threw off his brother's overlordship, and the absorbedGonzalo's territories (Gonzalo having died under mysteriouscircumstances). In the following generation, Sancho Ramirez was able totake control of the Kingdom of Navarre following the murder of its king,Sancho IV Garces, (the western portion of that kingdom falling to theKing de Castile, cousin Sancho Fernandez, hence Menendez Pidal's 'War ofthe Three Sanchos'). This was held by two sons of Sancho Ramirez, but waslost when both died without surviving issue, and a third brother, Ramiro
II was reluctantly recalled from a monastery. He married, had a daughterPetronilla, and engaged the infant to the adult Count of Barcelona,immediately returning to the monastic life. Petronilla's son Alfonso IIinherited both territories. Thus the Aragón of 1035 was little more thanthe mountain county of the 9th century, and it was an
agressive policy of the first several generations which brought about thekingdom of status.

Sancho III Ximemez, o Grande (ca. 991 - 18 de Outubro 1035), foi Rei de Navarra, rei de Castela (como Sancho I) e ainda Conde de Aragão.

Sancho III foi filho do rei Garcia III de Pamplona e Ximena Fernández e sucedeu a seu pai como primeiro rei de Navarra e conde de Aragão em 1004. Em 1010 casou com Mayor de Castela que, em 1029 herda o condado do seu irmão Garcia II Sanches. A partir desta data, Sancho III torna-se rei de quase toda a Península Ibérica e entitula-se Rex Hispaniarum, Reis das Espanhas. Sancho dividiu as suas possessões pelos filhos.

Sancho III the Great, born 985, died 1035. Title of Emperor of Spain1028-1035. King of Navarre 1001-1035. Married Dona Majora Munia Elvira, asister of Garcia, Count of Castile. At this time the Kingdom of Navarreincluded the three countries--Sobrado, Aragon and Ribagorza--and on hisdeath Sancho bequeathed them to his sons Gonzales and Ramiro. Sancho hadthe following children: Garcias III, King of Galicia and Portugal;Ferdinando I, King of Castile and Leon; Gonzales killed 1035; Roderige,called "The Cid'; and by his wife, Dona Elvira. By Gaya he had a naturalson, Ramirez.

1 NAME el Major //
2 GIVN el Major
2 SURN
2 NICK el Major


1 NAME Sancho III King of /Aragon/ 1 DEAT 2 DATE 1035

1 NAME el Major //
2 GIVN el Major
2 SURN
2 NICK el Major


1 NAME Sancho III King of /Aragon/ 1 DEAT 2 DATE 1035

King Sancho "the Great" divided his three kingdoms up between his three sons as follows: King Ferdinand I. of Castile; King Ramiro I. of Aragon; King Garcia Sanchez II. of Navarre.

Name Prefix:<NPFX> King Name Suffix:<NSFX> Iii, Of Navarre And Aragon "El Mayor"

Sancho III Garcés, byname SANCHO THE GREAT, Spanish SANCHO EL MAYOR, or EL GRANDE (b. c. 992--d. Oct. 18, 1035), king of Pamplona (Navarre)from about 1000 to 1035, the son of García II (or III).
Sancho established Navarrese hegemony over all the Christian states of Spain at a time when the caliphate of Córdoba was in a state of turmoil. Sancho was uninterested in a crusade against the Moors, but he was interested in the expansion of Pamplona, which he began by the seizure of the ancient Frankish counties of Sobrarbe and Ribagorza (1016-19). A skilled politician, Sancho pursued his aims more by subversion than by force of arms. He persuaded the Count of Barcelona, Berenguer Ramón I, to accept him as overlord. Gascony did likewise, giving him direct sovereignty over Labourd. As a consequence of his marriage (1010)to Munia, daughter of Count Sancho García (d. 1017) of Castile, Sancho secured his own acceptance as count when Sancho García's son, the child Count García, was assassinated (1029). He then took up Castilian irredentist claims in eastern Leon and occupied the Leonese capital, where he was crowned (1034)--taking the imperial title. Sancho, who introduced some feudal practices into his new dominions, also encouraged the Cluniac reformers and established much closer contacts generally between Christian Spain and trans-Pyrenean Europe. In his will, however, he deliberately destroyed the empire he had created: he divided it into four kingdoms and left these to his four sons, thus making inevitable the fratricidal wars that followed his death. Sancho created the kingdom of Aragon and was responsible for the elevation of Castile from county to kingdom, though he transferred some Castilian territory to Pamplona, which he left to his eldest son, García III

Sancho III Garcés, byname SANCHO THE GREAT, Spanish SANCHO EL MAYOR, or EL GRANDE (b. c. 992--d. Oct. 18, 1035), king of Pamplona (Navarre)from about 1000 to 1035, the son of García II (or III).
Sancho established Navarrese hegemony over all the Christian states of Spain at a time when the caliphate of Córdoba was in a state of turmoil. Sancho was uninterested in a crusade against the Moors, but he was interested in the expansion of Pamplona, which he began by the seizure of the ancient Frankish counties of Sobrarbe and Ribagorza (1016-19). A skilled politician, Sancho pursued his aims more by subversion than by force of arms. He persuaded the Count of Barcelona, Berenguer Ramón I, to accept him as overlord. Gascony did likewise, giving him direct sovereignty over Labourd. As a consequence of his marriage (1010)to Munia, daughter of Count Sancho García (d. 1017) of Castile, Sancho secured his own acceptance as count when Sancho García's son, the child Count García, was assassinated (1029). He then took up Castilian irredentist claims in eastern Leon and occupied the Leonese capital, where he was crowned (1034)--taking the imperial title. Sancho, who introduced some feudal practices into his new dominions, also encouraged the Cluniac reformers and established much closer contacts generally between Christian Spain and trans-Pyrenean Europe. In his will, however, he deliberately destroyed the empire he had created: he divided it into four kingdoms and left these to his four sons, thus making inevitable the fratricidal wars that followed his death. Sancho created the kingdom of Aragon and was responsible for the elevation of Castile from county to kingdom, though he transferred some Castilian territory to Pamplona, which he left to his eldest son, García III

Sancho ?den Store? var
konge av Navarra og Aragon 1000 - 1035 og
konge av Castilla 1026 - 1035 (som Sancho I).
Da han i år 1000 ble konge i Navarra og Aragon, forenet han distriktene Sobrarbien og
Ribagorza. Han viste å dra fordel av muselmennenes svakhet etter Almanzors død i 1008.
Sancho utvidet sine grenser mot syd og forberedte sin intervensjon i det kristne Spaniens
affærer. Han forstøttet derfor sin første hustru, Sancha, for å kunne ekte Nuña av Castilla.
Da Nuñas far døde i 1017 eller 1721, ble han etterfulgt av hennes bror Garcia
Sanchés. Han ble imidlertid myrdet av sønnene til greve Vela av Alvada i 1028, hvoretter
Sancho tok herredømmet over alle castillanske land.
Deretter angrep han Bermudo III, konge av Leon, men prestene fremtvang fred.
Sanchos eldste sønn ble gift med en datter til Bermudo. Straks etter brøt imidlertid krigen ut
igjen. Sancho tok hele Leon og lot Bermudo kun beholde kongeriket Galicien.
Han antok nå titelen konge over de spanske land, men ved sitt testamente ødela han
det spanske enhetsrike han hadde skapt. Hans sønn Garcia fikk Navarra og Vascongades.
Fernando fikk Castilla, Gonzalo fikk Sobrarbien og Ramiro fikk Aragon. Hvem Ramiros mor
var er ikke helt på det rene. Noen mener det var hans første hustru, doña Urraca, andre at det
var en illegitim forbindelse.
Sancho var gift 1. gang med Urraca som ble forstøtt.

Sancho III Garcés, byname SANCHO THE GREAT, Spanish SANCHO EL MAYOR, or EL GRANDE (b. c. 992--d. Oct. 18, 1035), king of Pamplona (Navarre)from about 1000 to 1035, the son of García II (or III).
Sancho established Navarrese hegemony over all the Christian states of Spain at a time when the caliphate of Córdoba was in a state of turmoil. Sancho was uninterested in a crusade against the Moors, but he was interested in the expansion of Pamplona, which he began by the seizure of the ancient Frankish counties of Sobrarbe and Ribagorza (1016-19). A skilled politician, Sancho pursued his aims more by subversion than by force of arms. He persuaded the Count of Barcelona, Berenguer Ramón I, to accept him as overlord. Gascony did likewise, giving him direct sovereignty over Labourd. As a consequence of his marriage (1010)to Munia, daughter of Count Sancho García (d. 1017) of Castile, Sancho secured his own acceptance as count when Sancho García's son, the child Count García, was assassinated (1029). He then took up Castilian irredentist claims in eastern Leon and occupied the Leonese capital, where he was crowned (1034)--taking the imperial title. Sancho, who introduced some feudal practices into his new dominions, also encouraged the Cluniac reformers and established much closer contacts generally between Christian Spain and trans-Pyrenean Europe. In his will, however, he deliberately destroyed the empire he had created: he divided it into four kingdoms and left these to his four sons, thus making inevitable the fratricidal wars that followed his death. Sancho created the kingdom of Aragon and was responsible for the elevation of Castile from county to kingdom, though he transferred some Castilian territory to Pamplona, which he left to his eldest son, García III

Founder of the houses of Castile, Leon, Navarre and Aragon

Sancho III of Navarre
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Sancho III Garcés (c. 985 – 18 October 1035), called the Great (Spanish: el Mayor or el Grande), was Count of Aragón and King of Navarre from 1000 until his death and Count of Castile jure uxoris from 1029 to his death. Between 1015 and 1019, he conquered Sobrarbe and Ribagorza.

During his lifetime, he was the most important Christian monarch of the Iberian Peninsula, bearing, in various media, the title of rex Hispaniarum. Having gone further than any of his predecessors in uniting the divided kingdoms of Iberia, his life's work was undone when he divided his domains shortly before his death to provide for each of his sons.

Contents [hide]
1 Regency and early acquisitions
2 Acquisition of Castile and León
3 Gascon suzerainty
4 Title
5 Succession
6 Legacy
7 Notes
8 Sources



[edit] Regency and early acquisitions

Sancho was born around 985 (some sources give 970 or even 992 or later) to García IV the Tremulous and Jimena Fernández, daughter of the count of Cea on the Galician frontier. He was raised in Leyra. He became king between 1000 and 1004, inheriting the kingdom of Pamplona (or Navarre, as it was variously called) and the county of Aragon. He was initially under a council of regency led by the bishops and his mother.


1015, he displaced Muslim control in the depopulated former county of Sobrarbe, and profited from the internal difficulties in Ribagorza to annex that county between 1016 and 1019, eventually marrying the heiress. He also forced Berengar Raymond I of Barcelona to become his vassal, though he was already a vassal of the French king. Berengar met Sancho in Zaragoza and in Navarre many times to confer on a mutual policy against the counts of Toulouse.

With Alfonso V of León, he led a combined attack against al-Mansur Ibn Abi Aamir, better known as Almanzor, conquering further territories in the south. After the crisis in the Caliphate of Córdoba, initiated by the death of al-Mansur in the 1002 Battle of Calatañazor, Sancho aspired to unify the Christian principalities in the face of the fragmentation Muslim Spain into the taifa kingdoms.


[edit] Acquisition of Castile and León
In 1016, Sancho fixed the border between Navarre and Castile, part of the good relationship he established by marrying Muña Mayor Sánchez (Muniadona), daughter of Sancho I of Castile. In 1017, he became the protector of Castile for the young García II. However, relations between the three Christian entities of León, Castile, and Navarre soured after the assassination of Count García in 1027. He had been bethrothed to Sancha, daughter of Alfonso V, who was set thus to gain from Castile lands between the rivers Cea and Pisuerga (as the price for approving the marital pact). As García arrived in León for his wedding, he was killed by the sons of a noble he had expelled from his lands.

Sancho III had opposed the wedding — and the ensuing Leonese expansion — and received a chance to act upon García's death. As the late count's brother-in-law, he immediately occupied Castile and was soon engaged in a full-scale war with León under Alfonso's successor, Vermudo III. The combined Castilian and Navarrese armies quickly overran Vermudo's kingdom, occupying Astorga. By March 1033, he was king from Zamora to the borders of Barcelona.

In 1034, even the city of León, the imperiale culmen (imperial capital, as Sancho saw it), fell, and there Sancho had himself crowned again. This was the height of Sancho's rule which now extended from the borders of Galicia in the west to the county of Barcelona in the east.

In 1035, he refounded the diocese of Palencia, which had been laid waste by the Moors. He gave the see and its several abbacies to Bernard, of French or Navarrese origin, to whom he also gave the secular lordship (as a feudum), which included many castles in the region.

Taking residence in Nájera instead of the traditional capital of Pamplona, as his realm grew larger, he considered himself a European monarch, establishing relations on the other side of the Pyrenees. He was assassinated at Bureba on 18 October 1035 and was buried in the monastery of San Salvador of Oña, an enclave in Burgos, under the inscription Sancius, gratia Dei, Hispaniarum rex.


[edit] Gascon suzerainty
Sancho established relations with the Duchy of Gascony, probably of a suzerain-vassal nature, him being the suzerain.[1] In consequence of his relationship with the monastery of Cluny, he improved the road from Gascony to León. This road would begin to bring increased traffic down to Iberia as pilgrims flocked to Santiago de Compostela. Because of this, Sancho ranks as one of the first great patrons of the Saint James Way.

Sancho VI of Gascony was a relative of Sancho of Navarre and he spent a portion of his life at the royal court in Pamplona. He also partook alongside Sancho the Great in the Reconquista. In 1010, the two Sanchos appeared together with Robert II of France and William V of Aquitaine, neither of whom was the Gascon duke's suzerain, at Saint-Jean d'Angély. After Sancho VI's death (1032), Sancho the Great extended his authority definitively into Gascony, where he began to mention his authority as extending as far as the Garonne in the documents issued by his chancery.

In southern Gascony, Sancho created a series of viscounties: Labourd (between 1021 and 1023), Bayonne (1025), and Baztán (also 1025).


[edit] Title
Throughout his long reign, Sancho used a myriad of titles. After his coronation in León, he styled himself rex Dei gratia Hispaniarum, or "by the grace of God, king of the Spains," and minted coins with the legend Imperator totius Hispaniae. The use of the first title implied his kingship over all the independently founded Iberian kingdoms and the use of the form Dei gratia, adopted from French practice, stressed that his right to rule was of divine origin and sustenance. The latter, imperial title was only rarely employed, for it is not documented, being found only on coins only probably datable to his reign. It is not unlikely, however, that he desired to usurp the imperial title which the kings of León had thitherto carried.[2]

Despite this, the contemporary ecclesiastic Abbot Oliva only ever acknowledged Sancho as rex Ibericus or rex Navarrae Hispaniarum, while he called both Alfonso V and Vermudo III emperor. The first title considers Sancho as king of all Iberia, as does the second, though it stresses his kingship over Navarre alone as if it had been extended to authority over the whole Christian portion of the peninsula.

To the Moors, he was always only Baskunish, the "lord of the Basques."


[edit] Succession
Besides four legitimate sons by Mayor, Sancho also fathered one by his mistress Sancha de Aybar named Ramiro, who was the eldest of his sons but, as a bastard, not entitled to succeed. Before his death in 1035, Sancho divided his possessions among his sons. García received Navarre and the Basque country with a certain seniority over his brothers (a "high kingship"), Ferdinand received Castile as a kingdom, and Gonzalo got Sobrarbe and Ribagorza, also raised to kingdom status. The illegitimate son obtained the county of Aragón, which was elevated to a kingdom, small as it was at the time (Ramiro was known as "the petty king"). Sancho left a younger son who did not partake in the inheritance, Bernard. He left two daughters, Mayor and Jimena, who married Vermudo III.


[edit] Legacy

The Arrano Beltza flag was derived by Basque nationalists from Sancho's seal, since his kingdoms covered most of the Basque Country.He introduced French feudal theories and ecclesiastic and intellectual currents into Iberia, such as the Cluniac Reform. He also began the Navarrese series of currency by minting what the Encyclopaedia Britannica calls "deniers of Carolingian influence." The division of his realm upon his death, the concepts of vassalage and suzerainty, and the use of the phrase "by the grace of God" (Dei gratia) after his title were imported from France, with which he tried to maintain relations. For this he has been called the "first Europeaniser of Iberia."[3]

His most obvious legacy, however, was the temporary union of all Christian Iberia. At least nominally, he ruled over León, the ancient capital of the kingdom won from the Moors in the eighth century, and Barcelona, the greatest of the Catalan cities. Though he divided the realm at his death, thus created the enduring legacy of Castilian and Aragonese kingdoms, he left all his lands in the hands of one dynasty, the Jiménez, which kept the kingdoms allied by blood until the twelfth century. He made the Navarrese pocket kingdom strong, politically stable, and independent, preserving it for the remainder of the Middle Ages. It is for this that his seal has been appropriated by Basque nationalism. Though, by dividing the realm, he isolated the kingdom and inhibited its ability to gain land at the expense of the Moslems. Summed up, his reign defined the political geography of Iberia until its union under the Catholic Monarchs.


[edit] Notes
^ Collins.
^ Menéndez Pidal.
^ Menéndez Pidal.

[edit] Sources
Collins, Roger. The Basques. Blackwell Publishing: London, 1990.
Menéndez Pidal, Ramón. La España del Cid. 1929.
Map of the division of Sancho's realm.



Preceded by
García IV King of Navarre
1000–1035 Succeeded by
García V
Count of Aragon
1000–1035 Succeeded by
Ramiro I
later King
Vacant Count of Sobrarbe
1015–1035 Succeeded by
Gonzalo
later King
Preceded by
William Isarno,
Raymond III of Pallars,
Mayor García Count of Ribagorza
1018–1035
with Mayor until 1032
Preceded by
García II Count of Castile
1029–1035
with Mayor until 1032 Succeeded by
Ferdinand I
later King
Preceded by
García Ramírez King of Viguera
ca. 1030–1035
absorbed by Kingdom of Navarre Vacant
Preceded by
New title Emperor of Spain
1034 – 1035 Vacant
Title next held by
Ferdinand I of León

The son of Garcia III and grandson of Sancho II Garces, he was the Count of
Aragon 1000-1035 and Castile 1029-1035. When he died in 1035, his kingdom
was divided amonst his four sons: Ramiro I, Garcia IV, Ferdinand I and
Garcia, thus making fractricidal wars inevitable after his death.

The son of Garcia III and grandson of Sancho II Garces, he was the Count of
Aragon 1000-1035 and Castile 1029-1035. When he died in 1035, his kingdom
was divided amonst his four sons: Ramiro I, Garcia IV, Ferdinand I and
Garcia, thus making fractricidal wars inevitable after his death.

The son of Garcia III and grandson of Sancho II Garces, he was the Count of
Aragon 1000-1035 and Castile 1029-1035. When he died in 1035, his kingdom
was divided amonst his four sons: Ramiro I, Garcia IV, Ferdinand I and
Garcia, thus making fractricidal wars inevitable after his death.

The son of Garcia III and grandson of Sancho II Garces, he was the Count of
Aragon 1000-1035 and Castile 1029-1035. When he died in 1035, his kingdom
was divided amonst his four sons: Ramiro I, Garcia IV, Ferdinand I and
Garcia, thus making fractricidal wars inevitable after his death.

[Wikipedia, "Sancho III of Navarre", retrieved 5 Oct 07]
Sancho III Garcés (circa 985 ? 18 October 1035), called the Great (Spanish: el Mayor or el Grande), was Count of Aragón and King of Navarre from 1000 until his death and Count of Castile jure uxoris from 1029 to his death. Between 1015 and 1019, he conquered Sobrarbe and Ribagorza.

During his lifetime, he was the most important Christian monarch of the Iberian Peninsula, bearing, in various media, the title of rex Hispaniarum. Having gone further than any of his predecessors in uniting the divided kingdoms of Iberia, his life's work was undone when he divided his domains shortly before his death to provide for each of his sons.

Regency and early acquisitions
Sancho was born around 985 (some sources give 970 or even 992 or later) to García IV the Tremulous and Jimena Fernández, daughter of the count of Cea on the Galician frontier. He was raised in Leyra. He became king between 1000 and 1004, inheriting the kingdom of Pamplona (or Navarre, as it was variously called) and the county of Aragon. He was initially under a council of regency led by the bishops and his mother.

In 1015, he displaced Muslim control in the depopulated former county of Sobrarbe, and profited from the internal difficulties in Ribagorza to annex that county between 1016 and 1019, eventually marrying the heiress. He also forced Berengar Raymond I of Barcelona to become his vassal, though he was already a vassal of the French king. Berengar met Sancho in Zaragoza and in Navarre many times to confer on a mutual policy against the counts of Toulouse.

With Alfonso V of León, he led a combined attack against al-Mansur Ibn Abi Aamir, better known as Almanzor, conquering further territories in the south. After the crisis in the Caliphate of Córdoba, initiated by the death of al-Mansur in the 1002 Battle of Calatañazor, Sancho aspired to unify the Christian principalities in the face of the fragmentation Muslim Spain into the taifa kingdoms.

Succession
Besides four legitimate sons by Mayor, Sancho also fathered one by his mistress Sancha de Aybar named Ramiro, who was the eldest of his sons but, as a bastard, not entitled to succeed. Before his death in 1035, Sancho divided his possessions among his sons. García received Navarre and the Basque country with a certain seniority over his brothers (a "high kingship"), Ferdinand received Castile as a kingdom, and Gonzalo got Sobrarbe and Ribagorza, also raised to kingdom status. The illegitimate son obtained the county of Aragón, which was elevated to a kingdom, small as it was at the time (Ramiro was known as "the petty king"). Sancho left a younger son who did not partake in the inheritance, Bernard. He left two daughters, Mayor and Jimena, who married Vermudo III.

Legacy
He introduced French feudal theories and ecclesiastic and intellectual currents into Iberia, such as the Cluniac Reform. He also began the Navarrese series of currency by minting what the Encyclopaedia Britannica calls "deniers of Carolingian influence." The division of his realm upon his death, the concepts of vassalage and suzerainty, and the use of the phrase "by the grace of God" (Dei gratia) after his title were imported from France, with which he tried to maintain relations. For this he has been called the "first Europeaniser of Iberia."

His most obvious legacy, however, was the temporary union of all Christian Iberia. At least nominally, he ruled over León, the ancient capital of the kingdom won from the Moors in the eighth century, and Barcelona, the greatest of the Catalan cities. Though he divided the realm at his death, thus created the enduring legacy of Castilian and Aragonese kingdoms, he left all his lands in the hands of one dynasty, the Jiménez, which kept the kingdoms allied by blood until the twelfth century. He made the Navarrese pocket kingdom strong, politically stable, and independent, preserving it for the remainder of the Middle Ages. It is for this that his seal has been appropriated by Basque nationalism. Though, by dividing the realm, he isolated the kingdom and inhibited its ability to gain land at the expense of the Moslems. Summed up, his reign defined the political geography of Iberia until its union under the Catholic Monarchs.

Sancho III Garcés, byname SANCHO THE GREAT, Spanish SANCHO EL MAYOR, or EL GRANDE (b. c. 992--d. Oct. 18, 1035), king of Pamplona (Navarre) from about 1000 to 1035, the son of García II (or III).
Sancho established Navarrese hegemony over all the Christian states of Spain at a time when the caliphate of Córdoba was in a state of turmoil. Sancho was uninterested in a crusade against the Moors, but he was interested in the expansion of Pamplona, which he began by the seizure of the ancient Frankish counties of Sobrarbe and Ribagorza (1016-19). A skilled politician, Sancho pursued his aims more by subversion than by force of arms. He persuaded the Count of Barcelona, Berenguer Ramón I, to accept him as overlord. Gascony did likewise, giving him direct sovereignty over Labourd. As a consequence of his marriage (1010) to Munia, daughter of Count Sancho García (d. 1017) of Castile, Sancho secured his own acceptance as count when Sancho García's son, the child Count García, was assassinated (1029). He then took up Castilian irredentist claims in eastern Leon and occupied the Leonese capital, where he was crowned (1034)--taking the imperial title. Sancho, who introduced some feudal practices into his new dominions, also encouraged the Cluniac reformers and established much closer contacts generally between Christian Spain and trans-Pyrenean Europe. In his will, however, he deliberately destroyed the empire he had created: he divided it into four kingdoms and left these to his four sons, thus making inevitable the fratricidal wars that followed his death. Sancho created the kingdom of Aragon and was responsible for the elevation of Castile from county to kingdom, though he transferred some Castilian territory to Pamplona, which he left to his eldest son, García III (or IV). [Encyclopaedia Britannica CD '97]

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]