== Notes for [[Item:Q116426|Q116426]] ==

"Rodericus comes…cum consanguinibus meis: Semeno Enechez et mater eius dompna Maria, Don Garcia, D. Malrico, Gonsalbo de Marañon, Don Nuño, Don Rodrico, Don Alvaro, Don Pedro Garciaz, comitissa Doña Elbira, Domna Milia, Domna Santia Garciaz, Domna Mayor Garciaz, Domna Maria Garciaz" donated "villam…Gormeces" to San Pedro de Arlança, by charter dated 7 Feb 1140[1097]. The family relationships between Rodrigo González de Lara, the main donor, and "consanguinibus meis" have been traced except in the case of the three presumed sisters "…Domna Santia Garciaz, Domna Mayor Garciaz, Domna Maria Garciaz". The connection between these sisters and the Aza family is indicated by the sister Mayor donating property, in the charter dated 24 May 1182 (see below), which had previously been donated by their supposed father. However, no close relationship between Rodrigo González de Lara and either García García de Aza or his known wife Sancha Pérez de Traba has yet been found. One explanation for the presence of the three sisters in this document is that their mother was a close relative of the Lara family, maybe the sister of Rodrigo González. This would also explain the absence of the other known children of García García de Aza in the document, on the assumption that they were born from his marriage to Sancha Pérez and so were not directly related to Rodrigo González.]

===Family

https://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/SPANISH%20NOBILITY%20LATER%20MEDIEVAL.htm#MayorGarciaAzadiedafter1182

GARCÍA García de Aza, son of conde GARCÍA Ordóñez, Tenente en Nájera y Grañón & his second wife Eva --- (1106, before 29 Sep-16 Dec 1160). ... [m firstly --- de Lara, daughter of ---.

García García & his [first] wife had three children:

*1. SANCHA Garcia (-after 7 Feb 1140). ...
*2. MAYOR García de Aza (-after 24 May 1182). ...
*3. MARÍA Garcia (-after 1140). ...

----

https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Se%C3%B1or%C3%ADo_de_Albornoz

García married a younger daughter of Pedro Fróilaz de Traba, sometimes called Eva and other times Sancha. 1 October García and his wife had at the least two daughters, Elvira and Mayor, who married Gonzalo de Maranhao.

It is possible that he had two more daughters, Sancha and María, and a natural daughter, Juana, a religious in the Monastery of Santo Domingo de Caleruega.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]