== Notes for [[Item:Q117875|Q117875]] ==

=Vasco Martins da Cunha, "o Seco", 7 senhor de Tábua=

*[http://www.asbrap.org.br/documentos/revistas/rev24_art4.pdf '''VASCO MARTINS DA CUNHA,'''] the Seco. Son of precedent and of Joana de Nomães. Was born c. 1260 and passed away in 1325. It was the 7th. Lord of the Morgado de Tábua. He married Senhorinha Fernandes de Chacim, daughter of Fernão Gonçalves Chacino and Major Afonso de Cambra.
* [https://www.genealogiahistoria.com.br/index_genealogia.asp?categoria=2&categoria2=1&subcategoria=335 '''Vasco Martins da Cunha , Seco,'''] was the 7th Lord of interest and Herdade De Tábua, 3rd Lord of the Morgado De Tábua, Knight Hidalgo, chief butler of Count D. Pedro (1309-23), deceased before 1325. He was married to Miss Fernandes Chancinho, deceased in 1330, daughter of Fernon Gonçalves Chancinho, Horseman, and Mor Afonso de Cambra. Vasco and Signorinha had among others:
* [https://our-royal-titled-noble-and-commoner-ancestors.com/p3355.htm#i100773 '''Our Royal Titled Noble Ancestors''']

=Married=

* Married: '''Senhorinha Fernandes Chancinho,''' widow of Ruy Gonçalves Bifardel (son of Gonçalo Viegas de Portocarrero, Alfeirão , and Sancha Peres da Veiga ), daughter of Fernão Gonçalves Chancinho and Mayor Affonso de Cambra.

= Children =

* '''Theresa Vasques da Cunha,''' married to Fernan Gomez de Guzman, son of Gomez Perez de Guzman and Arabuena Armildes.
* '''Martim Vasques da Cunha,''' married to Violante Lopes Pacheco , daughter of Dom Lopo Fernandes Pacheco and his first wife, Maria Gomes Taveira . Martim died before 1333, and Violante married for the second time, with Diogo Affonso de Sousa , son of Dom Affonso Dinis, Infante de Portugal , and Maria Pires Ribeiro de Sousa .
* '''Joanna Vasques da Cunha,''' married to Ruy Vasques de Azevedo , son of Vasco Paes de Azevedo and Maria Rodrigues de Vasconcellos [cited in 1.4.] .
* '''Berenguela Vasques da Cunha,''' married to Gonçalo Vasques de Azevedo , son of Vasco Paes de Azevedo and Maria Rodrigues de Vasconcellos [cited in 1.3.] .

=Links=

* http://palomatorrijos.blogspot.com/2009/02/duque-de-huete.html
* https://docplayer.com.br/87761903-Os-cunha-senhores-e-morgados-de-tabua.html
*https://www.academia.edu/25535705/Relat%C3%B3rio_de_Genealogia_para_LUIS_MANUEL_CORREIA_DA_CUNHA_PASCOAL
* http://www.asbrap.org.br/documentos/revistas/rev24_art4.pdf
* https://pt.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lista_de_senhores_de_T%C3%A1bua
* https://www.slideshare.net/mobile/DiamanteHino/rvore-genealgica-cunhas

=Sources=

* List of Lords of Tábua - https://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lista_de_senhores_de_T%C3%A1bua
* José Augusto de Sotto Mayor Pizarro, Portuguese medieval lineages-3 vols, modern University, 1st edition, Porto, 1999. Vol. 2-pg. 369.
* Manuel José da Costa felgueiras Gaio, Nobiliário of the families of Portugal, Carvalhos de Basto, 2nd edition, Braga, 1989. Vol. IV-pg. 144 (wedges).
* José Augusto de Sotto Mayor Pizarro, Portuguese medieval lineages-3 vols, modern University, 1st edition, Porto, 1999. Vol. 2-pg. 370.
* José Augusto de Sotto Mayor Pizarro, Linhagens Medievais Portuguesas - 3 vols, Universidade Moderna, 1ª Edição, Porto, 1999. vol. 2-pg. 369.
* Manuel José da Costa Felgueiras Gaio, Nobiliário das Famílias de Portugal, Carvalhos de Basto, 2ª Edição, Braga, 1989. vol. IV-pg. 144 (Cunhas).
* https://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vasco_Louren%C3%A7o_da_Cunha
* THE CUNHA, LORDS AND MORGADOS OF TÁBUA - http://www.asbrap.org.br/documentos/revistas/rev24_art4.pdf
* V Señor de Tabúa e da Honra da Cunha, Mordomo-mor do Conde don Pedro 1309-23. Fallecido antes de 1325.
* FONTES: Livº do Deão 2-AA8; 2-AG7-8; 4-O7
* Livº Linhagens do Conde D.Pedro 55-O6
* Felgueiras Gayo Nobiliário de Famílias de Portugal 1941,ttªCUNHAS #1 N7
* Senhor do Morgado de Tábua, Alcaide Mor de Lisboa por mercê de D.Pedro I em 1357
* VASCO MARTINS DA CUNHA, O SECO filho de Martim Vasques da Cunha N 6 do § digo deste § 1º casou com D. Senhorinha Fernandes Chancina filha de Fernão Gomes Chacino, e sua mulher D. Mayor Afonso da Camera de Ilustre Família. Foi o dito Vasco Martins Sr. do Morgado da Taboa Alcaide Mor de Lisboa por mercê do Rei D. Pedro I em 1357, e lhe deu por seus serviços o préstimo de Cunha em 1365, e Sr. das terras de seu pai, e se chamou o Seco.
* 8 Martim Vasques da Cunha
* 8 D. Joana Vaz mulher de Rui Vasques de Azevedo no ttº de Azevedos § 11 N 4 =
* 8 D. Beringeira Vasques mulher de Gonçalo Vasques de Azevedo c.g. no ttº de Azevedos § 1 N 14
* Casou 2ª vez Vasco Martins com ............................ Lopes filha de Lopo Soares Sr. de Alvergaria e sua mulher D. Mecia Rodrigues de Meira parece s.g.
* (NFP, Gayo, CUNHAS § 1 N 7)
* Historia genealogica da Casa Real Portugueza, By Antonio Caetano de Sousa - https://books.google.com/books?id=2RNcAAAAcAAJ&pg=PA175&lpg=PA175&dq=Senhorinha+Fernandes+de+Chacim&source=bl&ots=1Sx5KaE4IQ&sig=ACfU3U1brWzyYrrJOQgPKk52A4WmK-wgvg&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwj3hNCRksrvAhV-JzQIHX2WAdg4ChDoATAEegQICBAC#v=onepage&q=Senhorinha%20Fernandes%20de%20Chacim&f=false
* Evidence of the Genealogical History of the Portuguese Royal House: Taken, Volume 1, By António Caetano de Sousa - https://books.google.com/books?id=eoXzCtyoGPUC&pg=PA151&lpg=PA151&dq=Senhorinha+Fernandes+de+Chacim&source=bl&ots=hWUKyc4RRQ&sig=ACfU3U24Yy95EhK0PCD4hkJr2Uw7JCRELw&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwj3hNCRksrvAhV-JzQIHX2WAdg4ChDoATAGegQICRAC#v=onepage&q=Senhorinha%20Fernandes%20de%20Chacim&f=false
* Portugaliae monumenta historica a saeculo octavo post Christum usque ad, edited by Alexandre Herculano - https://books.google.com/books?id=4p2uV9QNPDIC&pg=PA147&lpg=PA147&dq=Senhorinha+Fernandes+de+Chacim&source=bl&ots=w8__0mNfzh&sig=ACfU3U1g2x9808faPwTW0kY8kpo-GaL64w&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwj3hNCRksrvAhV-JzQIHX2WAdg4ChDoATAHegQIBhAC#v=onepage&q=Senhorinha%20Fernandes%20de%20Chacim&f=false

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]