== Notes for [[Item:Q88161|Q88161]] ==

=Magas of Macedon=

Magas (Greek: Mάγας) was a Greek Macedonian nobleman that lived in the 4th century BC.

Magas was a local nobleman from obscure origins and was from Eordeaea.[1] Little is known on his life.

Magas married the noblewoman Antigone, the child of Cassander and the niece of the powerful Regent Antipater.[2] His marriage to Antigone reveals that Magas was a nobleman of some social status and influence as he married a close relation to the powerful Regent and his wife was a distant collateral relative to the Argead dynasty.[3]

After Magas married Antigone, they settled in Eordeaea. Antigone bore Magas a daughter; his only known child Berenice I of Egypt.[4][5] Magas had two namesakes: his grandson Magas of Cyrene and his great, great grandson Magas of Egypt.

References[edit]

1.Jump up ^ Ptolemaic Genealogy: Berenice I, Footnote 2
2.Jump up ^ Heckel, Who’s who in the age of Alexander the Great: prosopography of Alexander’s empire, p.71
3.Jump up ^ Ptolemaic Dynasty - Affiliated Lines: The Antipatrids 4.Jump up ^ Heckel, Who’s who in the age of Alexander the Great: prosopography of Alexander’s empire, p.71 5.Jump up ^ Ptolemaic Dynasty - Affiliated Lines: The Antipatrids

Sources[edit] Ptolemaic Genealogy: Berenice I Ptolemaic Dynasty - Affiliated Lines: Antipatrids W. Heckel, Who’s who in the age of Alexander the Great: prosopography of Alexander’s empire, Wiley-Blackwell, 2006

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magas_of_Macedon

--------------------
'''
=Magas of Macedon=
'''

Magas (Greek: Mάγας) was a Greek Macedonian nobleman that lived in the 4th century BC.

Magas was a local nobleman from obscure origins and was from Eordeaea. Little is known on his life.

Magas married the noblewoman Antigone, the child of Cassander and the niece of the powerful Regent Antipater. His marriage to Antigone reveals that Magas was a nobleman of some social status and influence as he married a close relation to the powerful Regent and his wife was a distant collateral relative to the Argead dynasty.

After Magas married Antigone, they settled in Eordeaea. Antigone bore Magas a daughter; his only known child Berenice I of Egypt.[4][5] Magas had two namesakes: his grandson Magas of Cyrene and his great, great grandson Magas of Egypt.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magas_of_Macedon

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]