== Notes for [[Item:Q112055|Q112055]] ==

Se casó con Matrona, hija de Aznar I Galíndez conde de Aragón. Mató a su cuñado Centulfo y repudió a Matrona para casarse con Nunila de Pamplona, hija de Íñigo Arista rey de Pamplona, con la que tuvo un hijo, Galindo Garcés.
===========================

García I Galíndez «el Malo» (m. 833), conde de Aragón (820-833). Las pocas noticias sobre su vida, recogidas por historiadores posteriores, se encuentran en el Códice de Roda.

Hijo de Galindo Belascotenes y de Faquilo
-----------------------------------------

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

García Galíndez (died 833), called the Bad (el Malo), was the Count of Aragon and Conflent from 820.

Son of Galindo Belascotenes, he married Matrona, daughter of Aznar Galíndez I. He later murdered his brother-in-law Centule and repudiated Matrona to marry Nunila, daughter of Íñigo Arista of Pamplona. According to tradition, which bestowed upon García his nickname, he murdered his brother-in-law for a joke that he and Galindo Aznárez I had played on him, namely, locking him up in a house during the Hogueras de San Juan.

In 820, Íñigo gathered a small army and deposed Aznar from Aragon and his other counties, bestowing them on García. In 824, when Aeblus and Aznar Sánchez marched on Pamplona, García and Musa ibn Fortún of the Banu Qasi lent their support to Íñigo and the Frankish counts were defeated.

Depending on the source, he either died in 833 or just retired, leaving the government to his son Galindo Garcés.

[edit]Sources

Collins, Roger. The Basques. Blackwell Publishing: London, 1990.

Higounet, Charles. Bordeaux pendant le haut moyen age. Bordeaux, 1963.

Lewis, Archibald R. The Development of Southern French and Catalan Society, 718–1050. University of Texas Press: Austin, 1965.

Foundation for Medieval Genealogy: Aragon.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]