== Notes for [[Item:Q87469|Q87469]] ==

'''Marcus Livius Drusus (consul)'''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Livius_Drusus_(consul)

The elder Marcus Livius Drusus (died 108 BC) was set up as tribune by the Senate in 121 BC to undermine Gaius Gracchus' land reform bills. To do this, he proposed creating twelve colonies with 3,000 settlers each from the poorer classes, and relieving rent on property distributed since 133 BC. He also said the Latin allies should not be mistreated by Roman generals, which was the counteroffer to Gaius' offer of full citizenship. These were known as the Leges Liviae, but they were never enacted, because the Senate simply wanted to draw support away from Gracchus. Their plan was successful and Drusus had enough support to veto Gaius' bill. Drusus was later consul in 112 BC and fought in Macedonia defeating the Scordisci, even pushing them out of Thrace across the Danube. In 109 BC he was elected censor along with the elder Marcus Aemilius Scaurus, but he died the next year in 108 BC.

He had a son of the same name.

'''Forrás / Source''': http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Livius_Drusus_(censor)

=Marcus Livius Drusus=

The elder Marcus Livius Drusus (died 108 BC) was set up as tribune by the Senate in 121 BC to undermine Gaius Gracchus' land reform bills. To do this (according to the record of Appian), he proposed creating twelve colonies with 3,000 settlers each from the poorer classes, and relieving rent on property distributed since 133 BC. He also said the Latin allies should not be mistreated by Roman generals, which was the counteroffer to Gaius' offer of full citizenship. These were known as the Leges Liviae, but they were never enacted, because the Senate simply wanted to draw support away from Gracchus. Their plan was successful and Drusus had enough support to veto Gaius' bill. Drusus was later consul in 112 BC and fought in Macedonia defeating the Scordisci, even pushing them out of Thrace across the Danube. In 109 BC he was elected censor along with the elder Marcus Aemilius Scaurus, but he died the next year in 108 BC.

He had a son of the same name, whose murder incited the Italian Social War.

==''The Magistrates of the Roman Republic''==
Please see snippets at:
* [https://books.google.com/books?id=tXYGAQAAIAAJ&focus=searchwithinvolume&q=Livius+Drusus]
* [https://books.google.com/books?id=reoZAAAAIAAJ&focus=searchwithinvolume&q=Livius+Drusus]

tribune in 122 BC, consul 112 BC, censor 109 BC

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]