== Notes for [[Item:Q153728|Q153728]] ==
https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jesus_Justus

For other uses of the name Jesus, see Jesus (disambiguation). Jesus Justus (Greek Iesous ho legomenos Ioustos) was one of several Jewish Christians in the church at Rome mentioned by Apostle Paul in the greetings at the end of Colossians 4:11.

Aristarchus my fellow prisoner greets you, and Mark the cousin of Barnabas (concerning whom you have received instructions--if he comes to you, welcome him), and Jesus who is called Justus. These are the only men of the circumcision among my fellow workers for the kingdom of God, and they have been a comfort to me. Colossians 4:10-11

It is generally thought that Paul wrote Colossians while in prison in Rome most likely during AD 50’s. Of those with Paul, Justus, Aristarchus, and Mark are said in the letter to be “of the circumcision”, that is, Jewish and to have "proved a comfort to me."

The name Jesus was not uncommon at the time of Jesus of Nazareth, as it was a form of the Old Testament name Joshua (Yeshua ישוע). The extra name "Justus" was likely to distinguish him from his Master, Jesus Christ.[1]

Jesus Justus is not mentioned in a similar passage in Philemon 1:23-24 whereas Aristarchus, Epaphras and Mark are again explicitly named by Paul.

According to some gnostic tradition, Jesus Justus was a son of Jesus and St. Mary Magdalene

http://www.newagegod.com/AGAPEmedia/crucified3.htm
https://archive.org/details/20240209_20240209_0631/page/236/mode/2up

== Gaiad usage ==
He was born on Pentecost 27 May 30 CE. I think this was [[Taurus 7]] 10030 AM

He basically assimilated into Roman society. He was not as driven as Jesus or James.
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]