== Notes for [[Item:Q86964|Q86964]] ==

He was an Equestrian from Reate in the Sabine region of Italy. He served as a customs official in the province of Asia, where he was honored with statues dedicated "To an Honest Tax-gatherer", and later as a banker among the Helvetii in Gaul, where he died. With his wife, Vespasia Pollio, he had two sons, Titus Flavius Sabinus and the future emperor Titus Flavius Vespasianus (aka Vespasian), and a daughter who died in infancy

From Wikipedia:

[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Titus_Flavius_Sabinus_I '''Titus Flavius Sabinus'''] (c. 20 BC - aft. 9, fl. 1st century BC to 1st century AD) was the son of [http://www.geni.com/people/Titus-Flavius-Petro/6000000013205685076 Titus Flavius Petro] and wife [http://www.geni.com/people/Tertulla/6000000006101312593 ... Tertulla].

He was an Equestrian from Reate (modern Rieti) in the Sabine region of Italy. He served as a customs official and then as a banker in the customs in the province of Asia, where he was honoured with statues dedicated "To an Honest Tax-gatherer", and later as a banker at Aventicum among the Helvetii in Gaul, where he died.

With his wife, [http://www.geni.com/people/Vespasia-Polla/6000000005241731148 Vespasia Polla], he had two sons, the consul [http://www.geni.com/people/Titus-Flavius-Sabinus/6000000013204919137 Titus Flavius Sabinus] and the future emperor [http://www.geni.com/people/Vespasian-Emperor-of-Rome/6000000000701024840 Vespasian], and a daughter who died in infancy, [http://www.geni.com/people/Flavia-Vespasia-Sabinus/6000000010111470081 Flavia Vespasia].

== Sources ==

* Tacitus, ''Histories''
* Suetonius, ''On the Life of the Caesars''
* Cassius Dio, ''Roman History''
* Arnold Blumberg (ed) (1995), ''Great Leaders, Great Tyrants?: Contemporary Views of World Rulers Who Made History''

== References ==

Christian Settipani. ''Continuité gentilice et continuité sénatoriale dans les familles sénatoriales romaines à l'époque impériale'', 2000

== Additional Sources ==

* D. C. O'Driscoll, [http://dcodriscoll.pbworks.com/w/page/9955773/Flavius Flavius]

--------------------
'''
=Titus Flavius Sabinus=
'''

Titus Flavius T. f. Sabinus was the father of the emperor Vespasian.

Sabinus was the son of Titus Flavius Petro and his wife, Tertulla, and was an eques from Reate in the Sabine region of Italy. He served as a customs official and then as a banker in the province of Asia, where he was honoured with statues dedicated "To an Honest Tax-gatherer", and later as a banker at Aventicum among the Helvetii in Gaul, where he died.

With his wife, Vespasia Polla, he had at least two sons, the consul Titus Flavius Sabinus, and Titus Flavius Vespasianus, the future emperor Vespasian; and also a daughter who died in infancy, Flavia Vespasia. He may have had an elder son, who was the father of Titus Flavius Sabinus, consul in AD 69.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Titus_Flavius_Sabinus_(father_of_Vespasian)

Downloaded from the Bruce Cooley Pusch RootsWeb site. Please remove the symbols I've inserted in many of the names like (L),(P) and(BCP). Also please delete the (NOTES)I've written in some entries in the first person, the notes that refer just to me.

OR "LEVI""LIVY""FLIVY"

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]