== Notes for [[Item:Q87411|Q87411]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaius_Octavius

--------------------
Julius Caesar was his stepfather
--------------------
Senator och Guvenör i Makedonien.

--------------------
http://homepage.mac.com/james_keller/PS68/PS68_204.HTML
--------------------
See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaius_Octavius
--------------------
http://larryvoyer.com/genealogy/getperson.php?personID=I141648&tree=v7_28
--------------------
Död 20 f.Kr
--------------------
3740611072440470. Senator-Praetor & Governor of Macedonia Caius Octavius IV ROMAN EMPIRE,1601,1746 son of Magistrate of Velitrae Caius Octavius III ROMAN EMPIRE and Unknown, was born in , , Roma, Italy and died in 59 B.C. in , , Roma, Italy.

General Notes:

Belonged to an old and respectable but not distinguished family from Velitrae.

Caius married Atia Balbus ROMAN EMPIRE 1601 in , , Roma, Italy. Atia was born in , , Roma, Italy and died in 43 B.C..

Children from this marriage were:

i. Augustus Gaius Julius Octavius ROMAN EMPIRE Emperor was born on 23 September 63 B.C. in Roma, , Italy and died 19 August 14 in Nola, Abadia A Isola, , , Italy. Other names for Gaius were Gaius Julius Caesar ROMAN EMPIRE, Gaius Octavius ROMAN EMPIRE, and Octavius ROMAN EMPIRE.

16870305536220235 ii. Octavia Thurina Minor ROMAN EMPIRE (born in 69 B.C. in Rome, , Lazio, Italy - died in 11 B.C. in Rome, , Lazio, Italy)

http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.com/~mgholler/Caden/a55.htm#i547459236

67481222144880940. Magistrate of Velitrae Caius Octavius III ROMAN EMPIRE,1601,1746 son of Tribune in Sicily Caius Octavius II ROMAN EMPIRE and Unknown, was born in 84 B.C. in Roma, Italy and died in 20 B.C. in Campania at age 64.



General Notes:

Belonged to an old and respectable but not distinguished family from Velitrae.

Caius married.

The child from this marriage was:

33740611072440470 i. Senator-Praetor & Governor of Macedonia Caius Octavius IV ROMAN EMPIRE (born in , , Roma, Italy - died in 59 B.C. in , , Roma, Italy)

http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.com/~mgholler/Caden/a56.htm#i547458974

134962444289761880. Tribune in Sicily Caius Octavius II ROMAN EMPIRE,1601,1746 son of Caius Octavius I ROMAN EMPIRE and Unknown, was born in 154 B.C. in Roma, Italy.

Caius married.

The child from this marriage was:

67481222144880940 i. Magistrate of Velitrae Caius Octavius III ROMAN EMPIRE (born in 84 B.C. in Roma, Italy - died in 20 B.C. in Campania)

http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.com/~mgholler/Caden/a57.htm#i547458950

269924888579523760. Caius Octavius I ROMAN EMPIRE,1601,1746 son of Eneius Octavius Rufus "Quaestor" ROMAN EMPIRE Chancellor of the Republic and Unknown, was born in 226 B.C. in Roma, Italy.

Caius married.

The child from this marriage was:

134962444289761880 i. Tribune in Sicily Caius Octavius II ROMAN EMPIRE (born in 154 B.C. in Roma, Italy)

and continues on...
--------------------
Governor of Macedonia, Caius Octavius IV ROMAN EMPIRE, son of Magistrate of Velitrae Caius Octavius III ROMAN EMPIRE and Unknown, was born in, Rome, Italy and died in 59 B.C. in, Rome, Italy. General Notes: Belonged to an old and respectable but not distinguished family from Velitrae. Caius married Atia Balbus in Rome, Italy. Atia was born in Rome, Italy and died in 43 B.C. Gaius Octavius] (about 100 – 59 BC) was an ancestor to the Roman Emperors of the Julio-Claudian dynasty. He was the father of the Emperor Augustus, step-grandfather of the Emperor Tiberius, great-great grandfather of the Emperor Caligula, great-grandfather of the Emperor Claudius, and great-great-great grandfather of the Emperor Nero. He descended from an old, wealthy equestrian branch of the Octavii family. Despite being from a wealthy family, his family was plebeian, rather than patrician. As a novus homo ("new man"), he was not of a senatorial family. His grandfather, Gaius Octavius, fought as a military tribune in Sicily during the Second Punic War. His father Gaius Octavius was a municipal magistrate who lived to an advanced age. He was distantly related to Gnaeus Octavius, the consul of 87 BC who led the opposition to Lucius Cornelius Cinna. Octavius' first wife was named Ancharia. The two had a child (named Octavia Major). It is not known how the marriage ended, although it is possible that Ancharia died during child birth. He later married the niece of Julius Caesar, Atia Balba Caesonia. How they met is not known, although Atia's family (through her father, the Balbi) lived close to Velitrae, which was the ancestral home of the Octavii. They had two children: Octavia Minor and the Emperor Augustus, the latter of whom was born in 63 BC. Octavius was elected quaestor, believed to have been in 70 BC. In 61 BC, he was elected praetor. In 60 BC, after his term had ended, he was appointed propraetor, and was to serve as governor of Macedonia. Before he left for Macedonia, the senate sent him to put down a slave rebellion at Thurii. These slaves had previously taken part in the rebellions of Spartacus and Catiline. He then left for Macedonia and proved a capable administrator, governing "courageously and justly", his deeds included leading the Roman forces to victory in an unexpected battle against the Thracian Bessian tribe. Cicero had high regard for his diplomatic dealings. Because of his successful term as governor of Macedonia, he won the support necessary to be elected consul. In 59 BC, Octavius sailed to Rome, to stand for election as consul. However, he died before arriving in Rome. He supposedly died in the same bedroom where Augustus would pass away many years later. His career is summarized in an inscription erected by his son on the forum he built in Rome: "Gaius Octavius, son, grandson and great-grandson of Gaius, father of Augustus, twice military tribune, quaestor, aedile of the plebs together with Gaius Toranius, judge, praetor, proconsul, proclaimed imperator in the province of Macedonia”
--------------------

The Octavii, were wealthy townsmen from Velitrae, southeast of Rome, to which his father came only as an equestrian banker, though his grandfather was a senator.
--------------------
The Octavii, were wealthy townsmen from Velitrae, southeast of Rome, to which his father came only as an equestrian banker, though his grandfather was a senator.
--------------------
'''
=Gaius Octavius=
'''

Gaius Octavius (about 100-59 BC) was an ancestor to the Roman Emperors of the Julio-Claudian dynasty. He is the father of the Emperor Augustus, step-grandfather of the Emperor Tiberius, great-grandfather of the Emperor Claudius, great-great grandfather of the Emperor Caligula, and great-great-great grandfather of the Emperor Nero. Hailing from Velitrae, he descended from an old, wealthy equestrian branch of the gens Octavia. Despite being from a wealthy family, his family was plebeian, rather than patrician. As a novus homo ("new man"), he would not be of a senatorial family.

His grandfather, Gaius Octavius, fought as a military tribune in Sicily during the Second Punic War. His father Gaius Octavius was a municipal magistrate who lived to an advanced age. He is a distant relative (possibly as third cousins, through their ancestor Gnaeus Octavius Rufus) to Gnaeus Octavius, the consul of 87 BC who led the opposition to Lucius Cornelius Cinna.

'''Personal life'''

Octavius' first wife was named Ancharia. The two had a child (named Octavia Major). It is not known how the marriage ended, although it is possible that Ancharia died during child birth. He later married the niece of Julius Caesar, Atia Balba Caesonia. How they met is not known, although Atia's family on her father's side (the Balbi) lived close to Velitrae, which was the ancestral home of the Octavii. They had two children: Octavia Minor and the Emperor Augustus, the latter of whom was born in 63 BC.

'''Political career'''

Octavius was elected quaestor, believed to have been in 70 BC. In 61 BC, he was elected praetor. In 60 BC, after his term had ended, he was appointed proprietor, and was to serve as governor (praefectus pro praetor) of Macedonia. Before he left for Macedonia, the senate sent him to put down a slave rebellion at Thurii. These slaves had previously taken part in the rebellions of Spartacus and Catiline. He then left for Macedonia and proved a capable administrator, governing "courageously and justly", his deeds included leading the Roman forces to victory in an unexpected battle against the Thracian Bessian tribe. Cicero had high regard for his diplomatic dealings. Because of his successful term as governor of Macedonia, he won the support necessary to be elected consul.

In 59 BC, Octavius sailed to Rome, to stand for election as consul. However, he died in Nola, before arriving in Rome. He supposedly died in the same bedroom where his son Augustus would pass away many years later. His career is summarized in an inscription erected by his son on the forum he built in Rome:

''C(aius) Octavius C(ai) f(ilius) C(ai) n(epos) C(ai) pr[on(epos)]
pater Augusti tr(ibunus) mil(itum) bis q(uaestor) aed(ilis) pl(ebis) cum C(aio) Toranio iudex quaestionum pr(aetor) proco(n)s(ul) imperator appellatus ex provincia Macedonia''

“Gaius Octavius, son, grandson and great-grandson of Gaius, father of Augustus, twice military tribune, quaestor, aedile of the plebs together with Gaius Toranius, judge, praetor, proconsul, proclaimed imperator in the province of Macedonia”

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaius_Octavius_%28praetor_61_BC%29

Caius Octavius IV, Senator-Praetor and Governor of Macedonia, died in 59B.C., belonged to an old and respectable but not distinguished familyfrom Velitrae. He was the son of Caius Octavius III., municipalmagistrate of Velitrae. He was the son of Caius Octavius II., a militarytribune in Sicily, 226 B.C. His father was Caius Octavius I., son ofEneius Octavius Rufus, the Quaestor, or Chancellor of the Republic,living about 330 B.C., the time of Alexander the Great, and brother ofEneius Octavius, a Roman Admiral under Scipio Africanus in the SecondPunic War.

Octavian’s father: Gaius Octavius IV / Caius Octavius IV
first wife was Ancharia
daughter: Octavia Major
entered Senate c. 70 BC
required sum of 400,000 HS

praetor in 61 BC
already been military tribune, quaestor, plebeian aedile
governor of Macedonia late 61 - 59
Suetonius, Aug. 3: ‘He governed Macedonia courageously and justly’
Cicero’s letters to his brother Quintus (governor of Asia) commend GaiusOctavius
died suddenly on his return; about to become candidate for consulship
Suetonius, Aug. 8: ‘At the age of four’

Senator Caius Octavius of Rome

DIED 59 BC

He was Praetor and Governor of Macedonia.

He was Praetor and Governor of Macedonia.

Infopedia:
Gaius (d. 58 B.C.), general and politician, praetor (61), proconsul of Macedonia (60); m. Atia, niece of Julius Caesar; father of the Emperor Augustus. Marcus (1st century B.C.), general; belonged to Senate party during Civil War; defeated Dolabella at sea; joined Pompey and fought at Thapsus (46 B.C.) and Actium (31).

Name Suffix:<NSFX> Governor Of Macedonia

Name Suffix:<NSFX> Governor Of Macedonia

Gaius Octavius
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Gaius Octavius (d. 59 BC) was the biological father of Augustus. He descended from an old, wealthy equestrian family, of whom he was the first to enter the Roman Senate.

His great-great-grandfather fought as a middle-ranking officer in the Second Punic War. His father was a municipal magistrate who lived to an advanced age. Like his father, he bribed voters during elections.

After his praetorship, he subsequently became governor of Macedonia. He was commissioned by the Senate on his way to Macedonia to disperse a rebellion of slaves who had previously taken part in the rebellions under Spartacus and Catiline. He proved a capable administrator in Macedonia, governing "courageously and justly", his deeds including victory in a battle against the Thracian Bessian tribe. Cicero had high regard for his diplomatic dealings.

Octavius died in Nola on his way to stand for the consulship in Rome in 59 BC, supposedly in the same bedroom where Augustus would later pass away. By his first wife, Ancharia, he fathered Octavia Major; by his second, Atia Balba Caesonia, he fathered Octavia Minor and Augustus.

Portraits of Gaius Octavius can be seen at [1] (section 4, "parents").


[edit] Source
Suetonius, Augustus, vs. 1-8 (Robert Graves translation)
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaius_Octavius"

Rootsweb Feldman
URL: http://worldconnect.genealogy.rootsweb.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=:3044567&id=I29936
# ID: I29936
# Name: Caius Octavius IV Roman Senator ROME 1 2 3 4 5 6
# Sex: M
# Birth: BEF 100 2 3 4 5 6
# Death: BEF 100 2 3 4 5 6
# Change Date: 15 JAN 2004 6
# Change Date: 15 OCT 2001 3 4 5 6
# Note:

[Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED]

2 SOUR S332582
3 DATA
4 TEXT Date of Import: 14 Jan 2004


[daveanthes.FTW]

Father: Caius Octavius III Roman Citizen ROME

Marriage 1 Atia Balbus ROME b: BEF 100

Children

1. Has Children Octavia the Elder ROME b: in 64 B.C.
2. Has No Children Augustus Octavius Caesar
3. Has No Children Gaius Octavius Augustus Rome Emperor ROME


Sources:

1. Title: 13143.GED
Note: ABBR 13143.GED
Note: Source Media Type: Other

ABBR 13143.GED

NS174433
Text: Date of Import: Apr 20, 2001
2. Title: daveanthes.FTW
Note: ABBR daveanthes.FTW
Note: Source Media Type: Other
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Book
Text: Date of Import: 14 Jan 2004
3. Title: daveanthes.FTW
Note: ABBR daveanthes.FTW
Note: Source Media Type: Other
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Book
Text: Date of Import: Jan 13, 2004
4. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Jan 18, 2004
5. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: 21 Jan 2004
6. Title: Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Feb 6, 2004


wtf 4:565 Caius Octavius Senator

Senator of Rome

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]