== Notes for [[Item:Q87945|Q87945]] ==

Samos I, King of Armenia, died circa 243 BC.
--------------------
Armenien utgör en mycket gammal statsbildning med rötter i antiken. Armenien har kallats världens äldsta stat.[källa behövs] Som land omnämns det för första gången i historien av den persiske kungen Darius I, i hans kilskrift om erövringen av landet. Armeniska nationen har sin vagga i området runt sjön Vansjön. Genom att ligga i korridoren som sammanbinder Asien med Europa har Armenien och dess kultur färgats stark av dessa två världar och förvandlats till "en smältdegel var i de två världarnas kultur har gett upphov till en säregen blandning av dessa två".

Armenien har upplevt fyra kungadömen: dynastin Artashisian (190 f.Kr. - 12 f.Kr.), dynastin Arshakounian (53 - 423 e.Kr.), dynastin Bagratouni (862 - 1045) och dynastin Roubinian (1187 - 1375), som i skillnad mot de andra kungadömen som regerade på det Armeniska höglandet, grundades i Kilikien, vid Medelhavskusten och blev en viktig allierade för de latinska staterna under korstågen.

Landet blev ortodoxt kristet år 301 e.Kr. och en del av den orientaliskt ortodoxa kyrkan. Armenien var det första landet som antog kristendomen som officiell religion. Som Armeniens apostel och grundaren av den armeniska kyrkan nämns martyrerna Judas Taddeus och Bartolomaios medan Gregorius Upplysaren anses som Armeniska Apostoliska kyrkans förste katolikos (patriark).

Den 24 april 1915 inleddes det i dåvarande Osmanska riket ett folkmord på armenierna. Detta innebar att mellan 1 - 2 miljoner armenier och andra kristna dödades eller deporterades, och att ytterligare ett flertal tvingades på flykt. Än idag finns diskussionen mellan armenier och turkar om det som pågick under de åren och Turkiet erkänner inte de angivna händelserna. Se vidare armeniska folkmordet.

Dagens Armenien utgör egentligen endast periferin i det historiska Armenien som förutom nuvarande område även omfattade delar av dagens östra Turkiet, med centrum för den armeniska nationen runt sjön Vansjön. Den första republiken Armenien utropades den 28 maj 1918 och enligt freden i Sèvres år 1920 skulle landet bli självständigt. Avtalet nullifierades dock av freden i Lausanne som tvingades fram av den nya republiken Turkiet, under Mustafa Kemal Atatürks ledning, som vägrade godkänna avtalet i Sèvres. År 1922 intogs Armenien av ryska bolsjeviker och den 2 december 1922 delades det mellan Turkiet och Sovjetunionen. År 1936 bildades den armeniska sovjetrepubliken.

Armenien förklarade sig självständigt den 23 augusti 1990 efter Sovjetunionens kollaps och tog då avstånd från kommunismen; landet erkändes 21 september 1991. 1988, tre år innan Sovjetunionens kollaps, krävde den högsta sovjeten Nagorno-Karabach att denna autonoma enklav skulle brytas ut ur sovjetrepubliken Azerbajdzan och anslutas till Armeniska SSR. Beslutet avslogs både av sovjeten i Baku och i Moskva. Oroligheterna ledde till en blodig väpnad konflikt som varade fram till 1994 då ett eldupphör trädde i kraft. De armeniska styrkorna i Nagorno-Karabach (varken Armeniska SSR eller republiken Armenien har officiellt varit aktivt inblandat i konflikten) lyckades säkra sin självständighet och inrättade en buffertzon runt regionen. Sedan 1994 har den så kallade Minsk-gruppen inom OSSE, med USA, Ryssland och Frankrike i spetsen, agerat som medlare i försök för att lösa dödläget.

27 oktober 1999 dödades premiärminister Vazken Sarksian, talmannen, och sex andra politiker vid en beskjutning av parlamentet av en grupp beväpnade män.

Geografi [redigera]

Armenien ligger i Mindre Asien, mellan Svarta havet och Kaspiska havet. Armenien, som saknar kust, gränsar i norr och öster till Georgien och Azerbajdzjan samt i söder och väster till Iran och Turkiet.

Terrängen är i huvudsak bergig med brusande forsar och få skogar. Klimatet är kontinentalt med varma somrar och kalla vintrar. Armeniens högsta topp är Aragats, 4 095 meter över havet.

I mellersta Armenien ligger den 1 230 km² stora Sevansjön.

Lägsta punkt: Debedfloden (400 meter över havet)

Naturtillgångar: små mängder av guld, koppar, zink
--------------------
Sames (Armenian: Շամուշ, Greek: Σαμωσ) was Satrap of Commagene. War between the Seleucid Empire and the Ptolemaic Kingdom seems to have allowed Sames an opportunity of independence. What side he took in the Syrian Wars is unknown as most of the records of that era have been lost, though it would make sense that he would have supported the Ptolemaic Kingdom against his large and powerful neighbour, the Seleucid Empire. Most sources give Orontes III as his father. After Orontes III died in 260 BC, there is no record for when Sames began his rule, only his year of death, in 260 BC as well. This seems to be blundered, chronogically. It may be that Sames was meant to succeed Orontes IV, but died the same year. That they both died in the same year looks suspicious, and may have been a Seleucid plot to take control, however it seems Arsames I took control of Commagene, Sophene and Armenia after 260 AD, and even that makes him look suspect. Commagene was outside the boundary of historic Armenia, yet the Armenian Satraps remained in occupation of many regions of Anatolia, such as Cappadocia and Pontus. It may have been that the son and heir to the Armenian kingdom would rule another region, just as the son or heir to the Achaemenid Empire had always ruled an outlying region, such as Bactria or Hyrkania. Viewing it from this perspective it would make sense, as his father Orontes III was of the Orontid family. Sames founded the city of Samosata, which has been submerged by the Ataturk Dam since 1989. Shamash was a Babylonian god, equivalent to Mithra, it was a dramatic break from a seemingly continuous tradition of Satraps with Armenian and Persian names. The neighbouring region of Osroene maintained a strong Aramaic culture that the Armenian and Persian occupiers never replaced. Although Sames had a very Babylonian (Aramaic) name, his name might have been "Mihrdat" which many of his successors had, but replaced it with the Babylonian equivalent for cultural reasons on taking control of Commagene. He was succeeded by his son, Arsames I.

From Wikipedia
--------------------
'''
=Sames of Commagene=
'''

Sames (Armenian: Շամուշ, Greek: Σαμωσ) was Satrap of Commagene.
War between the Seleucid Empire and the Ptolemaic Kingdom seems to have allowed Sames an opportunity of independence. What side he took in the Syrian Wars is unknown as most of the records of that era have been lost, though it would make sense that he would have supported the Ptolemaic Kingdom against his large and powerful neighbour, the Seleucid Empire.

Most sources give Orontes III as his father. After Orontes III died in 260 BC, there is no record for when Sames began his rule, only his year of death, in 260 BC as well. This seems to be blundered, chronologically. It may be that Sames was meant to succeed Orontes IV, but died the same year. That they both died in the same year looks suspicious, and may have been a Seleucid plot to take control, however it seems Arsames I took control of Commagene, Sophene and Armenia after 260 AD, and even that makes him look suspect.

Commagene was outside the boundary of historic Armenia, yet the Armenian Satraps remained in occupation of many regions of Anatolia, such as Cappadocia and Pontus. It may have been that the son and heir to the Armenian kingdom would rule another region, just as the son or heir to the Achaemenid Empire had always ruled an outlying region, such as Bactria or Hyrkania. Viewing it from this perspective it would make sense, as his father Orontes III was of the Orontid family.

Sames founded the city of Samosata, which has been submerged by the Ataturk Dam since 1989.

Shamash was a Babylonian god, equivalent to Mithra, it was a dramatic break from a seemingly continuous tradition of Satraps with Armenian and Persian names. The neighbouring region of Osroene maintained a strong Aramaic culture that the Armenian and Persian occupiers never replaced. Although Sames had a very Babylonian (Aramaic) name, his name might have been "Mihrdat" which many of his successors had, but replaced it with the Babylonian equivalent for cultural reasons on taking control of Commagene.

He was succeeded by his son, Arsames I.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sames_of_Commagene

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Armenia 260-243 BCE

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per00519.htm#0

OR "SAMUS"; KING OF ARMENIA ca. 260 BC

Name Prefix:<NPFX> King Name Suffix:<NSFX> I, Of Armenia

Name Prefix:<NPFX> King Name Suffix:<NSFX> I, Of Armenia

Ruled 260 BC, King of Armenia

Sames
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Sames was the founder of the Kingdom of Sophene and the city of Samosata first mentioned by Eratosthenes in 245 BC. Ziaelas of Bithynia took refuge at the court of Sames in Samosata in 260 BC.

Ruled 260 BC, King of Armenia

Ruled 260 BC, King of Armenia

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]