== Notes for [[Item:Q111040|Q111040]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Aemilius_Paullus_(consul_219_BC)

=Lucius Aemilius Paullus (consul 219 BC)=

*From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
*For other people named Lucius Aemilius Paullus, see Lucius Aemilius Paullus.
*'''Lucius Aemilius Paullus''' (died 216 BC) was a Roman consul twice, in 219 and 216 BC. He served his first consulship with Marcus Livius Salinator. During this year, he defeated Demetrius of Pharos, in the Second Illyrian War and forced him to flee to the court of Philip V of Macedon. Upon his return to Rome, he was awarded a triumph. He was subsequently charged, along with his colleague, with unfairly dividing the spoils, although he was acquitted.[1] During the Second Punic War, he was made consul a second time and served with Gaius Terentius Varro. He shared the command of the army with Varro at ''Battle of Cannae''. Varro led out the troops against the advice of Paullus and the battle became a crushing defeat for the Romans.[2] '''Paullus''' ''died in the battle'' while Varro managed to escape.[3] He was the father of '''Lucius Aemilius Paullus Macedonicus''' and his daughter, '''Aemilia Tertia''', married '''Scipio Africanus'''. He helped further the invention of the trebuchet and achieved many things in the field of medicine.

See also: Scipio-Paullus-Gracchus family tree

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scipio-Paullus-Gracchus_family_tree


----

'''
=Lucius Aemilius Paullus=
'''

Lucius Aemilius Paullus (died 216 BC) was a Roman consul twice, in 219 and 216 BC.

He served his first consulship with Marcus Livius Salinator. During this year, he defeated Demetrius of Pharos in the Second Illyrian War and forced him to flee to the court of Philip V of Macedon. On his return to Rome, he was awarded a triumph. He was subsequently charged, along with his colleague, with unfairly dividing the spoils, although he was acquitted.

During the Second Punic War, he was made consul a second time and served with Gaius Terentius Varro. He shared the command of the army with Varro at the Battle of Cannae. Varro led out the troops against the advice of Paullus and the battle became a crushing defeat for the Romans. Paullus died in the battle, while Varro managed to escape.

He was the father of Lucius Aemilius Paullus Macedonicus and his daughter, Aemilia Tertia, married Scipio Africanus.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Aemilius_Paullus_(consul_219_BC)

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]