== Notes for [[Item:Q107318|Q107318]] ==

* '''Progenitor of Abbasid Caliphate (Dynasty)'''

* Wilaadat (Birth):
* Wafaat (Death):

Source 1: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abbasid

Source 2: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Al-Mansur

Source 3: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kaysanites_Shia

----

After the death of Husayn, there were three different lines of Alidsd which compteted for allegiance of the legitimist faction: Those descended from Hasan and Husayn, the two sons of Ali by his wife Fatima, the daughter of the Prophet who left no son and the House of Muhammad, the son of Ali by another wife known as the Hanifite.... The first Alid faction to become prominent was the partisans of Muhammad, the son of the Hanifite, who were formed into a society by Kaysan, a freedman of Ali, for the purpose of avenging Hasan and Husayn, Ali's sons by Fatima. At Muhammad's death (AH 81) https://www.geni.com/people/Muhammad-Hanafiya-%D9%85%D8%AD%D9%85%D8%AF-%D8%AD%D9%86%D9%81%DB%8C%D9%87-de-la-tribu-des-Banu-Hanifa-and-imamate-of-Kaysanites-Shia-ancetre-des-Donboli/6000000041516148625?through=6000000041516412481 , the Kaysanites recognized his son Abu Hashim as the 5th Imam until AH 98 when Abu Hashim died childless after bequeathing his claims to Muhammad b. Ali b. Abdullah (d.126) who was not of the House of Ali at all and who became the founder of the Abbasid dynasty which obtained the Khalifate in 132...] ref:p. 9 of A Short History of The Fatimid Khalifate by Lacy O'Leary, lecturer in Aramaic and Syriac, Bristol University.

========

After Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyya died, his son Abu Hashim claimed the imamate. After his death the Abbasids claimed that on his deathbed Abu Hashim nominated his distant cousin Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Abdullah ibn Abbas ibn Abdu'l-Muttalib ibn Hashim as the imam. This man's son Abu'l-Abbas Abdullah as-Saffah became the first Abbasid caliph, repudiating Shi'ism, which effectively extinguished the sect that had recognized Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah as an imam.[9]
https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Muhammad_ibn_al-Hanafiyyah

=======
Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Abdallah or Muhammad "al-Imâm" was the son of "Ali ibn Abdallah ibn al-‘Abbas" and grandson of al-‘Abbas ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib, the uncle of the Islamic prophet, Muhammad. He was born in Humaima in Palestine, and was the founder of the Abbasid dynasty in Arabia.

Revolt of Mukhtar al-Thaqafi When al-Mukhtar announced the revenge of imam al-Husayn, he showed himself as the representative of Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah, the Promised Mehdi according to him.

Sixth Imam of Kaysanites

After the death of Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah, the imamate of Kaysanites Shia transferred to his son Abu Hashim, who transferred it to Muhammad (present profile), paving the way for the Abbasid dawa and the Abbasid Revolution.

[Bani Abbas Era (711-1235) ... Mokhtar's followers, called Keysanieh, after Abu Hashem's death https://www.geni.com/people/Abu-Hashim-ben-Mohammad-Hanifa-%D8%A7%D8%A8%D9%88%D9%87%D8%A7%D8%B4%D9%85-%D8%B9%D8%A8%D8%AF%D8%A7%D9%84%D9%87-%D8%A8%D9%86-%D9%85%D8%AD%D9%85%D8%AF-%D8%AD%D9%86%D9%81%DB%8C%D9%87/6000000041516412481?through=6000000041516148625 had sworn allegiance to Mohammad ibn Ali ibn Abbas ibn Abdolmottaleb, calling him Emam and naming themselves "Ale Abbas Shi'ites....] ref The Book of Iran - Iranian History at a glance, Dr Mahmoud Farrokhpey.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000014598150113

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]