== Notes for [[Item:Q111196|Q111196]] ==

Not a known son of https://www.geni.com/people/Recaredo-I-rey-de-los-visigodos/6000000003983656890?through=6000000186972157845

----

He was a Visigothic Prince of the early 7th century AD. and offspring of King Recáredo I and one of his several affective connections, in this case, born to the Merovingian princess Clodesind (also called Chodoswintha of Austrasia (daughter of King Sigebert I). Benedicto was lord of the fief of Liebana, in northern Spain in the surroundings of Cantabria and on the shores of the Bay of Biscay.His descent is partly intertwined with European and New World nobility.

---
"The cartulary of Liebana includes an
undated, but certainly
early, document which provides details realting to the
descendants of a
certain Benedicto and his wife Ellesinda. In addition
to a son, they
had two daughters, Osicia and Divigria, the latter
married to an
Aquilo. This couple had, with several others, two
sons, Fafila and
Diego, who married his first cousin Gulvira, daughter
of Osicia, and had
a son Pedro (again, with others)."

https://groups.google.com/g/soc.genealogy.medieval/c/C2DndlSATAc

Posted by Prof. Dr. Francisco Antônio Dória (Francisco Antônio de Moraes Accioli Dória), Brazilian mathematician, philosopher and genealogist. He is member of the Colégio Brasileiro de Genealogia.

https://cbg.org.br/biografia/francisco-antonio-de-moraes-accioli-doria

https://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Francisco_D%C3%B3ria

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]