== Notes for [[Item:Q114709|Q114709]] ==

----

===Biography

< [https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Muño_Fla%C3%ADnez Wikipedia] > '''Muño Flaínez''' (fl. c. 943-962),1 also written '''Munio''', documented in the ''History Roderici'' as '''Nuño Flaínez''', was Count of León and great-grandfather for the paternal branch of El Cid, in addition to great-great-grandfather of his wife Jimena Díaz. Son of '''Flaín Éctaz''' (fl. 932),2 3 was born into a family of the Asturian aristocracy. Although his presence at court was scarce, he appears in the documentation from 943 to 962 making several donations to the monastery of Sahagún and the cathedral of León1 and acquiring several properties, including a village in the valley of Laurenzo.

Marriage and descent

Muño is already married in 947 to Froiloba Bermúdez, daughter of an important Leonese tycoon, the Count of CeaBermudo Núñez, and his wife Countess Argilo.2 4 5 6 Froiloba was the sister of, among others, Jimena Fernández, Queen of Pamplona for her marriage to King García Sánchez II, as well.

Their children:
* Flaín Muñoz, Count.5 7. Married 1) Justa Fernández de Cea 2) unknown mistress 3) Justa Pepiz
* Velasco, husband of Natalia cognomento "Godo" Braóliz, with succession.7
* Jimena,5 wife of Gonzalo Gómez of the lineage of the Banu Mirel, landowners in the Land of Campos.8 7

----

===Genealogy
< [https://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/SPANISH%20NOBILITY%20EARLY%20MEDIEVAL.htm#PedroFlainezMBronildeB Medlands] >

'''MUNIO Flaínez''', son of FLAÍN Díaz & his wife --- (-[31 Oct 961/19 Jun 962]). "Osorio Monniz, Monnio Gudesteiz, Diaco Romaniz, Monnio Flainiz, Veremudus Flainiz" confirmed the charter dated 1 Jan 943 under which King Ramiro II granted to “Vermudo Nunniz” property confiscated from “Dom Patre”[962]. … m (before 13 Aug 947) '''FROILOBA Vermúdez''', daughter of VERMUDO Núñez Conde en Cea & his first wife Argila -- . …

Munio & his wife had [five] children:
* 1. [FRUELA Muñoz (-after 1 Mar 973). ..
* 2. FLAÍN Muñoz (-[998/11 Mar 1003]). … [m firstly ([before 975]) his first cousin, JUSTA Fernández, daughter of conde FERNANDO Vermúdez de Cea [Leon] & his wife condesa Elvira Díaz (before [955]-). [m firstly ([before 975]) his first cousin, JUSTA Fernández, daughter of conde FERNANDO Vermúdez de Cea [Leon] & his wife condesa Elvira Díaz (before [955]-). m [secondly] (before 1 May 987) JUSTA Pépiz, daughter of [983][PEPI Alfonso/PEPI Garvísiz & his wife ---] (-after 15 Jul 1009).
* 3. [ANSUR Muñoz (-after 1 Jan 1002).
* 4. [VELASCO Muñoz (-after 6 Sep 986).
* 5. JIMENA Muñoz (-after 4 Nov 1009). m GONZALO Gómez, son of GÓMEZ Miréllez & his wife --- (-before 8 May 984).


----

''Ancestros de Jimena Díaz según la genealogía propuesta por la profesora Margarita Torres Sevilla.
''
}
----

===References
* Torres Sevilla-Quiñones de León, Margarita Cecilia, "El linaje del Cid", Annals of the University of Alicante. Medieval History. n.º 13 (2000-2002). ISSN 0212-2480, pp. 343-360. < [https://rua.ua.es/dspace/bitstream/10045/6786/1/HM_13_11.pdf PDF] >

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]