== Notes for [[Item:Q85827|Q85827]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cornelia_Pompeia

Anteckningar från http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cornelia_Pompeia

Cornelia Pompeia

Från Wikipedia, den fria encyklopedin

För andra personer som heter Pompeia , se Pompeia (olika betydelser) .

Cornelia Pompeia Magna (född 47/35 BC, dödsår okänt) var dotter och yngsta barnet till Pompeia Magna och suffect konsuln Lucius Cornelius Cinna . Cornelia ? s morföräldrar var triumvir Pompejus och hans tredje hustru Mucia Tertia , medan hennes farfar var en äldre Lucius Cornelius Cinna . Hennes fullblodig bror Gnaeus Cornelius Cinna Magnus , ett halvsyskon från sin mor ? s första äktenskap med senatorn Faustus Cornelius Sulla . Hennes mor dog innan 35 f.Kr. och uppfostrades av sin far.

Innan 16 , gift Cornelia Lucius Scribonius Libo konsul 16 och som hon kom från ett senaten familj. Detta adelsman var kanske en avlägsen släkting till Cornelia . Libo kanske var en ättling till hennes mamma ? första äktenskap , hans farmor möjligen var Cornelia ? s äldre halvsyster . Den romerske kejsaren Tiberius , som debiteras Libo i planeringen av ett uppror mot kejsaren, högg Libo till döds i 16 .

Cornelia och Libo hade ett barn , Scribonia , som gifte sig med konsuln Marcus Licinius Crassus Frugi och fick barn.

--------------------

ID: I46324

Name: Cornelia Cinna

Given Name: Cornelia

Surname: Cinna

Sex: F

_UID: 046084198D85A041885A0F8E386C6E55DA64

Change Date: 3 Oct 2005

Death: deceased

Father: Lucius Cinna

Mother: Pompeia Minor Pompeius

Marriage 1 Marcus Libo

Married:

Children

Scribonia of Rome

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I46324
--------------------

--------------------
'''
=Cornelia Pompeia=
'''

Cornelia Pompeia Magna (born 47/35 BC, year of death unknown) was the daughter and youngest child to Pompeia Magna and suffect consul Lucius Cornelius Cinna. Cornelia’s maternal grandparents were triumvir Pompey and his third wife Mucia Tertia, while her paternal grandfather was an elder Lucius Cornelius Cinna. Her full-blooded brother was Gnaeus Cornelius Cinna Magnus; a half-sibling from her mother’s first marriage to senator Faustus Cornelius Sulla. Her mother died before 35 BC and was raised by her father.

Before 16, Cornelia married Lucius Scribonius Libo consul of 16 and like her came from a senatorial family. This nobleman was perhaps a distant relative to Cornelia. Libo maybe was a descendant of her mother’s first marriage; his paternal grandmother possibly was Cornelia’s elder half-sister. The Roman Emperor Tiberius, who charged Libo in planning a revolt against the emperor, stabbed Libo to death in 16.

Cornelia and Libo had a child, Scribonia, who married the consul Marcus Licinius Crassus Frugi and had children.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cornelia_Pompeia

*** First marrige was to Julius Caesar

Cornelia Pompeia Magna
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Cornelia Pompeia Magna also known as Pompeia Magna Minor (Minor Latin for the younger, born after 47 BC and before 35 BC-?) was the daughter and youngest child to Pompeia Magna and suffect consul Lucius Cornelius Cinna. Cornelia’s maternal grandparents were triumvir Pompey and his third wife Mucia Tertia, while her paternal grandparents were politician an elder Lucius Cornelius Cinna and an unnamed Roman woman. Her full-blooded brother was Gnaeus Cornelius Cinna Magnus; she also had two half-brothers and one half-sister from her mother’s first marriage to senator Faustus Cornelius Sulla. Her mother had died before 35 BC and was raised by her father. She along with her brother were born and raised in Rome.

Very little is known on the life of Cornelia. Before 16, Cornelia had married Lucius Scribonius Libo consul of 16 and like her came from a senatorial family. This nobleman was actually a distant relative to Cornelia. Libo was a descendant of her mother’s first marriage; his paternal grandmother was Cornelia’s elder half-sister. The Roman Emperor Tiberius, who charged Libo in planning a revolt against the emperor, stabbed Libo to death in 16.

Cornelia and Libo had one daughter and only child called Scribonia who married the consul Marcus Licinius Crassus Frugi and had children.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]