== Notes for [[Item:Q111230|Q111230]] ==

[These two sources below do not provide any evidence that Siseguntia is the daughter of https://www.geni.com/people/Rei-dos-Francos-de-Borgonha-Guntram-I/6000000193083622832?through=6000000186244914662 The relationship with her parents should be cut unless there is better evidence.]

"Miro (Mir, Mirio, Latin: Mirus) was the Suebian King of Galicia from 570 until his death in 583. His reign was marked by attempts to forge alliances with other Chalcedonian Christian nations with the goal of checking the power of the Arian Visigoths under Leovigild.

(...) He also left a widow, Sisegu(n)tia, who married Andeca, who deposed Eboric and took to ruling in Gallaccia Suevorum regnum. "

https://dbpedia.org/page/Miro_(Suebian_king)

---

"March 28 - Usually calendars mention St. Gontran on this day, although there are other saints. He is the King of Burgundy who died in 592.

(...) Of his three wives, Gontran had only one daughter ''who later entered the Order'', hence his decision to choose Childebert II as his successor.

https://www.rdb.mg/en/credo-en/saint-of-the-day/2144-saint-gontran-en.html


The documents show the existence of Siseguntia. The absence of her name does not exclude her parentage. The Roman Catholic Apostolic Church may have more information to be consulted.



----

https://it.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andeca#Matrimoni_e_discendenza

*Andeca married, firstly, the daughter of King Miro [2].
* Then in his second marriage, in 584, he married Siseguta, the widow of Miro [4].

No descendants of Andeca are known, neither legitimate nor illegitimate[12].

----

===Genealogy

https://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/VANDALS,%20SUEVI,%20VISIGOTHS.htm

* TEODEMIRO (-570). He succeeded in 561 as TEODEMIRO King of the Suevi at Lugo. He divided his territories into two ecclesiastical provinces at the assembly at Lugo, Braga and Lugo, in 569[103]. m ---. The name of Teodemiro's wife or concubine is not known. King Teodemiro & his [wife] had one child:
** 1. '''MIRÓN''' (-583). The primary source which confirms his parentage has not yet been identified. He succeeded his father in 570 as MIRÓN King of the Suevi at Lugo. … The Iohannis Abbatis Biclarensis Chronica records the death in 583 of "Miro Suevorum rex"[107]. m as her first husband, '''SISEGUTIA''', daughter of ---. The Iohannis Abbatis Biclarensis Chronica records that "Audeca" succeeded in 584 "in Gallaccia Suevorum regnum" and married "Sisegutiam relictam Mironis regis"[108]. She married secondly (584) as his [second] wife, '''Audica''', who had deposed King Eborico. King Mirón & his wife had two children:
***a) EBORICO (-after 585). The Iohannis Abbatis Biclarensis Chronica names "Eboricus filius eius" when recording that he succeeded his father in 583 "in provincia Gallacciæ"[109]. Gregory of Tours names "Euric" as son of "Mir King of Galicia" when recording that he succeeded his father and sought to renew a pact with King Leovigildo[110]. He succeeded his father in 583 as EBORICO King of the Suevi at Lugo. He was deposed in 584 by Audica[111]. The Iohannis Abbatis Biclarensis Chronica records that he became a monk after he was deposed[112].
***b) daughter . Gregory of Tours records that Audica, a relation of Euric, married the sister of the latter[113]. m as his [first] wife, AUDICA, son of ---.


----

https://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/VANDALS,%20SUEVI,%20VISIGOTHS.htm

*AUDICA (-585). Gregory of Tours records that Audica, a relation of Euric, married the sister of the latter and deposed his brother-in-law, before marrying the widow of his father-in-law[114]. He deposed King Eborico in 584, succeeded as AUDICA King of the Suevi. The Iohannis Abbatis Biclarensis Chronica records that "Audeca" succeeded in 584 "in Gallaccia Suevorum regnum" and married "Sisegutiam relictam Mironis regis"[115]. The Visigoths intervened in support of ex-King Eborico, defeated and deposed King Audica in 585, annexing the Suevi kingdom for themselves[116].
**m [firstly] --- of the Suevi, daughter of MIRON King of the Suevi. Gregory of Tours records that Audica, a relation of Euric, married the sister of the latter[117].
**m [secondly] (584) as her second husband, '''SISEGUTIA''', widow of MIRÓN King of the Suevi, daughter of ---. The Iohannis Abbatis Biclarensis Chronica records that "Audeca" succeeded in 584 "in Gallaccia Suevorum regnum" and married "Sisegutiam relictam Mironis regis"[118].

----

https://fabpedigree.com/s073/f041730.htm '''Unreliable site''' claims

Husband/Partner: Ario-Miro (of GALICIA) of DEZA

Children:
* Eborico (King) SUEVO m.? Child: Gaudioso
* Mira la SUEVA m. Sigebut BALTHES (King) of the VISIGOTHS ; Sisebut (King) of the VISIGOTHS [alt ped] Child: Theodora the VISIGOTH [alt ped]
* (NN) of GALICIA Prince of SUEVI m. ? Child: Ariomiro (II; Sn.) de DEZA

----

===References
* https://it.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andeca#Matrimoni_e_discendenza cites
**2. "Saint+Gregory+(Bishop+of+Tours)"&printsec=frontcover #ES Historia Francorum, liber sextus, par. XLIII, pag. 454 < [https://www.google.it/books/edition/Historiæ_ecclesiasticæ_Francorum_libri/0VZBAQAAMAAJ?hl=it&gbpv=1&bsq=Miro GoogleBooks] >
**4. ES MGH Auct. ant. 11, Iohannis Abbatis monasterii Biclarensis Chronica, pag. 216 < [https://www.dmgh.de/mgh_auct_ant_11/index.htm#page/216/mode/1up link] >

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]