== Notes for [[Item:Q104410|Q104410]] ==

'''''The Monitor''''', McAllen, Texas; June 24, 2001; page 8E … “'''Sample Lineages: Marcos Alonso de la Garza'''” ... “Marcos Alonzo Garza is the forefather of many that carry the last names of Garza, de la Garza, Falcon and Treviño. What is known about Captain Marcos Alonzo Garza is that he was the son of Marcos Alonzo and Constanza La Garza. He also went by the names Marcos Alonzo Garza y del Arcon, Marcos Alonzo Arza y del Arcon, Marcos Alonzo Arza y del Arcon, Marcos Alonzo Garza del Alcon , and Marcos Alonzo. He was from Lepe, Huelva, Spain.

It is estimated he was born about 1550, came to New Spain serving the military and married in 1585 to Juana de Treviño from a prominent Mexico City military family. His assignments took the family to Durango and Zacatecas where his duties were supervising the mining of silver and gold. His whole family ended up in Nuevo Leon in the time period between 1596 and 1603, after completion of his military career. The family of Marcos Alonzo is included in the list of the 12 original founding families of Monterrey N.L. Mexico, which was founded in 1596.

It is not known where the "del Arcon" or "del Alcon" part of the last name came from. However, this ending had an impact on his son, Blas, for he used as his last name, de la Garza-Falcon. (Alcon is the ancient form of the word Halcon, Falcon) At the time it was common to use wither paternal or maternal last names.

The children of Marcos Alonzo Garza never again used the paternal last name of Alonzo. Instead his sons Francisco and Pedro used the last name of "de la Garza," Blas used the last name of "de la Garza-Falcon," and Diego, Alonzo, and Jose used their maternal last name "Treviño."

As to why the last name Alonzo was totally abandoned by the family is a mystery, but it may have to do with the fact that Alonzo last name of Lepe, Huelva, Spain was associated with the Jews. Hernando Alonzo financed and aided Hernan Cortez in his actions. After the conquest of Mexico City, Hernando Alonzo, a well known Jew in the New World, was becoming too wealthy and powerful, and thus a threat. Hernando Alonzo was burned alive under orders of the Inquisition. While no link has been established between Hernando Alonzo and Marcos Alonzo, the name may have been changed for protection.

Only to add to the speculation is the fact that Marcos took his family to Monterrey where many other families with Jewish roots had settled. The Treviños which Marcos married into were known to be converts from Jews to Christians.

Today many people go by the surname Garza having dropped the "de la" many years ago. There is also the surname Falcon having dropped the "de la Garza," de la Garza and Treviño, and all come from the same common ancestor. For more information on this very topic refer to Tomas Mendirichaga Cueva's book "Origin of the Surname Garza and Treviño in Nuevo Leon". “

'''___________________'''

http://gw5.geneanet.org/sanchiz?lang=en;pz=tomas;nz=sanchez+garza;ocz=0;p=marcos+alonso;n=garza+arcon

children:
* Francisco Garza-Falcón Treviño
* Marcos Alonso Garza Treviño 1588
* Pedro Garza-Falcón Treviño ca 1590-1639
* Blas María Garza-Falcón Treviño ca 1591-1669
* Francisco Garza Treviño 1593
* Diego Treviño Garza 1595
* Alonso Treviño Garza ca 1598-1654
* José Guadalupe Treviño Garza 1599-1646
* Juana Garza Treviño 1607

'''______________________'''

Marcos Alonso DE LA GARZA y ARCON1221 was born in Lepe, Huelva, Spain.

Spouse: Juana de TREVIÑO. Juana de TREVIÑO and Marcos Alonso DE LA GARZA y ARCON16,1322 were married. According to the 1626 Census of the Villa de Cerralvo (Monterrey), at a distance of one arcabuz shot from the ranch of Bernabe de las Casas (who lived 7 leagues from the Villa), lived the brothers Diego de Treviño and Francisco de la Garza (both widowers) and their unmarried brothers Joseph de Treviño, Pedro de la Garza, Marcos y Bernave Gonzalez. Children were: Marcos Alonso DE LA GARZA, Capt. Pedro DE LA GARZA, Capt. Blas DE LA GARZA FALCON, Capt. Francisco DE LA GARZA, Diego de TREVIÑO, Capt. Alonso de TREVIÑO de la Garza, Caudillo Joseph de TREVIÑO (aka Joseph de la Garza).

http://www.raullongoria.net/Genealogy/FamilyTree/b54.html#P984
--------------------
asked for a land grant in May 1610 in Monterrey stated he arrived with Capt.Diego Rodriguez
--------------------
1. Marcos Alonzo Garza Y del Arcon FALCON1 was born 1560 in Lepe, Huelva, Spain. He died 1634.

BIOGRAPHY: Marcos came to New Spain, probably as a soldier in the Spanish government. He went to Durango where his children were born in Mapimi. His two sons Blas and Marcos Alonso married sisters from the Navarro / Gonzales family.

They were decendants of the Sosas and Montemayors, prominent families of early settlers in Mexico

Marcos married (1) Catalina Martinez GUAJARDO.

Marcos also married (2) Juana Quintanilla TREVINO1 on 1610. Juana was born 1566 in Mexico City, Mexico, New Spain.

They had the following children:
* + 2 M i. Blas Maria Trevino De La Garza FALCON was born 1580 and died 21 Feb 1668.
* + 3 M ii. Marcos Alonso Trevino De La Garza FALCON was born 1598 and died 1654.
* 4 M iii. Pedro Trevino De La Garza FALCON1 was born 1600 in Real del
* Mapimi, Nueva Viscaya, Durango, Durango, Mexico, New Spain.
* 5 M iv. Francisco Trevino De La Garza FALCON1.
* 6 F v. Juana Trevino De La Garza FALCON1 was born 1607 in Real del
* Mapimi, Nueva Viscaya, Durango, Durango, Mexico, New Spain.
* 7 M vi. Josef Trevino De La Garza FALCON1 was born 1609 in Real del Mapimi,
* Nueva Viscaya, Durango, Durango, Mexico, New Spain.
* + 8 M vii. Alonso de la Garza Trevino FALCON was born 1600 and died 1660.

http://www.wadefalcon.com/ColonialSpanishFamiliesOfLouisiana/DeLaGarzaFalcon.pdf

Ref: '''''The Conquistadores and Crypto-Jews of Monterrey''''', David T. Raphael (c.2001), pp 205--206 ... From Lepe, Huelva, Spain. Arrived in New Spain and resided in Mexico City where he met his future wife, Juana de Trevino. Because of his Converso origins, he may have preferred someone with a similar background. Made his way to the kingdom of Nuevo Leon where his sons had already settled. Lived in Saltillo where he had a small animal ranch. Submitted a petition for a land grant on 30 May 1610 before Capt Diego Rodriguez, Lt. Gov. for Gov. Diego de Montemayor. Alonso requested four caballerias of land with water supply in Villa Seca and the river, called Los Angeles. Also a plot in the field to be built up with its home and square-section and kitchen garden in the most comfortable area next to Capt. Rodriguez. Also a site for ganado mayor at the Mojarras River with four caballerias of land, and a settlement of indigenous Borrado Indians, This request was granted "in the name of His Majesty without the need of an arbitrator."

--------------------

--------------------
* Reference: [https://www.ancestry.com/family-tree/person/tree/110326636/person/120137628454 Ancestry Genealogy] - [https://www.geni.com/projects/SmartCopy/18783 SmartCopy]: ''Sep 6 2017, 13:03:38 UTC''

--------------------
=== GEDCOM Source ===

@@R1453530179@@ Ancestry Family Trees Online publication - Provo, UT, USA: Ancestry.com. Original data: Family Tree files submitted by Ancestry members.
=== GEDCOM Source ===
Ancestry Family Tree http://trees.ancestry.com/pt/AMTCitationRedir.aspx?tid=159345381&pid=224
--------------------
=== GEDCOM Note ===
Capitn Marcos Alonso de la Garza Falcn "Alonzo", "del Falcn", "Arcon"

Marcos Alonso de la Garza Falcon Trevio

--------------------
=== GEDCOM Note ===
<b>The Monitor, McAllen, Texas; June 24, 2001; page 8E "<i>Sample Lineages: Marcos Alonso de la Garza</i>"</b> ... "Marcos Alonzo Garza is the forefather of many that carry the last names of Garza, de la Garza, Falcon and Treviño. What is known about Captain Marcos Alonzo Garza is that he was the son of Marcos Alonzo and Constanza La Garza. He also went by the names Marcos Alonzo Garza y del Arcon, Marcos Alonzo Arza y del Arcon, Marcos Alonzo Arza y del Arcon, Marcos Alonzo Garza del Alcon, and Marcos Alonzo. He was from Lepe, Huelva, Spain.

It is estimated he was born about 1550, came to New Spain serving the military and married in 1585 to Juana de Treviño from a prominent Mexico City military family. His assignments took the family to Durango and Zacatecas where his duties were supervising the mining of silver and gold. His whole family ended up in Nuevo Leon in the time period between 1596 and 1603, after completion of his military career. The family of Marcos Alonzo is included in the list of the 12 original founding families of Monterrey N.L. Mexico, which was founded in 1596.

It is not known where the "del Arcon" or "del Alcon" part of the last name came from. However, this ending had an impact on his son, Blas, for he used as his last name, de la Garza-Falcon. (Alcon is the ancient form of the word Halcon, Falcon) At the time it was common to use wither paternal or maternal last names.

The children of Marcos Alonzo Garza never again used the paternal last name of Alonzo. Instead his sons Francisco and Pedro used the last name of "de la Garza," Blas used the last name of "de la Garza-Falcon," and Diego, Alonzo, and Jose used their maternal last name "Treviño."

As to why the last name Alonzo was totally abandoned by the family is a mystery, but it may have to do with the fact that Alonzo last name of Lepe, Huelva, Spain was associated with the Jews. Hernando Alonzo financed and aided Hernan Cortez in his actions. After the conquest of Mexico City, Hernando Alonzo, a well known Jew in the New World, was becoming too wealthy and powerful, and thus a threat. Hernando Alonzo was burned alive under orders of the Inquisition. While no link has been established between Hernando Alonzo and Marcos Alonzo, the name may have been changed for protection.

Only to add to the speculation is the fact that Marcos took his family to Monterrey where many other families with Jewish roots had settled. The Treviños which Marcos married into were known to be converts from Jews to Christians.

Today many people go by the surname Garza having dropped the "de la" many years ago. There is also the surname Falcon having dropped the "de la Garza," de la Garza and Treviño, and all come from the same common ancestor. For more information on this very topic refer to Tomas Mendirichaga Cueva's book "Origin of the Surname Garza and Treviño in Nuevo Leon". "

<b>Ref: The Conquistadores and Crypto-Jews of Monterrey</b>, David T. Raphael (c.2001), pp 205--206 ... From Lepe, Huelva, Spain. Arrived in New Spain and resided in Mexico City where he met his future wife, Juana de Trevino. Because of his Converso origins, he may have preferred someone with a similar background. Made his way to the kingdom of Nuevo Leon where his sons had already settled. Lived in Saltillo where he had a small animal ranch. Submitted a petition for a land grant on 30 May 1610 before Capt Diego Rodriguez, Lt. Gov. for Gov. Diego de Montemayor. Alonso requested four caballerias of land with water supply in Villa Seca and the river, called Los Angeles. Also a plot in the field to be built up with its home and square-section and kitchen garden in the most comfortable area next to Capt. Rodriguez. Also a site for ganado mayor at the Mojarras River with four caballerias of land, and a settlement of indigenous Borrado Indians, This request was granted "in the name of His Majesty without the need of an arbitrator."

--------------------
Birth: 1566 - Lepe, Andalucía, Corona de Castilla, España Death: 1634 - Saltillo, Nueva Extremadura, Reino de Nueva España Parents: Marcos Alonso De Arcon (Nacida De Aracon), Costanza Alonso De Arcon (Nacida De Aracon) (nacida De La Garza)

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000000307810776

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]