== Notes for [[Item:Q110975|Q110975]] ==

'''Julius Constantius''' (died September 337) was a politician of the Roman Empire and a member of the Constantinian dynasty, being a son of emperor Constantius Chlorus and his second wife Flavia Maximiana Theodora, a younger half-brother of emperor Constantine I and the father of emperor Julian.

===Biography===

Julius Constantius was born after 289, the son of Constantius Chlorus and his wife Theodora, adoptive daughter of emperor Maximian. He had two brothers, Dalmatius and Hannibalianus, and three sisters, Constantia, Anastasia and Eutropia. Emperor Constantine I was his half-brother, as he was the son of Constantius and Helena. Despite this illustrious kinship Julius Constantius was never himself emperor or co-emperor; Constantine, however, gave him the title of Patricius.

Julius Constantius was married twice. With his first wife, Galla, sister of the later consuls Vulcacius Rufinus and Neratius Cerealis, he had two sons and a daughter. His eldest son, whose name is not recorded, was murdered in 337 together with his father. His second son Constantius Gallus, was appointed Caesar by his cousin Constantius II. His daughter was the first wife of Constantius II. It has been proposed that Galla and Julius had another daughter, born between 324 and 331 and married to Justus, mother of Justina, whose daughter, wife of emperor Theodosius I, was called Galla.

After the death of his first wife, Julius Constantius married a Greek woman Basilina, the daughter of the governor of Egypt Julius Julianus. Basilina gave him another son, the future emperor Julian the Apostate, but died before her husband, in 332/333. Nothing is known about other marriages of Julius Constantius, but since the sources about him are rather poor, other marriages are of course not excluded. Allegedly at the instigation of his stepmother Helena, Julius Constantius did not live initially at the court of his half brother, but together with Dalmatius and Hannibalianus in Tolosa, in Etruria, the birthplace of his son Gallus, and in Corinth. Finally, he was called in Constantinople, and was able to build a good relationship with Constantine.

Constantine favoured his half brother appointing him patricius and Consul for the year 335, together with Gaius Caeionius Rufius Albinus.

However, in 337, after the death of Constantine, several male members of the Constantinian dynasty were killed, among them Constantius (whose property was confiscated) and his eldest son; his two younger sons however survived, because in 337 they were still children, and later were elevated to the rank of co-emperor and the emperor.

===Sources===

* English Wikipedia: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Julius_Constantius Julius Constantius]

* ancestry.com: [http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I66363 Julius of Rome]

* american-pictures.com: [http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per02555.htm#0 Julius Constantinus Prince of the West]

Murdered like his siblings.

Downloaded from the Bruce Cooley Pusch RootsWeb site. Please remove the symbols I've inserted in many of the names like (L),(P) and(BCP). Also please delete the (NOTES)I've written in some entries in the first person, the notes that refer just to me.

"THE PATRICIAN"; MURDERED

Julius Constantius
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Flavius Julius Constantius (d. September, 337) was a son of Western Roman Emperor Constantius Chlorus and his second wife Flavia Maximiana Theodora. He was a younger half-brother of Roman Emperor Constantine I.

His father died on July 25, 306 when Julius Constantius was either a child or an adolescent. He is considered to have spent much of the 300s, 310s and 320s under virtual house arrest in Tolosa , Gallia Narbonensis, Gaul, Western Roman Empire under orders of his brother.

He first married Galla, sister of both Vulcacius Rufus and Neratius Cerealis. They had three known children.:

* Constantius Gallus (325/326 - 354).
* A son. Murdered in 337.
* A daughter. First Empress consort of his nephew Constantius II.

He married for a second time to Basilina, daughter of Caeionius Iulianus Camenius. They only had one known son:

* Flavius Claudius Iulianus (331/332 - 363).

His half-brother favored Julius Constantius by naming him a patrician and by appointing him consul in 335. When Constantine died on May 22, 337, Julius Constantius was in position to claim the throne for himself. He was murdered within months of Constantine's death along with most males of their family.

Only five males survived the series of assassinations. His nephews and new Roman Emperors Constantine II, Constantius II and Constans along with his two own young sons. Constantius II is suspected to have ordered the assassination of his uncle.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]