== Notes for [[Item:Q88782|Q88782]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adad-nirari_II

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kings_of_Assyria

--------------------
Adad-nirari IIFrom Wikipedia, the free encyclopediaJump to: navigation, search Adad-nirari II is generally considered to be the first King of Assyria in the Neo-Assyrian period. He firmly subjugated the areas previously under only nominal Assyrian vassalage, conquering and deporting troublesome Aramean, Neo-Hittite and Hurrian populations in the north to far-off places. Adad-nirari II then twice attacked and defeated Shamash-mudammiq of Babylonia, annexing a large area of land north of the Diyala River and the towns of Hīt and Zanqu in mid Mesopotamia. He made further gains over Babylonia under Nabu-shuma-ukin I later in his reign. He also campaigned to the west, subjugating the Aramean cities of Kadmuh and Nisibin. Along with vast amounts of treasure collected, he also secured the Kabur river region.[1]

[edit] BiographyAdad-nirari II's father was Ashur-dan II, whom he succeeded.

Adad-nirari II's son was named Tukulti-Ninurta II and Tukulti continued to wage war against Assyrian enemies.[1]

He reigned from 911[2] to 891 BC.

Because of the existence of full eponym lists from his reign down to the middle of the reign of Ashurbanipal in the 7th century BC, year one of his reign in 911 BC is perhaps the first event in ancient Near Eastern history which can be dated to an exact year, although the Assyrian King List is generally considered to be quite accurate for several centuries before Adad-nirari's reign, and scholars generally agree on a single set of dates back to Ashur-resh-ishi I in the late 12th century BC.

[edit] References1.^ a b Healy, Mark (1991). The Ancient Assyrians. New York: Osprey. p. 6. 2.^ Bertman, Stephen (2005). Handbook to Life in Ancient Mesopotamia. New York: Oxford UP. p. 74. Preceded by Ashur-dan II King of Assyria 911–891 BC Succeeded by Tukulti-Ninurta II Persondata Name Adad-Nirari Ii Alternative names Short description Assyrian king Date of birth Place of birth Date of death Place of death
This biography of a member of a Middle Eastern royal house is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v ·t ·e
This Assyrian-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v ·t ·e Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Adad-nirari_II&oldid=518847634" View page ratingsRate this page Rate this page Page ratings What's this?Current average ratings. Trustworthy

Objective

Complete

Well-written

I am highly knowledgeable about this topic (optional) I have a relevant college/university degreeIt is part of my professionIt is a deep personal passionThe source of my knowledge is not listed here I would like to help improve Wikipedia, send me an e-mail (optional) We will send you a confirmation e-mail. We will not share your e-mail address with outside parties as per our feedback privacy statement.Submit ratings

Saved successfullyYour ratings have not been submitted yetYour ratings have expiredPlease reevaluate this page and submit new ratings. An error has occurred. Please try again later. Thanks! Your ratings have been saved.Do you want to create an account?An account will help you track your edits, get involved in discussions, and be a part of the community.Create an accountorLog inMaybe later Thanks! Your ratings have been saved.Did you know that you can edit this page?Edit this pageMaybe later Categories: 891 BC deathsAssyrian kingsMiddle Eastern royalty stubsAssyrian stubsHidden categories: Year of birth unknownNavigation menuPersonal tools Create accountLog inNamespaces ArticleTalkVariantsViews ReadEditView historyActions Search
Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia InteractionHelp About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact Wikipedia ToolboxWhat links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageRate this page Print/exportCreate a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version LanguagesCatalà Česky Deutsch Español Euskara Français 한국어 Italiano ქართული Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk (bokmål)‎ Polski Português Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska 中文 This page was last modified on 2 February 2013 at 12:06.

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. See Terms of Use for details. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

Contact us http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adad-nirari_II

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Assyria 911-889 BCE

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per02165.htm#0

Adad-nirari II
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.

Adad-nirari II is generally considered to be the first King of Assyria in the Neo-Assyrian period. He reigned from 912 to 891 BC. Because of the existence of full eponym lists from his reign down to the middle of the reign of Ashurbanipal in the 7th century BC, year one of his reign in 911 BC is perhaps the first event in ancient Near Eastern history which can be dated to an exact year, although the Assyrian King List is generally considered to be quite accurate for several centuries before Adad-nirari's reign, and scholars generally agree on a single set of dates back to Ashur-resh-ishi I in the late 12th century BC.

Adad-nirari succeeded his father, Ashur-dan II, and was succeeded by his son, Tukulti-Ninurta II.

Preceded by:
Ashur-dan II King of Assyria
912–891 BC Succeeded by:
Tukulti-Ninurta II

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]