== Notes for [[Item:Q85131|Q85131]] ==

From Wikipedia:

'''[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Licinius_Crassus_Frugi Marcus Licinius Crassus Frugi]''' was a Roman nobleman of consular rank that lived during the Roman Empire. Frugi’s mother was an unnamed Roman woman, while his father was consul and governor [http://www.geni.com/people/Marcus-Licinius-Crassus-Frugi-I/6000000003828385238 Marcus Licinius Crassus]. Frugi’s adoptive paternal grandfather was consul and general [http://www.geni.com/people/Marcus-Licinius-Crassus/6000000012763002427 Marcus Licinius Crassus] (consul 30 BC). Crassus was the grandson of triumvir Marcus Licinius Crassus and the last known direct descendant of his grandfather.

Frugi served as a praetor and then later as a consul along with Lucius Calpurnius Piso in 27, under the reign of Roman Emperor Tiberius. In the older historical sources, they record his consulship as in the year 29. Sometime after 44, he served as Roman Governor of Mauretania.

During the reign of Roman Emperor Claudius, Frugi had appeared to come into favor with the emperor. Claudius had successfully conquered Britain and had added Britain as a province to the Roman Empire. In 43, Claudius had held a triumph parade in Rome, in celebrating his victory of Britain. Frugi had attended Claudius’ triumph parade. Claudius on this occasion had except Frugi from wearing a purple-bordered toga and earned the same honor on a previous occasion. Frugi came dressed to the parade in a palm-embroidered tunic and rode a caparisoned charger. Little else is known on Frugi.

Frugi had married a noblewoman called Scribonia. She was of the highest birth and had descended from ancient, distinguished and politically influential blood. Scribonia was a direct descendant of Pompeia, the daughter of triumvir Pompey from his third marriage to Mucia Tertia.

Scribonia bore Frugi four sons and they were:

# Marcus Licinius Crassus Frugi II - Frugi served as consul in 64 under Roman Emperor Nero. Frugi was later killed by Nero sometime before 68.
# Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus - who married Roman princess Claudia Antonia in 43, the daughter and only child of Roman Emperor Claudius from his second marriage to Aelia Paetina. Antonia married him as her first husband and they had no children. Magnus was murdered in 47.
# Marcus Licinius Crassus Scribonianus - sometime between 68 and 69, the general Marcus Antonius Primus, had offered Scribonianus the Roman Empire and position of Roman Emperor, however Scribonianus refused to accept this.
# Lucius Calpurnius Piso Frugi Licinianus or Lucius Calpurnius Piso Licinianus (38-69). Licinianus was adopted by the brief Roman Emperor Galba, who reigned between 68-69. Licinianus became Galba’s son and heir, who was murdered on the orders of Otho, when trying to obtain the Roman throne. Licinianus married a Roman woman called Verania Germina, who came from a family of consular rank.

In the spring of 47, Frugi, his wife and his second son Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus were executed on the orders of Roman Empress Valeria Messalina. After Frugi, his wife and his son had died, the three were placed in the tomb of Licinii Calpurnii that is located on the Via Salaria. Also placed in the tomb was their first son.

Frugi and Scribonia from their first son’s marriage had two grandsons Calpurnius Piso Crassus Frugi Licinianus who was consul in 87 and suffect consul in 88 Lucius Scribonius Libo Rupilius Frugi Bonus. Calpurnius Piso Crassus Frugi Licinianus and his wife Agedia Quintina had conspired against the Roman Emperor Nerva and the couple was banished by Nerva to Taranto. Calpurnius Piso tried for a second time to escape and was banished by the Roman Emperor Trajan to a solitary island and on his third attempt to escape he died. Calpurnius Piso was also placed in the tomb of Licinii Calpurnii. Lucius Scribonius Libo Rupilius Frugi Bonus was an ancestor to Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius.

===Sources===

* English Wikipedia: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Licinius_Crassus_Frugi Marcus Licinius Crassus Frugi]

[[Category:Wikipedia overwrite]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]