== Notes for [[Item:Q112361|Q112361]] ==

Not the son of https://www.geni.com/people/Rodrigo-Moniz/6000000001864373690 & https://www.geni.com/people/Justa-Gondemares/5153035963070106413

--------------

-http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/Galicia.htm#MunioRodriguezdied1074
''ML parents: RODRIGO Romániz, son of ROMÁN & ELVIRA Rodríguez ''

3. ''' MUNIO Rodríguez ''' (-[1074/75]). Conde [1030/33]. “Pelagius” donated property to Sobrado, with the consent of “comiti Munio Roderici et comitisse domna Eximena”, by charter dated 13 Feb 1033[839]. Ildonza, Aragonta and Munio “filiis comitis Roderico Romaniz et eius coniugia comitissa Geluira Ruderiquiz” donated property by charter dated 1034 which names “avia nostra...comitissa domna Odrocia”[840]. He rebelled against Fernando I King of Castile, as shown by the document dated 19 Aug 1061 under which King Fernando donated property "in Compostella…[qui] fuit…de Odrozia comitissa…cum filia sua Gyloira et…nepus suum comitem Monninum Ruderici", confiscated after their rebellion, to Celanova[841]. Munio Rodríguez granted property to his wife Ilduara Velásquez by charter dated 1074[842].

'''m''' firstly (before 1033) JIMENA Ordóñez, daughter of ORDOÑO Vermúdez de León & his wife Fronilde Peláez (-after 18 Sep 1042). ... ... ...

'''m''' secondly ILDUARA Velásquez, daughter of VELASCO --- & his wife ---. Munio Rodríguez granted property to his wife Ilduara Velásquez by charter dated 1074[847].


Munio & his first wife had [four] children:
* a) RODRIGO Muñoz (-killed in battle Zalaca [Sagrajas] 23 Oct 1086). m --. The name of Rodrigo's wife is not known.
* b) SUERO Muñoz (-after 1094) m SANCHA Velaz, daughter of conde VELA Ovéquiz & his wife Ildonza Muñoz .
* c) MUNIO Muñoz (-after 20 Oct 1086).
* d) [FERNANDO Muñoz (-1103 or after).

Munio & his second wife had one child:

* e) ELVIRA Muñoz . Torres names Elvira Muñoz as daughter of Munio Rodríguez and his second wife and states that she married Pelayo Gómez[866]. m conde PELAYO Gómez de Carrión, son of GÓMEZ Díaz Conde de Saldaña & his wife Teresa Peláez (-[1101]).

-----------

This is for https://www.geni.com/people/Munio-Rodr%C3%ADguez-conde-de-Bierzo/6000000011812551151?through=6000000001864373690 (?)

''' Munio Rodriguez de Bierzo''' foi conde de Bierzo e Senhor de Aldara, Deza e Gusmão.

Foi filho de Rodrigo Moniz (Nunez) Conde de Castilla e de Justa (Gontrade) Gondemares, filha de Gondemar Piniolis, conde das Astúrias e de uma senhora cujo nome a história não regista. Casou com Ximena Ordoñez (1000 -?) de quem teve:

# Rodrigo Moniz de Gusmão (1020 -?) casou com Urraca Diez,
# Munio Moniz de Bierzo (1030 – 1097), conde de Bierzo casou por duas vezes, a primeira com Muniadona Moniz e a segunda com Vasquida, [NO]
#.Arias Nunes

_____________________________________________________________

D. '''Nuño Rodriguez''', hijo primogénito de D. Rodrigo Nuñez, vivió en tiempo del Rey D. Alonso V y en los sucesivos hasta el reinado de D. Fernando primero, llamado el Magno, y este es á quien la Historia de Asturias llama Munion Rodriguez de Cangas, y dice que era natural de esta Villa en Asturias, teniendo sin duda allí muchos bienes, porque hay repetidas memorias de él en escrituras de aquel tiempo, hasta los años de 1040: algunos pretenden dar á este Munion Rodriguez el apellido de Guzman, por haber vivido en el Castillo de este nombre; pero aunque sea cierto que ya D. Munio ó Nuño. Rodiguez poseia este Castillo, que desde su abuelo Gundemaro tenia el nombre de Guzman, no lo es que los de esta familia usasen de este apellido hasta algunos años despues, como repara muy bien D. José de Pellicer. El matrimonio de este Caballero, es sin disputa entre los Historiadores haberle celebrado con doña Jimena Ordoñez, hija del Infante D. Ordoño, y de doña Fronilda: la general dice, que doña Jimena fué hija de D. Bermudo II y de la Infanta doña Fronilda, á quien llama doña Frovilla Pelaez, cuando otros aseguran haber sido doña limena, Nieta de D. Bermudo II. Unas memorias del Convento de Cornelia, que copia Sota, dicen: El Rey D. Bermudo II tuvo dos amigas hermanas, de la una tuvo al Infante D. Ordoño, y de la otra á la Infanta doña Elvira: D. Ordoño casó con la Infanta doña Fronilda, y tuvo estos hijos, D. Alonso, D. Pelayo, D. Sancho, y doña Jimena Ordoñez: esta caso con el Conde Munio Rodriguez : este Conde Munio Rodriguez lo fué de Astorga, y tambien su hijo.

''in: Diccionario histórico, genealógico y heráldico de las familias ilustres de la monarquía española, tomo VII, pp. 211-212 <http://books.google.com.br/books?pg=PA211&lpg=PA209&dq=Diccionario+histo%CC%81rico,+genealo%CC%81gico+y+hera%CC%81ldico+de+las+familias+ilustres+de+la+monarqui%CC%81a+espan%CC%83ola++gontroda+gundemariz&sig=9lk8WdMonOGGLb3QpGQNJ8MYzI8&ei=8dPCTeitKsWftgeU_ZW9BQ&ct=result&id=dt4VAAAAYAAJ&ots=STajQJnRBP#v=onepage&q&f=false>''

Primero que fe llamó Guzman (porque tenia fu reficencia en el caftillo y lugar de efte nombre en el campo de Roa) fue el Conde Don Nuño Rodriguez de Amaya y Guzman, y que hafta efte Cavallero havian ufado fus progenitores el apellido de Amaya, por fer Condes de Amaya en Caftilla la Vieja, riveras del Rio Pifuerga (cuya linea deduce defde el Conde Don Gonzalo Poblador de Lara año de 762, hermano de Don Diego Porcelós Poblador de Burgos, ambos defcendientes del Rey Recadero). Historia de la Muy Ilustre Casa de Sousa Capitulo XI. Del Conde Don Mendo Gonzalez de Sousa, Undecimo progenitor de efta Cafa. Pág 143

El Conde don Muñon Rodriguez es el principio y tronco del linage de Muñoz dando fu nombre proprio por apellido a fus decendientes. Efte fue cafado con doña Ximena Ordoñez hija del Infante dõ Ordoño y de la Infanta doña Fronilda hija de Pelayo. Y el Infante don Ordoõ fue hijo no legitimo de el Rey don Bermudo el Segundo de Leon, cuyo reynado fue en el año de el Señor de novecientos y ochenta y cinco. Tuvo el Conde don Muñon en efta Señora al Conde dõ Rodrigo Muñoz. NOBLEZA DEL ANDALVZIA Por Gonçalo Argote de Molina, Sevilla 1588. De el Linaje de Domingo Muñoz, y de la antiguedad de fu apellido. Cap. XCVI. Pág. 98
--------------------
Jimena was the daughter of Count Munio Muñiz and his wife Velasquita. Munio Muñiz was the son of Count Munio Rodríguez and Jimena Ordóñez, who was the daughter of the infant Ordoño, illegitimate son of Bermudo II of Leon.

<Hr>

TRUNK BRANCH OF THE GUZMANES

I Count Nuño Rodríguez lived in the days of Alfonso V until the reign of Fernando I, and married Doña Jimena Ordóñez. He followed II Rodrigo Núñez, who married Doña Urraca and died in 1086, leaving the kingdom to his son III Nuño Ruiz, who died in 1130 and was married to Doña Elvira de Manzaneda and had IV Ruiz Núñez, who married Godo Guzmán and They had V Alvar Ruiz de Guzmán, who married Doña Urraca de Castro

===References
*https://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Munio_Rodrigues_(morto_em_1074)
* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rodrigo_Muñoz_(Galician_count)
** His name is sometimes represented in older sources as Rodrigo Núñez. Though sharing a common origin, the names Nuño and Munio were distinct at this time. However, scribes and historians in later centuries came to use them interchangeably, such that the distinction was lost

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]