== Notes for [[Item:Q112573|Q112573]] ==

http://genealogics.org/getperson.php?personID=I00106135&tree=LEO

Ava de Ribagorza filha de Raimundo II de Ribagorza, conde de Ribagorza e de Gersenda de Fézensac.

--------------------

Aba Raimúndez de Ribagorza1

b. circa 945, d. after 995

Father Ramón II, conde Ribagorza y Pallars2,3 b. circa 925, d. circa 970

Mother Gersinde de Fézenzac4 b. circa 925

Charts Descendants of Charlemage

Aba Raimúndez de Ribagorza was born circa 945. She was the daughter of Ramón II, conde Ribagorza y Pallars and Gersinde de Fézenzac.2,3,4 Aba Raimúndez de Ribagorza married García I "el de las Manos Blancas", conde de Castilla, son of Fernán, conde de Castilla and Sancha Sánchez de Pamplona, between 958 and 961.5,6,1 Aba Raimúndez de Ribagorza died after 995.1 Aba Raimúndez de Ribagorza was buried in St. Peter's, Cardeña, Burgos Province, Castile.1

Family

García I "el de las Manos Blancas", conde de Castilla b. 938, d. between 18 April 995 and 19 July 995

Children

Sancho I "el de los Buenos Fueros", conde de Castilla+ b. c 965, d. 5 Feb 10175,7

Elvira Garcés, regente de León+ b. c 970, d. a 1 Mar 10288

Gonzalo Garcés de Castilla+ b. c 9703

Citations

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 286-35.

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 286-36.

[S989] Todd A. Farmerie (e-mail address), Re: ancestry of Munio Gonzales in "Re: ancestry of Munio Gonzales," newsgroup message 1998/02/20.

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 289-36.

[S187] Royal Genealogy Database, online http://www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/public/genealogy/

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 285-35.

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 285-34.

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 276-34.

Offspring

In 960, Garcia married Ava/Alba de Ribagorza, daughter of Ramón II de Ribagorza. They had seven children:

Mayor García, married Raymond III de Pallhars-Jussà, claimed Ribagorza

Sancho García, conde de Castilla

Urraca García

Gonzalo García (died 979)

Elvira García (died 1017), married in 991 Bermudo II of León

Toda García, married Eduardo of Liebana

Oneca García, married in 995 Almanzar, chamberlain of Cordoba

--------------------
Leo: Europäische Stammtafeln, J.A. Stargardt Verlag, Marburg, Schwennicke, Detlev (Ed.), Reference: II 69 .

Leo: Actas do 17 Congresso Internacional de Ciéncias Genealógica e Heráldica, Inst. Port. de Heráldica, Lisboa, 1986.

55448869. Prinsesse Ana (Ona, Aba; Sancha) N.NSDTR i Frankrike (7313) was a Prinsesse in Frankrike. (7314) Hun hadde med Garcia, foruten Sancho, også Urraca, den eldste datter, for hvem hun og Garcia steftet klostret Covarrubias, samt Velasquita og Elvira. De to sistnevnte ble etterhverandre dronninger av Leon som Bermudo II's gemalinner.

SOURCE NOTES:
www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal11091

"DE RIBAGORZA"

Ana (Aba, Onia, Sancha) var en frankisk prinsesse.
Ana og Garcia hadde foruten Sancho, døtrene Urraca, Velasquita og Elvira. For den
eldste datteren, Urraca, stiftet de klosteret Covarrubias. De øvrige døtrene ble begge, etter
hverandre, dronninger av Leon som Bermudo II's gemaliner.

Name Suffix:<NSFX> Of Ribagorza

Name Suffix:<NSFX> Of Ribagorza

-- MERGED NOTE ------------

Wikidata: https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q8263136 | Geni: https://www.geni.com/people/6000000012996575824

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]