== Notes for [[Item:Q86246|Q86246]] ==

https://www.ancient.eu/Brundisium/
----

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I46325

ID: I46325
ID: I46325
Name: Lucius Cinna<br/ Given Name: Lucius
Surname: Cinna
Nickname: Cornelius
Sex: M

_UID: 48F915F212A7B24696ED35D04184BE7478EF
Change Date: 3 Oct 2005
Death: deceased
Marriage 1 Pompeia Minor Pompeius
Childen Cornelia Cinna

--------------------
Anmärkning:

Anteckningar från http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Cornelius_Cinna_ ( suffect_consul )

Lucius Cornelius Cinna ( suffect konsul )

Från Wikipedia, den fria encyklopedin

Lucius Cornelius Cinna ( blomstrade 1: a århundradet f.Kr. ) var son till konsul Lucius Cornelius Cinna , som var en anhängare av politiker Gaius Marius . Hans syster , Cornelia Cinna mindre , var den första hustru till diktatorn Julius Caesar och han var morbror till sin dotter Julia Caesaris . Cinna var medlem av gens Cornelia , som var patriciska status.

Tidig karriär

I 78 f.Kr. , tillsammans Cinna sig med Marcus Aemilius Lepidus i ett försök att störta den romerska konstitution diktatorn Sulla . Innan han lämnade Rom , sökte han ut stöd av Julius Caesar för upproret som uteblev . Efter nederlag och död Lepidus på Sardinien , gick Cinna i exil , medföljande Marcus Perperna att gå allmän Quintus Sertorius i Spanien. Caesar kunde erinra Cinna från exilen tillbaka till Rom och använde honom i den romerska senaten mot senaten oppositionen. På grund av sin far? associering Marius , under Sulla ? s konstitutionella reformer han inte kunde främja sin karriär. Men när Caesar blev diktator , var Cinna snart befordrades till praetorship .

Sammansvärjning mot Caesar

Även Cinna starkt ogillade Caesar? s auktoritära sätt att styra , han blir inte en aktiv deltagare i konspirationen att mörda Caesar. Caesar mördades mars 44 f.Kr. .

Samma dag som Caesars begravning , var befolkningen i en sådan ilska på Cinna att vissa misstag mördade tribun för plebejerna Helvius Cinna , trodde att det var han. När mordet på tribunen genomfördes, var Cinna promenad i Caesar? s liktåg . Under den politiska kaos efter dessa händelser Cinna inte utnyttja sin ställning att hävda en romersk provins att styra. Cicero berömmer honom för denna gärning av själv återhållsamhet. I 32 f.Kr. Cinna fungerat som en suffect konsul.

Privatliv

Efter 47 f.Kr. gifte Cinna Pompeia Magna , dotter till triumvir Pompejus och hans tredje hustru Mucia Tertia . Cinna gift Pompeia som hennes andre make . Pompeia gift Cinna som hans första fru. Pompeia hade blivit änka , hennes man Faustus Cornelius Sulla hade dött i strid. Cinna blev styvfar till Pompeia ? son från sitt första äktenskap . Pompeia födde Cinna två barn som var: en son Gnaeus Cornelius Cinna Magnus och en dotter Cornelia Pompeia Magna . Hans fru dog innan 35 f.Kr. och utöver detta inte mer är känt om Cinna .

Källor

Microsoft Encarta Encyclopedia 2002

http://www.ancientlibrary.com/smith-bio/0763.html

http://www.ancientlibrary.com/smith-bio/0764.html

http://www.ancientlibrary.com/smith-bio/2806.html
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Cornelius_Cinna_(suffect_consul)

http://hu.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Cornelius_Cinna_(ifjabb)

Lucius Cornelius Cinna (? – Kr. e. 32 után) / (? – after 32 BC)
--------------------
'''
=Lucius Cornelius Cinna=
'''

Lucius Cornelius Cinna (flourished 1st century BC) was the son of the consul Lucius Cornelius Cinna, who was a supporter of politician Gaius Marius. His sister, Cornelia Cinna minor, was the first wife of dictator Julius Caesar and he was the maternal uncle of their daughter Julia Caesaris. Cinna was a member of the gens Cornelia, who were of patrician status.

'''Early career'''

In 78 BC, Cinna allied himself with Marcus Aemilius Lepidus in attempting to overthrow the Roman constitution of dictator Lucius Cornelius Sulla. Before he left Rome, he sought out the support of Julius Caesar for the rebellion which was not forthcoming. After the defeat and death of Lepidus in Sardinia, Cinna went into exile, accompanying Marcus Perperna Vento to join general Quintus Sertorius in Spain. Caesar was able to recall Cinna from exile back to Rome and used him in the Roman Senate against senatorial opposition. Due to his father’s association with Marius, under Sulla’s constitutional reforms he was unable to promote his career. However, when Caesar became dictator, Cinna was soon promoted to the praetorship.

'''Conspiracy against Caesar'''

Although Cinna strongly disapproved of Caesar’s authoritarian way of governing, he did not become an active participant in the conspiracy to murder Caesar that led to the dictator's assassination in March 44 BC.

On the day of Caesar's funeral, the populace were in such rage at Cinna that some accidentally murdered tribune of the plebs Helvius Cinna, thinking it was he. When the murder of the tribune took place, Cinna was walking in Caesar’s funeral procession. During the political chaos after these events Cinna did not take advantage of his position to claim a Roman province to govern. Cicero praises him for this act of self-restraint. In 32 BC Cinna served as a suffect consul.

'''Personal life'''

After 47 BC, Cinna married Pompeia Magna, the daughter of the fallen triumvir Pompey and from his third wife Mucia Tertia. Cinna married Pompeia as her second husband. Pompeia married Cinna as his first wife. Pompeia had become a widow; her husband Faustus Cornelius Sulla had died in battle. Cinna became a stepfather to Pompeia’s son from her first marriage. Pompeia bore Cinna two children who were: a son Gnaeus Cornelius Cinna Magnus and a daughter Cornelia Pompeia Magna. His wife died before 35 BC and beyond this no more is known on Cinna.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Cornelius_Cinna_(suffect_consul)

Lucius Cornelius Cinna (suffect consul 32 BC)
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Lucius Cornelius Cinna (flourished 1st century BC) was the son of an elder Lucius Cornelius Cinna, who was a supporter of politician Gaius Marius and his mother is an unnamed Roman woman. His sister was Cornelia Cinna minor, was the first wife of dictator Gaius Julius Caesar and was the maternal uncle of their daughter Julia Caesaris. Cinna was a member of the Cornelius (gens), who were of patrician status.

Cinna in 78 BC, allied himself with Marcus Aemilius Lepidus in overthrowing the Roman constitution of dictator Lucius Cornelius Sulla. After the defeat and death of Lepidus in Sardinia, Cinna accompanied Marcus Perperna to join general Quintus Sertorius in Spain. Caesar used Cinna, against various Roman Senators in the Roman Senate and was able to recall Cinna from exile back to Rome.

Due to his father’s association with Marius and Sulla’s constitutions reforms, he was unable to promote his career, until Caesar’s rise. When Caesar became dictator, Cinna promoted to the praetorship. Although Cinna, strongly disapproved of Caesar’s way of governing, he wouldn’t associate himself with the senators who wanted Caesar killed.

After Caesar was assassinated in March 44 BC, the senators were in such rage of Cinna, they accidentally murdered tribune of the plebs Helvius Cinna, thinking it was he. When the murder of the tribune took place, Cinna was walking in Caesar’s funeral procession. Cinna during the political chaos didn’t promote his career, even not claiming a Roman province, for him to govern. Cicero praises him for this act. Cinna in 32 BC, served as a suffect consul.

After 47 BC, Cinna married Pompeia Magna, the daughter of triumvir Pompey and from his third wife Mucia Tertia. Cinna married Pompeia has her second husband. Pompeia married Cinna as his first wife. Pompeia had become a widow, who her husband Faustus Cornelius Sulla had died in battle. Cinna became a stepfather to Pompeia’s children from her first marriage. Pompeia bore Cinna two children who were: a son Gnaeus Cornelius Cinna Magnus and a daughter Cornelia Pompeia Magna. His wife died before 35 BC and beyond this no more is known on Cinna.


[edit] Sources
Microsoft Encarta Encyclopaedia 2002
http://www.ancientlibrary.com/smith-bio/0763.html
http://www.ancientlibrary.com/smith-bio/0764.html
http://www.ancientlibrary.com/smith-bio/2806.html

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]