== Notes for [[Item:Q90709|Q90709]] ==

'''Gaius Vipstanus Messalla Gallus''' (c. 10 BC - aft. 53 AD) was a Consul Suffectus in 48.

He was the son of Lucius Vipstanus Gallus and wife Valeria, and the brother of Lucius Vipstanus Poplicola, whom he succeeded in consulship as a suffect. In 52 or 53 he became a legatus Augusti pro praetore in Pannonia.

He married an unknown woman, born c. 15 AD, and had a son, Lucius Vipstanus Messalla. His wife later married Marcus Aquilius Regulus, by whom she had a son named Lucius Aquilius Regulus.

===Sources===

English Wikipedia: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaius_Vipstanus_Messalla_Gallus Gaius Vipstanus Messalla Gallus]
--------------------
'''
=Gaius Vipstanus Messalla Gallus=
'''

(Gaius) Vipstanus Messalla Gallus (c. 10 BC – aft. 60 AD) was a Roman politician who was Consul Suffectus in AD 48.

It is assumed that Messalla Gallus was the son of Lucius Vipstanus Gallus and a Valeria Messalla. It is postulated that he was the brother of Lucius Vipstanus Poplicola, whom he succeeded in the consulship as a suffect consul in AD 48.

In 52 or 53 he became a legatus Augusti pro praetore in Pannonia. Then in 59 or 60, Messalla Gallus was appointed Proconsular governor of Asia.

It is believed that Messalla Gallus had a son, Lucius Vipstanus Messalla. Gallus' wife had earlier been married to Marcus Aquilius Regulus, by whom she had a son named Lucius Aquilius Regulus.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaius_Vipstanus_Messalla_Gallus

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]