== Notes for [[Item:Q100010|Q100010]] ==

Some sources call him ''Joseph of Cairo'', others call him ''Joseph of Rome'' this profile is for '''''Joseph of Rome''''', ''Joseph of Cairo'' is found elsewhere in the tree.

In 1040 he fled to Granada, an independent sultanate in what is now Spain. He took refuge there with Rabbi Yosef ha-Naggid until the latter's murder in 1066. Yosef then traveled north in Christian Spain, into France and Italy, and finally to the Middle East, where he settled at Fustat (Cairo)...then the entire family disappears from records of the Cairo Geniza. This usually happens when there are conversions to Islam or Christianity - and with the entire family disappearing from the Geniza documents we can assume that some converted to Christianity and some converted to Islam...but none were left as members of Rabbinic Jewish Community (at least one is known to adopt Qaraite traditions).

Yoseph was assassinated in a pogrom in Granada (1062) where he served as a Grand Vizier like his father before him
R. Yoseph I descends from King David <biblical.html> in one of two possible ways. According to The ESKELES Genealogy <esk.html> by Zeev ESHKOLOT <esk1a.html> he was the son of Rav Khai (Hai) Gaon <kings.html> (b. 939, d. 1038 CE). See p. 320 and 1130 of vol. 7 of Encyclopedia Judaica <http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0685362531/loebfamilytree>. (See Aryeh LIFSCHEUTZ, Avoth Atarah le-Banim, Warsaw (1927) p. 163 for claim of descent from R. Hai.)
However, in Hai's eulogy, Samuel Ha-Nagid said that Hai left no child. (!?) Perhaps this simply meant that Samuel's son R. Yoseph I had already passed away.
Alternatively, According to David HUGHES <http://hometown.aol.com/rdavidh218/davidicdynasty.html>, RDavidH218 at Aol.com <mailto:RDavidH218 at Aol.com>, Yoseph was rather the son of Samuel Ha-Nagid <hophni.html>, and Hai married a daughter of Samuel Ha-Nagid. (Gaon of the Sura academy 997-1013).

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD772EC31EFBBFA9822EF79916CAF7C
geni:6000000009305036314

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]