== Notes for [[Item:Q87317|Q87317]] ==

'''Gaius Claudius Marcellus Minor''' (88 BC – May 40 BC) was a Roman senator and consul. He was a member of the distinguished Claudius family. He was a friend to Roman senator Cicero, and an early opponent of Julius Caesar.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaius_Claudius_Marcellus_Minor
--------------------
'''
=Gaius Claudius Marcellus Minor=
'''

Gaius Claudius Marcellus Minor (88-May 40 BC) was a Roman Senator and Consul. He was a member of the distinguished Claudius family. He was a friend to Roman Senator Cicero and an early opponent of Julius Caesar.

'''Descent & family'''

He was a direct descendant of consul Marcus Claudius Marcellus. His grandfather was also named Marcus; his father was Gaius and his mother was named Junia.

From his first unnamed wife, Marcellus had a daughter who married the Roman Senator, Sextus Quinctilius Varus who served as a Quaestor in 49 BC. He was a grandfather to the Roman General Publius Quinctilius Varus and his three sisters.

He married in an arranged ceremony Octavia the Younger, a great-niece of Julius Caesar and sister of Octavian. Octavia bore Marcellus three children a son, Marcus and two daughters, both named Claudia Marcella born in Rome.

'''Opposition to Julius Caesar'''

In 54 BC the great-uncle of Octavia, Julius Caesar was said to be anxious for Octavia to divorce Marcellus so that she could marry Pompey, his rival and son-in-law who had just lost his wife Julia (daughter of Caesar and thus Octavia's cousin once removed). However, Pompey apparently declined the proposal and Octavia's husband continued to oppose Julius Caesar, culminating in the crucial year of his consulship in 50 BC when he tried to recall Julius Caesar from his ten-year governorship in Gaul two years early, without his army, in an attempt to save the Roman Republic. Failing this, he called unsuccessfully upon Caesar to resign.

He also obstructed Caesar from standing for a second consulship in absentia, insisting that he should return to Rome to stand, thereby forgoing the protection of his armies in Gaul. When Caesar finally invaded Italy in 49 BC, Marcellus, unlike his brother and nephew, did not take up arms against him. Caesar subsequently pardoned him.

'''Later years'''

In 47 BC, he was able to intercede with Caesar for his cousin and namesake Gaius Claudius Marcellus Maior, a former consul of 49 BC, then living in exile. He died in May 40 BC; five months later, his wife, Octavia, married the Roman Triumvir Mark Antony.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaius_Claudius_Marcellus_Minor

Gaius Claudius Marcellus
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.
Jump to: navigation, search
Gaius Claudius Marcellus was the name of several men in ancient Rome. Two of the most prominent bearers of this name were first cousins and held the consulship in successive years (50-49 BC).


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

C. Claudius Marcellus Major was son of another Gaius and first cousin of the C. Claudius Marcellus Min. (below). He was consul in 49 BC.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

C. Claudius Marcellus Minor (d. 40 BC) was a member of the Claudian Family and a direct descendant of the consul Marcus Claudius Marcellus. His father was also named Marcus, and his mother was named Junia.

He was consul in 50 BC. He attempted to recall Julius Caesar from his ten-year governorship in Gaul two years early. Failing this, he called unsuccessfully upon Caesar to resign. He also obstructed Caesar from standing for a second consulship in absentia, insisting that he should return to Rome to stand, thereby forgoing the protection of his armies in Gaul. When Caesar finally invaded Italy, Marcellus, unlike his brother and nephew, did not take up arms against him. Caesar subsequently pardoned him.

Marcellus married in an arranged ceremony Octavia Thurinia Minor, a great-niece of the Julius Caesar and sister of Octavian. They had three children: two daughters, both named Claudia Marcella and born in Rome, and a son, Marcus, born in Baia.

Following Caesar's assassination, Marcellus became a supporter of Octavian. He died in May 40 BC. Five months later, his widow married Mark Antony.

The Roman General Publius Quinctilius Varus and his 2 sisters were grandchildren from his first marriage.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]