== Notes for [[Item:Q101819|Q101819]] ==

All three Navarros used their offices to benefit their fellow-Jews. Particularly noteworthy are the efforts of the younger Moses Navarro at the time of the large-scale massacres of the Spanish Jews in 1391. In that year he presented the Portuguese king with the bull decreed on July 2, 1389, by Pope Boniface IX (based on a bull of Pope Clement VI), forbidding Christians to harm the Jews, desecrate their cemeteries, or attempt to baptize them by force. On July 17, 1392, the king ordered the promulgation of this bull throughout Portugal, reinforcing it with legislation of his own. Moses was also instrumental in acquiring the king's protection for Jewish refugees from Spain.

Grandson of Moses Navarro; Portuguese chief rabbi and "almoxarife," and body-physician of King Juan I.; died about 1410. Alarmed at the cruel persecution of the Jews in Spain and apprehending that it might spread to Portugal, D. Moses, in 1391, in the name of all Portuguese Jews, submitted to the king in Coimbra a bull of Pope Boniface IX., dated July 2, 1389, and based upon a bull of Pope Clement VI., in which it was most strictly forbidden to baptize a Jew by force, to beat, rob, or kill him, or to desecrate Jewish cemeteries, etc. By an enactment of July 17, 1392, the king not only ordered that this bull should be published throughout the kingdom, but he issued simultaneously a law to the same effect. At the same time D. Moses obtained the king's protection for the Spanish Jews who, in the year of terror 1391, sought refuge in Portugal. The king issued also a further order that both native-born and immigrant Jews should be protected, and prohibited under penalty their arrest. Moses' successor as chief rabbi was Judah Cohen, otherwise unknown.

--------------------
As court Jews the Navarro family were the rivals of the Negro (Ibn Yahia) family. Moisés Navarro, close to the Portuguese kings and Chief Rabbi of Portugal, was the successor of Guedelha Negro, Afonso IV’s Chief Rabbi, who fell out of favour with the new king, Pedro, probably because of his attitude vis-àvis the death of Inês de Castro. Moisés Navarro and his wife Salva, rich rural and urban landlords, founded with royal permission the oldest Jewish morgadio. They decided to divide their own properties between their two sons, Yosef and Yitshaq, and their heirs, either male or female, as long as the females married a relative who used the surname “Navarro”. This family name soon disappeared among Yosef’s heirs, since his daughters did not follow the last wish of their grandfather. The name of Navarro continued among Yitshaq’s heirs only.3 During the social revolution against Castilian power, the Navarro family supported João, the master of Avis, the future João I of Portugal, while some members of the Negro family, namely David Negro, future Chief Rabbi of Castile, followed the regent Leonor Teles and the Castilian king.4

Source: HISPANIA JUDAICA BULLETIN Articles, Reviews, Bibliography and Manuscripts on Sefarad Editors: Yom Tov Assis and Raquel IbÆæez-Sperber

http://www.hum.huji.ac.il/upload/_FILE_1379400106.pdf _______

Navarro es de los apellidos Sefarditas más comunes, de hecho se ubica dentro de los 5 apellidos de origen judeo español más común según el libro "Sefardíes" de Jose M.Estrugo. Para muestra el nombre de renombrados Sefarditas de apellidos Navarro como el Gran Rabino de Portugal Tesorero del Rey, Pedro I de Portugal ,Moshe Navarro, su hijo Yehuda Navarro y su nieto Moshe Navarro, los 3 consentidos del Rey y grandes Rabinos de Portugal.

http://www.hebrewsurnames.com/NAVARRO

Note that only Moshe II's father Yehuda or Judah kept the name Navarro and passed it on to his heirs. All of Yehuda's siblings reverted to their original Hebrew surname ibn Yahya.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD9D68AD1EFBBFA9822EF79916C5350
geni:6000000014737304276

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]