== Notes for [[Item:Q103390|Q103390]] ==

Jewish scholar from Estelle (Étoile-sur-Rhône, Dauphiné); author of an overview of rabbinical scholarship as an introduction to his Qiryat Sefer (Borough of the Book), written in Provence. The Qiryat Sefer consists of three parts on God, the preservation of body and soul, and rules for social relationships. In its introduction, David includes a short history of rabbinical scholarship (Seder ha-Qabbalah, order of tradition).

Beginning with the Geonim, major scholars of the academies in Sura and Pumbedita from the 7th to the end of the 11th century, he then continues with the scholars of Tzarfat (northern France), starting with Rashi (Solomon ben Isaaq; 1040-1105). He mentions several of the Tosafists, scholars of the 12th and early 13th century who interpreted with reference to Rashi's commentaries, and ends their list with Eliezer ben Samuel of Metz (ca 1115–ca 1198). His focus then shifts to the scholars of 12th century Narbonne, Lunel (for example Abraham ben David of Posquières, ca 1125-98), and Provence (Meir ben Isaaq of Trinquetaille). His main admiration belongs to Moses ben Maimon (Maimonides; ca 1135-1204) to whom he devotes the longest paragraph. He resumes his overview with scholars from Spain and Provence of the 12th and 13th century, among them Yudah ben Bartzillai of Barzelona, Gershom ben Solomon of Béziers, Solomon ben Abraham Adret (RaShBa; ca 1235–ca 1310) and Peretz ben Eliyah of Corbeil (Morenu ha-Rav Perez; d. ca 1295). Towards the end of his chronicle he mentions briefly Meir ben Barukh of Rothenburg (MaHaRam; ca 1215-93). Although some of the Tosafists he lists had connections to Ashkenaz, David counts them to Tzarfat; Meir of Rothenburg is the only scholar he associates with Ashkenaz.

The manuscripts are London, Beth Din & Beth Hamidrash, n° 17 and Cambridge, Trinity College, F 12 129.

See also Jewish chronicle tradition.

Eva Haverkamp

Bibliography

Text: A. neubauer, Mediaeval Jewish Chronicles and Chronological Notes, II, 1895, 230-33. Lit: E. renan, Les Écrivains Juifs Français du XIVe Siècle, 1893, 471-7.

Cite this page

Eva Haverkamp. "David ben Samuel of Estelle." Encyclopedia of the Medieval Chronicle. Brill Online, 2013. <http://referenceworks.brillonline.com/entries/encyclopedia-of-the-medieval-chronicle/david-ben-samuel-of-estelle-SIM_00860>

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000000348876714

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]