== Notes for [[Item:Q116436|Q116436]] ==

----

===Notes
[https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gómez_González_de_Manzanedo Wikipedia] page for Gómez González de Manzanedo (c. 1130-12 October 1182), son of this profile:

Family relationships

Count Gómez González had three sons;
* one named Diego who had no descendants,
* Rodrigo Gómez, father of Count Gonzalo Rodríguez de Bureba, and
* '''Gonzalo Gómez'''.

'''The latter is the one that several modern historians and genealogists consider to be the father of Gómez González de Manzanedo'''.2 3

----

From the [https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gómez_González#Bibliograf%C3%ADa Wikipedia] page for Gómez González (c. 10671 -Fresno de Cantespino (Segovia), October 26, 1110) father of this profile:


Married Urraca Muñoz, sister of Count Rodrigo Muñoz and Jimena Muñoz, lover of King Alfonso VI. Once widowed, Urraca remarried Count Beltrán de Risnel.9

From this marriage they were born:

# Rodrigo Gómez, Count of Bureba.10 11 In 1126 he confirms a document entitled filius comitis Gomez Gonzalivz et filius comitisse Urrache Moniuz. He married Elvira Ramírez, daughter of Count Ramiro Sánchez of Pamplona12 and Cristina Rodríguez, daughter of Rodrigo Díaz the Champion. They appear together for the first time in 1137 when they both donate to the monastery of Oña heredades and palaces in Villaverde in the alfoz of Ubierna.
# Diego Gómez, founder of the monastery of La Vid and his first abbot. He died before December 19, 1135 when his brothers Rodrigo, Sancha, and Estefanía, made a donation to the monastery of Oña in suffrage for the soul of his brother Diego Gómez.11
# Estefanía Gómez 11
# Sancha Gómez.11
# Gonzalo Gómez, who confirmed in the monastery of San Millán de la Cogolla in 1114 calling himself '''Gonzalvo Gomez, filius comitis, being the only Count Gómez at that time, Count Gómez González.''' The Manzanedo come from him.13

Refs:
*11. Canal Sánchez-Pagín, José María (2003). "Cond Gómez de Candespina: his history and his family." Yearbook of Medieval Studies. Vol. 33 (1). ISSN 0066-5061. p. 53. http://estudiosmedievales.revistas.csic.es/index.php/estudiosmedievales/article/view/197/200
* 13. Estepa Díez, Carlos (2006). "Border, nobility and lordships in Castile: the lordship of Molina (12th-13th centuries)". Historical studies. Medieval history (Salamanca: Ediciones Universidad de Salamanca) (24): 15-86. ISSN 0213-2060. p. 54, n. 305. http://campus.usal.es/~revistas_trabajo/index.php/Studia_H_Historia_Medieval/article/viewFile/4520/4536 Lo he considerado sobrino del conde Rodrigo Gómez, hijo de un posible hermano de éste llamado Gonzalo, ESTEPA DÍEZ. Las behetrías castellanas, I, pp. 280, 282. Tal hipótesis cobra mayor vero- similitud si tenemos en cuenta que se documenta un Gonzalo Gómez filius comitis en 1114, febrero, 15 (RUIZ ALBI. Urraca, n.o 56). Por el contario, rectifico, en el sentido de que no creo que éste tuviera la
dignidad condal que tuvo su hermano Rodrigo Gómez.
----

Castilian surname, which emanated from the great house of Lara, through the lords of Aza, coming from that of the former counts of Castile. This lineage had a solar house in the Manzanedo valley, Villarcayo judicial district, in the province of Burgos (Old Castilla). He proved his nobility in the Order of Santiago.


----


Apellido castellano, el cual dimanó de la gran casa de Lara, a través de los señores de Aza, proveniente aquella de los antiguos condes de Castilla. Este linaje tuvo casa solar en el valle de Manzanedo, partido judicial de Villarcayo, en la provincia de Burgos (Castilla la Vieja). Probó su nobleza en la Orden de Santiago.

http://www.sologenealogia.com/gen/getperson.php?personID=I72927&tree=001

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]