== Notes for [[Item:Q87144|Q87144]] ==

Marcus Aemilius Lepidus (triumvir) From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Marcus Aemilius Lepidus (Latin: M·AEMILIVS·M·F·Q·N·LEPIDVS),[1] (born c. 89 or 88 BC, died late 13 or early 12 BC)[2] was a Roman patrician who rose to become a member of the Second Triumvirate and Pontifex Maximus. His father, Marcus Aemilius Lepidus, had been involved in a rebellion against the Roman Republic which led to his death.

Lepidus was among Julius Caesar's greatest supporters. He started his cursus honorum as a praetor in 49 BC, was placed in charge of Rome while Caesar defeated Pompey in Spain,[3] and was rewarded with the consulship in 46 BC after the defeat of the Pompeians in the East. When in February 44 BC Caesar was elected dictator for life by the senate, he made Lepidus "Master of the Horse", effectively deputy in the dictatorship.[4] Their brief alliance in power came to a sudden end, however, when Caesar was assassinated on March 15 44 BC (the Ides of March). One of the ringleaders of the conspiracy, Cassius Longinus, had argued for the killing of Lepidus and Mark Antony as well, but Marcus Junius Brutus had overruled him, saying the action was an execution and not a political coup.[5]

After Caesar's murder, Lepidus, despite assuring the senate of his loyalty, allied himself with Mark Antony in a joint bid for power. But Caesar had left an heir: Gaius Julius Caesar Octavian, his great nephew and adopted son in Caesar's will. Octavian, Antony and Lepidus met on an island in a river near Mutina (modern Modena), their armies lined along opposite banks,[6] and formed the Second Triumvirate, legalized with the name of Triumvirs for the Organization of the People by the Lex Titia of 43 BC. Unlike the First Triumvirate of Caesar, Pompey, and Crassus, this one was formally constituted. In effect, it sidelined the consuls and the senate and signalled the death of the republic.[6] The triumvirate's legal life span of five years was renewed in 38 BC by the treaty of Tarentum for an equal period of time.

After the pacification of the east and the defeat of the assassins' faction in the Battle of Philippi, during which he remained in Rome, Lepidus assumed rule of the western provinces of Hispania and Africa. For a while he managed to distance himself from the frequent quarrels between his colleagues Antony and Octavian; however, in 36 BC an ill-judged political move gave Octavian the excuse he needed: Lepidus was accused of usurping power in Sicily and of attempted rebellion and was forced into exile in Circeii. He was stripped of all his offices except that of Pontifex Maximus. Spending the rest of his life in obscurity, he died peacefully in late 13 BC or early 12 BC.

[edit] Family Lepidus was the son of Marcus Aemilius Lepidus; his mother may have been a daughter of Lucius Appuleius Saturninus. His brother was Lucius Aemilius Lepidus Paullus and father to Marcus Aemilius Lepidus the Younger. He married Junia, sister of Marcus Junius Brutus and Junia Tertia, Cassius Longinus's wife. After the Battle of Philippi, Lepidus managed to protect Junia Tertia and her mother Servilia from execution.

Forrás / Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Aemilius_Lepidus_(triumvir)

--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Aemilius_Lepidus_(triumvir)

TRIUMVIR

Marcus Aemilius Lepidus (triumvir)
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.
Jump to: navigation, search
This page is about the contemporary of Caesar Augustus. For other generations of his family see Marcus Aemilius Lepidus.

Marcus Aemilius Lepidus (Latin: M·AEMILIVS·M·F·Q·N·LEPIDVS¹), died 13 BC, was a patrician Roman politician of the 1st century BC. Known simply as Lepidus he was the son of Marcus Aemilius Lepidus and Appuleia, the daughter of the rebellious Lucius Appuleius Saturninus. His father was also involved in a rebellion against the Republic and died because of it. He was a member of the second triumvirate and pontifex maximus. Lepidus was among Julius Caesar's greatest supporters. He started his cursus honorum as a praetor in 49 BC, and was rewarded with the consulship in 47 BC, after the defeat of the Pompeians in the East. Following Caesar's assassination in March 15, 44 BC (the Ides of March), Lepidus allied himself with Mark Antony in a joint bid for power. But Caesar had left an heir: Octavian, his great-nephew and adopted son, had a matching ambition and the popularity with which to climb the hierarchy. Together they formed the second triumvirate, legalized with the name of Triumvirs for the Organization of the People by the Lex Titia of 43 BC. The triumvirate had a legal life span of five years and was renewed in 38 BC with the Treaty of Tarentum for an equal period of time.

After the pacification of the East and the defeat of the assassins faction, during which Lepidus remained in Rome, he went to rule the western provinces of Hispania and Africa. Somehow, Lepidus managed to remain aside the frequent quarrels between his colleagues Antony and Octavian. However, in 36 BC, an ill-judged political move was the excuse that Octavian needed. Lepidus was accused of usurping power in Sicily and attempt of rebellion and was forced to exile. All of his offices were taken away, except the one of pontifex maximus.

Lepidus died peacefully in 13 BC. Lepidus was the brother of Lucius Paullus and father to Lepidus the Younger.

[edit]
Notes
1- English: "Marcus Aemilius Lepidus, son of Marcus, nephew of Quintus".

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]