== Notes for [[Item:Q100574|Q100574]] ==

source: http://www.geni.com/people/Judah-ben-Solomon-al-%E1%B8%A4ar%C4%ABz%C4%AB/6000000022453877614?through=6000000022453945754

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yehuda_Alharizi

Yehuda Alharizi, also Judah ben Solomon Harizi or al-Harizi (Hebrew: יהודה בן שלמה אלחריזי‎, Yehudah ben Shelomo al-Harizi, Arabic: يحيا بن سليمان بن شاؤل أبو زكريا الحريزي اليهودي من أهل طليطلة‎, Yahya bin Sulaiman bin Sha'ul abu Zakaria al-Harizi al-Yahudi min ahl Tulaitila) was a rabbi, translator, poet and traveller active in Spain in the Middle Ages (1165 in Toledo? – 1225 in Aleppo). He was supported by wealthy patrons, to whom he wrote poems and dedicated compositions.

He was a rationalist, conveying the works of Maimonides and his approach to rationalistic Judaism. He translated Maimonides' Guide for the Perplexed and some of his Commentary on the Mishnah, as well as the Mahbarot Iti'el of the Arab poet al-Hariri, from the Arabic to Hebrew.

Alharizi's poetic translation of the Guide for the Perplexed is considered by many to be more readable than that of Samuel ben Judah ibn Tibbon. However, it has not been very widely used in Jewish scholarship, perhaps because it is less precise. It had some influence in the Christian world due to its translation into Latin.[1]

Alharizi's own works include the "Tahkemoni", composed between 1218 and 1220, in the Arabic form known as maqama. This is written in Hebrew in unmetrical rhymes, in what is commonly termed rhymed prose. It is a series of humorous episodes, witty verses, and quaint applications of Scriptural texts. The episodes are bound together by the presence of the hero and of the narrator, who is also the author. Another collection of his poetry was devoted to preaching ethical self-discipline and fear of heaven.

Harizi undertook long journeys in the lands of the Middle East. His works are suffused with his impressions from these journeys.

He not only brought to perfection the art of applying Hebrew to secular satire, but he was also a brilliant literary critic and his maqama on the Andalusian Hebrew poets is a fruitful source of information.[2]

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Judah al-Ḥarīzī (ca. 1166–1225) was a central author of medieval Hebrew, Judeo-Arabic, and classical Arabic literature as well as an important translator of Arabic and Judeo-Arabic literary, legal, and philosophical texts into Hebrew. Born in Toledo, then still a highly Arabized city in the Christian kingdom of Castile, al-Ḥarizi left around 1208 to travel to Provence and the Islamic East, going as far as Baghdad and ultimately settling in Ayyubid Aleppo, where he died. Information concerning al-Ḥarizi’s place and date of death, his uncommon height, and his Maghrebi accent is recorded in the biographical dictionary of poets by Ibn al-Shaʿār al-Mawṣalī (1197–1256), entitled Qalāʾid al-Jumān fī Farāʾid Shuʿarāʾ hādha ʾl-Zemān. In the dictionary, al-Mawṣalī gives al-Ḥarīzī’s full Arabic name as Yaḥyā ibn Sulaymān ibn Shaʾūl Abū Zakariyya al-Ḥarīzī al-Yahūdī.

Al-Ḥarīzī’s translations of Judeo-Arabic and Arabic halakhic, philosophical, and belletristic works were generally commissioned by Jewish intellectuals in Christian Iberia and Provence. Among the works he translated were Moses Ibn Ezra’s Maqālat al-Ḥadīqa fī Maʿnā al-Majāz wa ʾl-Ḥaqīqa (Treatise of the Garden of Figurative and Literal Speech), entitled Arugat ha-Bosem (The Gardenbed of Spice) in Hebrew; Maimonides’s Dalālat al-Ḥāʾirīn (Guide of the Perplexed), entitled Moreh Nevukhim in Hebrew (this translation was written after Samuel Ibn Tibbon’s more canonical, authorized translation; it was commissioned by readers in Provence who desired a less opaque register of Hebrew); Maimonides’s Introduction to the Mishna and his commentary on the first five tractates of Zera‛im; Maimonides’s Essay on Resurrection; ʿAlī ibn Riḍwān’s Epistle on Morals, entitled Iggeret ʿAli ha-Yishmaʾeli (The Epistle of ʿAlī the Ishmaelite) in Hebrew; Ḥunayn ibn Isḥāq’s Ādāb al-Falāsifa (Dicta of the Philosophers), entitled Musre ha-Filosofim in Hebrew; Galen’s Dialogue on the Soul; and the Arabic Maqāmāt (rhymed-prose fictional narratives) of al-Ḥarīrī of Basra, entitled Maḥberot Ittiʾel (Ithiel’s Compositions) in Hebrew.

The method for the translation of nonbelletristic texts adopted by al-Ḥarizi tends to preserve the purity of Hebrew diction, sometimes at the expense of accuracy, which places it in contrast with the contemporaneous literalist method emerging in Provence. In Maḥberot Ittiʾel, he tends to biblicize and Judaize the text by writing in biblical Hebrew, borrowing figures of speech from the Bible (often out of context for ironic or humorous purposes), resetting stories in biblical locations, and replacing Islamic cultural and religious references with Jewish ones. For example, in al-Ḥarīrī’s twelfth maqāma, which is set in Ghutah, near Damascus, a drunk preacher disguised as a Sufi mendicant teaches a prayer for protection opening with the first sura of the Qur’ān and including blessings for the Prophet Muḥammad. In al-Ḥarīzī’s rewriting, the story is set in the “Heights of Naphtali and Asher” in the Land of Israel, praise for Muḥammad is replaced with praise for Moses, and the qur’anic sura is replaced with Psalm 91, which appropriately is a prayer for protection. At the same time, al-Ḥarīzī preserves the literary conceits of al-Ḥarīrī whenever possible. For example, for his translation of al-Ḥarīrī’s sixteenth maqāma, which includes palindromes, al-Ḥarīzī composed original Hebrew palindromes rather than render the Arabic literally.

Unfortunately, Maḥberot Itti’el does not preserve an introduction that might have elucidated the author’s methods and motivations for the translation at the time of its composition. However, an explanation is given, albeit in hindsight, in al-Ḥarīzī’s introduction to Sefer Taḥkemoni, which was composed after he had left Spain to wander the Islamic East. He writes that he undertook Maḥberot Ittiʾel as a challenge posed by some Spanish Jews who had become enamored with the maqāmāt of al-Ḥarīrī and thought them untranslatable. Al-Ḥarīzī thus sought to mitigate the awe-inspiring status of al-Ḥarīrī’s text by demonstrating its translatability. He also states in the introduction to Sefer Taḥkemoni that he regretted having translated al-Ḥarīrī’s maqāmāt because “I went to translate a foreign book as though the words of the Living God were not among us; I rushed to tend a foreign vineyard but did not tend my own.”

Sefer Taḥkemoni was explicitly composed in competition with al-Ḥarīrī’s maqāmāt and to establish Hebrew’s versatility, eloquence, and superiority over Arabic. Al-Ḥarīzī even suggests that the seeming richness of Arabic is owed to tropes plagiarized from Hebrew and assures his readers that nothing in his Hebrew book is taken from al-Ḥarīrī. Given this, it may seem surprising that Sefer Taḥkemoni borrows liberally from Arabic plot materials in maqāma collections by Badīʿ al-Zamān al-Hamadhānī, and al-Ḥarīrī as well as from other Arabic sources. The difficulty may be resolvable if one thinks of originality as pertaining to turns of phrase and figures of speech rather than plot.

The title Taḥkemoni is taken from the name of one of King David’s warriors in II Samuel 23:8. The root of the name, ḥkm, means “to be wise”; thus the title conveys both might and wisdom. Like the classical Arabic maqāma collections by al-Hamadhānī and al-Ḥarīrī, Sefer Taḥkemoni’s chapters involve interactions between two characters, a narrator and a protagonist rogue. These characters (and other characters too) possess symbolic names whose sense is revealed through semantic and intertextual analysis. The narrator is Heman the Ezrahite (Ezraḥi), a name that appears in this precise form as the author of Psalm 88. There is another Heman whose wisdom is compared with that of King Solomon (I Kings 5:11) and yet a third Heman called Heman the poet (I Chronicles 6:18). The narrator’s name thus denotes wisdom and poetry. On a semantic level, Ezraḥi is derived from the root zrḥ, meaning “to rise from the soil.“ Thus, it is not surprising that the narrator reveals his native land (i.e., the soil from which he rises) to be Spain (Sefarad), also the native soil of the author.

The narrator’s status as “one who rises from the soil” places him in contrast with the protagonist, Heber the Kenite (Ḥever ha-Qeni), the namesake of a character from Judges 4:11 who “pitched his tent at Elon be-Ṣaʿananim.” He is called Ḥever because he “brings together” (from the root ḥbr) scattered bits of rhetoric and teaching. His tribe is the Kenites, descendants of the biblical Cain, who was cursed to wander after killing his brother Abel. While his home, Elon be-Ṣaʿananim, is a simple place-name in the Bible, it is significant here because of the force of its root ṣʿn, “to wander.” Thus, he comes from a place of abstract and eternal wandering.

The constant movement from place to place in the Taḥkemoni imbues the text with the ideal of wanderlust common in maqāma literature. There is probably a relationship between al-Ḥarīzī’s selection of the maqāma as his genre of choice and his own experience of wandering. The forty-sixth chapter details the journey of Heber the Kenite from Spain through Provence, the Land of Israel, and the lands of the Islamic East, concluding in Baghdad. Largely believed to be autobiographical, the chapter preserves the identities of many historical figures whom al-Ḥarīzī undoubtedly met, either lavishing them with praise or censuring them with blame. This Hebrew chapter has strong parallels with a Judeo-Arabic maqāma, discussed further below, that has been associated with al-Ḥarīzī.

Two other original Hebrew compositions by al-Ḥarīzī can be identified with certainty. In the brief Iggeret Leshon ha-Zahav (Epistle of the Golden Tongue), a female speaker identifying herself as Wisdom (Heb. ḥokhma) and the Golden Tongue (Heb. leshon ha-zahav) instruct the author concerning the physical world, the nature of the soul, and similar matters. This piece bears a significant resemblance to a scene in the introduction to Sefer Taḥkemoni in which the Hebrew tongue speaks to the author as a woman; the Epistle was likely composed prior to the Taḥkemoni. Sefer ha-‘Anaq (Book of the Necklace) is a collection of homonymic epigrams on devotional and moralistic themes. The book borrows its homonymic form, though not its content, from a book of the same title by Moses ibn Ezra.

Two Judeo-Arabic compositions and one personal letter also survive from al-Ḥarizi’s pen. Al-Rawḍa al-Anīqa (The Elegant Garden) is a maqāma mentioned by al-Mawṣalī that mostly likely contained the author’s address to the Jews of Baghdad for not appreciating him sufficiently. This work seems to have been incorporated into the longer Kitāb al-Durar (Book of Pearls), which describes al-Ḥarīzī’s journeys in the Islamic East more broadly and opens with Judeo-Arabic poems in praise of God. Kitāb al-Durar has been associated with al-Ḥarīzī because of the many details that overlap with chapter 46 of Sefer Taḥkemoni, though there are notable variations, such as the order in which cities are presented and the inclusion of additional stopping places during the journey.

The aforementioned biographical dictionary by al-Mawṣali also preserves six poems by al-Ḥarīzī in classical Arabic. These include an erotic poem based on a verse by the Andalusian poet-prince al-Muʿatamad Ibn ʿAbbād (d. 1095) and several panegyrics dedicated to Ayyubid rulers, including al-Mālik al-Ashraf ibn Abū Bakr Ayyūb (d. 1237), who seem to have supported al-Ḥarīzī in his final days.

Jonathan P. Decter

Bibliography

Al-Ḥarīrī, Abū Muḥammad al-Qāsim ibn ʿAlī. Ma ḥ berot Itti’el, trans. Judah ben Solomon al-Ḥarizi, ed. Yiṣḥaq Pereṣ (Tel Aviv: Moledet, 1951).

Al-Ḥarīzī, Judah. Sefer Ta ḥ kemoni, ed. Y. Toporovsky (Tel Aviv: Mosad Harav Kook, 1952).

Blau, Joshua, and Joseph Yahalom. “Kitab Aldurar—An Unpublished Work by Judah Alharizi,” Pe‘amim 108 (2006): 19–51 [Hebrew].

——— and ——— (eds.). The Wanderings of Judah Alharizi: Five Accounts of His Travels (Jerusalem: Ben-Zvi Institute, 2002) [Hebrew].

Decter, Jonathan, Iberian Jewish Literature: Between al-Andalus and Christian Europe (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2007).

Sadan, Joseph. “Judah Alḥarizi as a Cultural Junction—An Arabic Biography of a Jewish Writer as Perceived by an Orientalist,” Pe‛amim 68 (1996): 18–67 [Hebrew].

Schirmann, Jefim. Die hebräische Übersetzung der Maqamen des Hariri. (Frankfurt a.M.: J. Kauffmann, 1930).

——— . The History of Hebrew Poetry in Christian Spain and Southern France, ed., suppl., and annot. Ezra Fleischer (Jerusalem: Magnes Press, 1997) [Hebrew].

Cite this page

Jonathan P. Decter. "Ḥarīzī, Judah ben Solomon al-." Encyclopedia of Jews in the Islamic World. Executive Editor Norman A. Stillman. Brill Online, 2013.<http://referenceworks.brillonline.com/entries/encyclopedia-of-jews-in-the-islamic-world/harizi-judah-ben-solomon-al-COM_0001410>

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD88155C1EFBBFA9822EF79916CB860
geni:6000000026495325045

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]