== Notes for [[Item:Q86650|Q86650]] ==

Lucius Aemilius Paullus (born before 29 BC – 14 AD) was the son of Paullus Aemilius Lepidus (suffect consul 34 BC and later censor) and Cornelia, the elder daughter of Scribonia. He was married to Julia the Younger, the eldest granddaughter of the Emperor Augustus.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Aemilius_Paullus_(consul_1)

For other persons named Lucius Aemilius Paullus, see Lucius Aemilius Paullus.


Life and Career

Paullus' mother died sometime between 20 and 15 BC, and he was brought up by his widower father, Paullus Aemilius Lepidus. Sometime after 13 BC, this elder Paullus married Claudia Marcella Minor, who herself was a widow with a small child.

The early career of the younger Paullus is unknown, his first and only known post being that of consul in 1 with his brother-in-law, Gaius Caesar. He is also known to have been a member of the Arval Brethren[1].

According to ancient historians, his wife Julia was exiled in 8 AD for having an affair with a senator. Paullus himself was executed as a conspirator in a revolt at some point between 1 and 14[2].

He only had one child by his wife - a girl named Aemilia Lepida (4/3 BC-53 AD), who was betrothed to Claudius until the downfall of her parents caused her great-grandfather, Augustus, to break off the betrothal and marry her to Marcus Junius Silanus (consul 19), by whom she had several children[3].

Forrás / Source:

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Aemilius_Paullus_(consul_1)

--------------------

ID: I84712

Name: Lucius Aemilius Paullus

Given Name: Lucius Aemilius

Surname: Paullus

Sex: M

_UID: 9F66F0FEF972C848A060147A334092C0C1C4

Change Date: 11 Aug 2005

Birth: ABT 219 BC

Death: ABT 190 BC

Marriage 1 Spouse Unknown

Children

Aemilia Paula b: ABT 225 BC

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I84712

--------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Aemilius_Paullus_(consul_1)
--------------------
•ID: I17078

•Name: Aimibus Paulius of ROME

•Surname: Rome

•Given Name: Aimibus Paulius of

•Sex: M

•_UID: 83C1F3AE9A7CD611844A88D8C879B23336D0

•Change Date: 1 Feb 2001 at 00:00:00

Marriage 1 Julia Of ROME

Children

1. Ameilia Lepida of ROME

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=maple-above&id=I17078
--------------------
'''
=Lucius Aemilius Paullus=
'''

Lucius Aemilius Paullus (c. 37 BC – 14 AD) was the son of Lucius Aemilius Lepidus Paullus (suffect consul 34 BC and later censor) and Cornelia, the elder daughter of Scribonia. He was married to Vipsania Julia, the eldest granddaughter of the Emperor Augustus.

'''Life and career'''

Paullus' mother died sometime between 20 and 15 BC, and he was brought up by his widower father, Lucius Aemilius Lepidus Paullus. Sometime after 13 BC, this elder Paullus married Claudia Marcella Minor, who herself was a widow with a small child.

The early career of the younger Paullus is unknown, his first and only known post being that of consul in 1 AD with his brother-in-law, Gaius Caesar. He is also known to have been a member of the Arval Brethren.

According to ancient historians, his wife Julia was exiled in 8 AD for having an affair with a senator. Paullus himself was executed as a conspirator in a plot to assassinate Augustus at some point between 1 and 14.

He only had one child by his wife, a girl named Aemilia Lepida (4/3 BC – 53 AD), who was betrothed to Claudius until the downfall of her parents caused her great-grandfather, Augustus, to break off the betrothal and marry her to Marcus Junius Silanus Torquatus, consul in AD 19, by whom she had several children, including Junia Calvina and Marcus Junius Silanus Torquatus, consul in AD 46.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Aemilius_Paullus_(consul_1)

----



===Notes
# https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Aemilius_Paullus_(consul_1)
## John Scheid, "Scribonia Caesaris et les Cornelii Lentuli", Bulletin de Correspondance Hellénique, 100 (1976), pp. 485-491
## Syme, The Augustan Aristocracy, pp. 249f
## Attilio Degrassi, I fasti consolari dell'Impero Romano dal 30 avanti Cristo al 613 dopo Cristo (Rome, 1952), p. 6
## Syme, Augustan Aristocracy (1989), pp. 123f
## Suetonius, Life of Augustus, 19

AKA: LUCIUS AEMILIUS PAULLUS CENSOR OF ROME

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]