== Notes for [[Item:Q108597|Q108597]] ==

It was '''Mu'awiyah I''' who received 1/3 of '''Safiyya's''' fortune - this was with agreement and support of '''Aisha''', wife of '''Prophet Muhammad (PBUH)'''.

* '''1st Umayyad Caliph'''
* Reign: 661- 680 AD
* Wilaadat (Birth):
* Wafaat (Death): 30th Rajjab 60 AH (9th May 680 AD)

Source 1: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Muawiyah_I
--------------------
Muʿāwiyah ibn ʾAbī Sufyān - He is Ali ibn Abi Talib's father-in-law's wife's half brother. Ali's strongest opposition was raised by Mu'awiyya from the Ummayad family based in Syria. The assassinated Caliph, Uthman, had been the kinsman of Mu'awiyya, and he accused Ali for not having charged his murderers. In 658, Ali gave in to Mu'awiyya's criticism, and established an investigation committee. This compromise shocked many Muslims, and a group of them broke with Ali. This group soon came to be known as Kharijis, and when Ali was murdered in 661, this was probably the act of a member of the Khariji sect. ref:http://www.lexicorient.com/e.o/ali.htm

=======

Muawiyah bin Abi-Sufyan was born in Mecca to Abu Sufyan ibn Harb and Hind bint Utbah (601 CE) into the Banu Umayya sub-clan of the Banu Abd-Shams clan of the Quraysh tribe. The Quraysh controlled the city of Mecca (in the west of present-day Saudi Arabia) and the Banu Abd-Shams were among the most influential of its citizens.[6] The meaning of Muawiyah in Arabic is "young fox".[citation needed] His father Abu-Sufyan struggled against Islam until Muhammad's army entered Mecca in 630.

Muawiyah, Muhammad and Ali shared the same great-great grandfather, ‘Abd Manaf bin Qusay, who had four sons: Hashim, Muttalib, Nawfal, and Abdu Shams. Hashim was the great grandfather of Ali and Muhammad. Umayyah bin Abdu Shams was the great grandfather of Muawiyah

Muawiyah worked as a scribe for Muhammad. According to al-Baladhuri, Urwa ibn az-Zubayr, relating from his father, Aisha said "I went to the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, who was in a room with Umm Habiba (Muawiyah's sister and Muhammad's wife) on her day. Muawiya knocked on the door and he gave him permission to enter, which he did. He had a pen behind his ear which he had not used. The Prophet said, 'What is this on your ear?' He said, 'A pen which I have made ready for Allah and His Messenger.' The Prophet said. 'May Allah repay you well on behalf of your Prophet! By Allah, I will only ask you to write down revelation from heaven"[13][14][15] According to Ibn Katheer in his book the Al-Bidayah wan-Nihayah, Ibn Abbas said that Abu Sufyan asked Muhammad if he could make his son Muawiyah a scribe which Muhammad granted. Therefore, Muawiyah became his scribe
--------------------
Muawiyah I was appointed the Governor of Syria by Umar earlier In 639 after his elder brother Yazid ibn Abi Sufyan (Governor of Syria) died in a plague, along with Abu Ubaidah ibn al-Jarrah the governor before him and 25,000 other people. To stop the Byzantine harassment from the sea during the Arab-Byzantine Wars. Now under Uthman's rule in 649 Muawiyah was allowed set up a navy; manned by Monophysitise Christians, Copts and Jacobite Syrian Christians sailors and Muslim troops. This resulted in the defeat of the Byzantine navy at the Battle of the Masts in 655, opening up the Mediterranean.

(read doct in MEDIA)

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000008506564343

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]