== Notes for [[Item:Q100787|Q100787]] ==

Josiah ben Jesse

Josiah ben Jesse flourished in the first half of the thirteenth century as part of a family of nesi’im centered in Mosul. He had three brothers—Hodiah (probably the Jalāl al-Dawla of several Geniza letters; cf. infra), Hezekiah, and Solomon (= Jedidiah? [see Gil, sec. 259, ad fin.])—and spent some time in Egypt (Ashmun, Bilbays, Fustat, al-Maḥalla, and, perhaps, Alexandria and Damira) as well as in Damascus, where he met the poet Judah al-Ḥarīzī. At least six different “date points” are attested for Josiah, based on dated or datable sources in which he is mentioned. These are (1) 1218–1220: al-Ḥarīzī’s Taḥkemoni, in which a substantial portion of the first maqāma and a small part of the forty-sixth devote unmitigated encomia to “the nasi Rabbi Josiah b. Jesse nasi of the diasporas of all Israel, the crown of the venerable, master of good works, the embodiment of virtuous qualities, and the one of whom all the world speaks good things” (ha-nasi’ rabbi yoʾshiya ha-nasi’ ben yishay nesi’ galuyyot kol yisra’el keter ha-nikhbadim u-va‘al ma‘asim neḥemadim osef ha-middot ha-ḥamudot u-ve-khol tevel medubbar bo nikhbadot; Toporovski, p. 351); (2) March 1235: a ban (T-S Box K 6, f. 152) written by Josiah himself (the only extant item from him), in which he is again styled “Josiah the nasi b. Jesse nasi of the diasporas of all Israel” ([Y o’]shiya ha-nasi’ ben yi[shay nesi]’ galuyyot kol yisra’el); (3) December 1236: a letter to Solomon b. Jesse (Gil, vol. 2, §93 [Bodl. Ms. Heb.a.3, f. 24r]) which mentions “the most distinguished lord, our nasi Josiah—may his glory be exalted!” (al-sayyid al-ajall nesienu Yoʾshiyahu yar[um] ho[do]); (4) ca. 1237: a letter from Solomon b. Jesse (Gil, vol. 2, §93 [T-S 13 J 21, f. 8v]) in which reference is made to “the master, our nasi Josiah—may his glory be exalted!—and the lords, his sons” (al-mawlā nesi’enu Yoʾshiyahu yar[um] ho[do] wa-’l-sāda awlāduhu); (5) February–March 1244: a letter (T-S NS J 2) sent from Damīra (Lower Egypt) in which is mentioned “the [lease] price of riding and pack animals . . . for our lord, the nasi Josiah . . . [for his journey] to Ashmūn and al-Maḥalla” (ujra al-dawābb . . . li-sayyidnā al-nasi’ yoshiyahu[!] . . . ilā ashmūn wa-ilā ʾl-maḥalla); and (6) January 1254: a letter from Jalāl al-Dawla, on behalf of Josiah’s nephew Jesse ben Solomon, to Jesse’s father, Solomon (Gil, vol. 2, §93 [T-S 18 J 4, f. 13]), in which reference is made to “our nasi Josiah—may his glory be exalted!” (nesi’enu Yo’shiyahu yar[um] ho[do]).

Michael G. Wechsler

Bibliography

Gil, Moshe. Be-Malkhut Yishma‘ʾel bi-Tqufat ha-Geʾonim, 4 vols. (Tel Aviv, 1997); slightly revised version of vol. 1 trans. D. Strassler, Jews in Islamic Countries in the Middle Ages (Leiden: Brill, 2004).

Mann, Jacob. The Jews in Egypt and in Palestine under the Fā ṭ imid Caliphs, 2 vols. in 1, preface by S. D. Goitein (New York, 1970).

———. Texts and Studies in Jewish History and Literature, vol. 1 (Cincinnati, 1931).

Toporovski, Israel. Rabbi Yehuda al- Ḥ arizi: Ta ḥ kemoni (Tel Aviv, 1952).

Michael G. Wechsler. "Josiah ben Jesse." Encyclopedia of Jews in the Islamic World. Executive Editor Norman A. Stillman. Brill Online, 2013.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD8E581C1EFBBFA9822EF79916C48F4
geni:6000000022293548472

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]