== Notes for [[Item:Q104629|Q104629]] ==

10. ALFEREZ REAL RODRIGO3 DE MORALES-TREVINO (JUANA2 DE TREVINO-QUINTANILLA-Y-SALAZAR, PEDRO1 DE SALAZAR)
*was born 1634 in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico, and
*died Aft. 01 Nov 1660 in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
*He married JUANA LEIVA-DE-LAS-RUELAS,
**daughter of DOMINGO GIL-DE-LEIBA and ESTEFANIA DE ROJO-RUELAS.
**She died 23 Jun 1673 in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
**Notes for ALFEREZ REAL RODRIGO DE MORALES-TREVINO: His last will and testament was signed on November 1, 1660. Source:Origen de los Fundadores de Texas, Nuevo Mexico, Coahulia, y Nuevo Leon, by Guillermo Garmendia Leal. Page 117.
***Notes for JUANA LEIVA-DE-LAS-RUELAS: Source:Origen de los Fundadores de Texas, Nuevo Mexico, Coahulia, y Nuevo Leon, by Guillermo Garmendia Leal. Page 126.
***Marriage Notes for RODRIGO DE MORALES-TREVINO and JUANA LEIVA-DE-LAS-RUELAS: Marriage source:Origen de los Fundadores de Texas, Nuevo Mexico, Coahulia, y Nuevo Leon, by Guillermo Garmendia Leal. (page 129).

Children of RODRIGO DE MORALES-TREVINO and JUANA LEIVA-DE-LAS-RUELAS are:
*1. 42. i. APOLONIA4 DE MORALES.
*2. 43. ii. ANTONIA DE MORALES.
*3. 44. iii. BEATRIZ DE MORALES-LEIVA,
**b. Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico;
**d. Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.
*4. iv. ANTONIO DE MORALES,
**m. MARIA FLORES-FERNANDEZ.
*5. 45. v. ESTEFANA DE MORALES.
*6. vi. ALEJANDRO DE MORALES,
**m. LUISA FLORES-DE-VALDEZ.
*7. 46. vii. JOSEPHA DE MORALES,
**b. 1653, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.

http://www.somosprimos.com/inclan/salazar.htm

--------------------
=== GEDCOM Note ===
(Research):http://www.somosprimos.com/inclan/salazar.htm n.10

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000011016788077

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]