== Notes for [[Item:Q118253|Q118253]] ==

NOTE: She was one of TWO daughters of Guillaume VIII d'Aquitaine named Agnès (each by a different mother). Dates: c1059-Mother: Mathilde ???. Aka Inés. Married (1) Alfonso VI King of Castile & Leon and (2) Helie, Comte du Maine.

From Foundation for Medieval Genealogy:

AGNES d’Aquitaine ([1059]-[1077/93] or after 1099, bur Sahagún, León, royal monastery of Santos Facundo y Primitivo). The Chronicle of Saint-Maxence records that the only daughter of "Goffredus" & his second wife was the wife of "Hildefonsi regis, filii Freelandi et nepotis Garsii", in a later passage recording their marriage in 1069[439]. Orderic Vitalis refers to the second marriage of "Agnetem filiam Guillelmi Pictavorum ducis relictam Hildefonsi senioris Galiciae regis"[440]. The Chronicon Regum Legionensium names "Ines" ("Agnetam") as the first of the "five legitimate wives" of King Alfonso[441]. The De Rebus Hispaniæ of Rodericus Ximenes names "Agnes" as first wife of "rex Aldefonsus"[442]. According to Kerrebrouck[443], Agnès d'Aquitaine never existed. He says that the first wife of King Alfonso VI was Inés de Guzmán, although he does not name her parents or precise origin. She was known as INÉS in Castile. "Agnes regina" confirmed the donation to Cluny by "Adefonsus…princeps" dated 22 May 1077[444]. Orderic Vitalis refers to the second marriage of "Agnetem filiam Guillelmi Pictavorum ducis relictam Hildefonsi senioris Galiciae regis"[445]. Reilly[446] says that Queen Constanza was buried next to Queen Inés, implying that the latter had predeceased her successor. The primary source on which this is based has not yet been identified, although if it is correct it does seem surprising that the repudiated queen should have remained in Castile until she died and that she was buried in the royal monastery. m [firstly] (betrothed 1069, [late 1073/early 1074], repudiated soon after 22 May 1077) as his first wife, ALFONSO VI King of Castile and Leon, son of don FERNANDO I "el Magno" King of Castile and León & his wife doña Sancha de León (Compostela [1037]-Toledo 30 Jun 1109, bur Sahagún, León, San Mancio chapel in the royal monastery of Santos Facundo y Primitivo). [m secondly (after 1099) as his second wife, HELIE Comte du Maine, son of JEAN de la Flèche & his wife Paula de Maine (-11 Jul 1110, bur Saint-Pierre de la Couture).]

------------------------

Agnes of Aquitaine, Queen of León and Castile

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Agnes_of_Aquitaine,_Queen_of_Castile

Agnes or Ines of Aquitaine or Poitou was an 11th century Queen of Leon and Castile by her marriage to Alfonso VI of León and Castile.

Contemporary records show Agnes to have been daughter of William VIII, Duke of Aquitaine and his second wife, Matilda, whose origins are uncertain. She has been confused with a half-sister of the same name who was also an Iberian Queen, Agnes, daughter of William by his third wife, Hildegarde of Burgundy.

[edit] Marriage

In 1069, Agnes married Alfonso VI, king of León, his father dividing the kingdom into three realms upon his death. Alfonso and his brother Sancho of Castile would supplant their brother García in Galicia, but then in January 1072, Alfonso (and presumably Agnes) was forced to flee and Sancho took the entire realm of their father. However, Sancho was assassinated later that year and Alfonso returned, being crowned king of the reunited kingdom of their father in October 1072, at which time he also claimed to be "Emperor of all Spain".

They last appear together in May 1077, and then Alfonso appears alone. This suggests that she had died, although Orderic Vitalis reports that in 1109 Alfonso's 'relict' Agnes remarried to Elias I of Maine, leading some to speculate that Alfonso and Agnes had divorced due to consanguinity. It seems more likely that Orderic gave the wrong name to Alfonso's final wife, Beatrice, who had just become a widow at the time. Agnes and Alfonso had no children, (nor did Elias by his wife, Alfonso's 'relict').[1]

[edit] Death and Burial

Several alternative accounts are given for the death of Agnes. Some sources place it in 1078, which would be consistent with her disappearance from the records. However, a surviving obituary notice has been interpreted as placing her death in 1097. This record, though, simply refers to Queen Ínes, and probably intended her half-sister Agnes, Queen of Aragon and Navarre, who died in that year. Likewise, the report of her 1009 marriage to Elias of Maine would, if accurate, require her survival at least to that date.

A queen Agnes is said to have been buried in the royal monastery of Sahagún, Sahagún, León, near Alfonso's second wife, Constance of Burgundy [2]. However, given that the surviving monuments at Sahagún are not contemporary and errors have been found in the reported inscriptions, this may be apocryphal.

--------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Agnes_of_Aquitaine,_Countess_of_Savoy

Agnes of Aquitaine, Countess of Savoy

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Agnes

Countess of Savoy

Tenure 1064-1078

Spouse Peter I, Count of Savoy

Issue

Bertha, Queen of Aragon?

Agnes, Margravine of Susa

Alix, Margravine of Western Liguria

House House of Poitiers

Father William VII, Duke of Aquitaine

Mother Ermensinda

Born c.1052

Died after 18 June 1089

Agnes of Aquitaine (c.1052 – after 18 June 1089) was a daughter of William VII, Duke of Aquitaine and his wife Ermesinde, who is of unknown origins. Her sister was Clementia, Countess consort of Luxembourg. Agnes herself was Countess consort of Savoy and possibly Queen consort of Aragon.

Contents

[hide]

* 1 Life

o 1.1 Possible wife of Ramiro I of Aragon

o 1.2 Countess of Savoy

* 2 Sources

o 2.1 Footnotes

[edit] Life

[edit] Possible wife of Ramiro I of Aragon

Agnes became a popular name in the Poitiers family during Agnes' lifetime; after the marriage of William V, Duke of Aquitaine and Agnes of Burgundy. There were several Aquitainian women sharing the name and sharing similar or the same titles by marriage. Three known women named Agnes who were of Aquitainian origin became Iberian Queen consorts, however it is possible there was a fourth.[1]

Ramiro I of Aragon married a second wife named Agnes, who is believed to be of Aquitainian origins.[2] The woman's parentage is disputed; she may have been daughter of William VI, Duke of Aquitaine or his half-brother William VII, Duke of Aquitaine. It is believed by some [3] that Duke William VI died childless. This would have left Duke William VII with his daughter who would have been aged around six around the time of marriage, this would also explain the lack of children born to Ramiro and his second wife.

Ramiro I died on 8 May 1063 leaving his wife a widow.

[edit] Countess of Savoy

Agnes married Peter I, Count of Savoy in 1064. Duke William VI is probably excluded as her father from thus, as Agnes would have been over 26 years old at the time of her marriage if she had been his daughter (he died in 1038). This seems improbable as noble girls often married when aged 12 to 15 at the time. Duke William VII is therefore left as the most likely candidate to be Agnes´s father.

Agnes and Peter had at most, three daughters:

* Agnes (c.1066-after 13 March 1110) married Count Friedrich von Luetzelburg, Magrave of Susa and had issue

* Alix (died after 21 December 1099) married Boniface del Vasto and had issue.

* Bertha (c.1075-before 1111) (supposed daughter) married Peter I of Aragon, a possible step-grandson of Agnes. Her marriage to Ramiro I of Aragon would explain her daughter's marriage as Bertha's mother would have been Dowager Queen consort of Aragon. Bertha had no known issue.

Peter died on July 9 1078, leaving Agnes a widow. A charter confirms that Agnes, widow of Count Peter was still alive in June 1089.[4]

[edit] Sources

* AQUITAINE, Medieval Lands

* SAVOY, Medieval Lands

[edit] Footnotes

1. ^ Szabolcs de Vajay 'Berthe, reine d'Aragon', p. 396

2. ^ ES II 58 and ES II 76.

3. ^ Richard (1903) Tome II, p. 122.

4. ^ Carutti, D. (1889) Regesta comitum Sabaudiæ, marchionum in Italia (Turin) ("Regesta comitum Sabaudiæ"), CCXV, p. 76.

This page was last modified on 22 October 2010 at 11:45.

ES II:76

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]