== Notes for [[Item:Q87903|Q87903]] ==

ID: I46339

Name: Gnaeus Cornelius Scipio

Given Name: Gnaeus Cornelius

Surname: Scipio

Sex: M

_UID: 592B100A93023049AA08F3D11C42057F04F0

Change Date: 4 Apr 2004

Death: 211 BC

Marriage 1 Spouse Unknown

Children

Publius Corneilus Scipio

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I46339

Gnaeus Cornelius Scipio Calvus

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Gnaeus Cornelius Scipio Calvus (died 211 BC) was a Roman general and statesman.

His father was Lucius Cornelius Scipio (Lucius Cornelius L.f. Scipio), son of the patrician censor of 280, Lucius Cornelius Scipio Barbatus. His younger brother was Publius Cornelius Scipio, father of the most famous Scipio – Scipio Africanus. Gnaeus Cornelius Scipio Calvus served as consul in 222 BC, his co-consul being Marcus Claudius Marcellus, in the first of his five consulships. Gnaeus Cornelius Scipio was nicknamed Calvus (the bald) to distinguish him from his uncle, another Gnaeus Cornelius Scipio nicknamed Asina (or donkey), who had been twice consul during the First Punic War.

Scipio Calvus fought in the Second Punic War in Iberia (Hispania), starting with a victory in the Battle of Cissa in 218 BC until he was killed in the Battle of the Upper Baetis in 211 BC shortly after the similar death of his younger brother. Both Scipios were capable commanders, both were consuls, and both were killed in Hispania after their armies had separated.

[edit] Descendants

His son was Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica, consul in 191 BC, the first Scipio Nasica (nicknamed Nasica for his pointed nose), who founded the Nasica branch of the Scipiades. Scipio Nasica's son, another Scipio Nasica (nicknamed Corculum, with his full name being Publius Cornelius P.f. G.n. Scipio Nasica Corculum), married his second cousin Cornelia Africana Major, the eldest daughter of Scipio Africanus and thus united the two lines. Their descendants in the male line continued until at least 46 BC, in the person of Metellus Scipio (adopted into the Caecilii Metelli family).

Forrás / Source:

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gnaeus_Cornelius_Scipio_Calvus

----

'''
=Publius Cornelius Scipio=
'''

Publius Cornelius Scipio (died 211 BC) was a general and statesman of the Roman Republic.

A member of the Cornelia gens, Scipio served as consul in 218 BC, the first year of the Second Punic War. He sailed with his army from Pisa with the intention of confronting Hannibal in Hispania.[1] Stopping at Massilia (today Marseille) to replenish his supplies, he was shocked to discover that Hannibal's army had moved from Hispania and was crossing the Rhône. Scipio disembarked his army and marched to confront Hannibal, who, by now, had moved on. Returning to the fleet, he entrusted the command of his army to his brother Gnaeus Cornelius Scipio Calvus and sent him off to Hispania to carry on with the originally intended mission. Scipio returned to Italy to take command of the troops fighting in Cisalpine Gaul.

On his return to Italy, he advanced at once to meet Hannibal. In a sharp cavalry engagement near the Ticinus, a tributary of the Po river, he was defeated and severely wounded. In December of the same year, he again witnessed the complete defeat of the Roman army at the Trebia, when his fellow consul Tiberius Sempronius Longus allegedly insisted on fighting against his advice. [The earliest historical source was by the Greek historian Polybius, who became an intimate of Scipio's grandson and was seemingly biased in favour of the Scipio family. The other major account was written in the following century by the Roman historian Livy, who also expressed bias in favour of certain aristocratic families.]

Despite the military defeats, he still retained the confidence of the Roman people: his term of command was extended and the following year found him in Hispania with his brother Calvus, winning victories over the Carthaginians and strengthening Rome's position in the Iberian peninsula. He continued the Iberian campaigns until 211, when he was killed during the defeat of his army at the upper Baetis river by the Carthaginians and their iberian allies under Indibilis and Mandonius. That same year, Calvus and his army were destroyed at Ilorci near Carthago Nova. The details of these campaigns are not completely known, but it seems that the ultimate defeat and death of the two Scipiones was due to the desertion of the Celtiberians, who were bribed by Hasdrubal Barca, Hannibal's brother.

The son of Lucius Cornelius Scipio, he was the father of Publius Cornelius Scipio Africanus (the elder), and of Lucius Cornelius Scipio Asiaticus.

A later Publius Cornelius Scipio, son of Scipio Africanus the elder and Aemilia Paulla, and grandson of the consul of 218 BC, was the adoptive father of Scipio Aemilianus Africanus. This latter Scipio served as praetor in 174 BC.

'''Source :'''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Publius_Cornelius_Scipio

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]