== Notes for [[Item:Q99578|Q99578]] ==

The descendants of Haninai appear to occupy the gaonate of Sura for several generations and may also be ancestors of the Maharal of Prague.

Prince Haninai's father, Bustanai (d. 660/5), was the first Jewish Exilarch to be recognized by Arab rule. His father's birth and much of his life is surrounded by legend. His father's second wife was the daughter of King Shahrijar III of Persia.

King Shahrijar's mother was Miriam, the daughter of the Byzantine Emperor Maurice.

The Bahai religious leader Bahá'u'lláh's ancestry can be traced back to Haninai's father, Shahrijar Yazadagird III of Parthia

http://www.bupc.org/genealogy/genealogy-of-christ.html

Genealogy of Baha'u'llah, The HEIR to the THRONE OF DAVID, showing His lineage from Bostanai (the exilarch: exiled Davidic monarch) the son of King David.

Exilarchs

http://www.dayanofaleppo.org/docs/OtherImages.aspx

http://books.google.com/books?id=ZABSepHO1FMC&pg=PA631&lpg=PA631&dq=Jewish+Exilarchs+chart&source=bl&ots=GhC5dOhqO8&sig=8lHJuYPmqsq0o6-fRWSMEQ04aKo&hl=en&ei=zq89TKuKGsK88gbrtvmoBg&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=5&ved=0CCIQ6AEwBDgK#v=onepage&q&f=false

‪The British Chronicles, Volume 2‬ By David Hughes

Yazidgard lll / Bostonai, Exilarch chart

-------------------

Hanina ben Adoi (exilarch)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exilarch

--------------------

http://www.loebtree.com/hophni.html

Bustanai Genealogy

---------------------

http://medlibrary.org/medwiki/Bustanai_ben_Haninai

--------------------

Contact: Leone WEST adim4111@@yahoo.com for descendants of Nehemiah.

Prince Haninai Baradai (d. 689). Three sons: Hisdai II (exilarch c. 700-730) (information available), Nehemiah through whom the line of the exilarchs eventually passes, and Hananiah.

Hannaniah, the gaon of Sura from 689 to 694.

Sons: Hilai (Hillel) gaon of Sura from 694 to 712, and Yakob

Yakob, Gaon of Sura from 712-730

Mari, Gaon of Sura from 748 or 751 to 756 (d. 756).

Hillel, Gaon of Sura 792-798, d. 798. Sons: Ivomai, Natroi gaon of Sura (d. 853) and Rivyai (father of Joseph [d. 841])

Ivomai, Kohen Zedek, Gaon 838-848. Sons: Hophni, Nehemiah and Nahshon (gaon of Sura 874-882, and father of Khai gaon of Sura 889-896).

Hophni. Given by another source as Hophni son of Zedek Ha-COHEN son of Ivomai.

Rabba or Rabban

Mari, Gaon of Sura, went to Spain in 941.

Samuel Ha-Gaon, gaon of an academy in Spain around 975. Died 935.

Hophni ha-COHEN (from Merida?) (d. 963) married the daughter of Tzadok Kahana son of Mar Joseph Rav, grandson of Matityahu Gaon. (See David HUGHES RDavidH218@@aol.com for ancestry of Matityahu Gaon.) Sons: Samuel Ha-Nagid, Yehoseph Ha-Nagid (father of Samuel, father of Joseph Ha-Nagid who was killed in a pogrom 1062)

Samuel Ha-Nagid (b. Spain, d. 1056 Spain or 1034) (Last Gaon of the Sura academy 997-1013).

Samuel's daughter Asmouna possibly married Hai Gaon.

Samuel's son Israel was Gaon of Sura Academy 1017-1034. (Azariah ha-Kohen [Gaon of Sura Academy 1034-1037] may have been son of Israel.)

Samuel's son Isaac was a gaon.

(generation skipped in some accounts) Joseph Ibn Nagrela [Al-Nagrila] Ha-Nagid (d. 1034)

Samuel Ha-Nagid, vizier 1027 (d. 1056).

R. Yoseph I. Gaon. Executed 1066. Married daughter of Rabbi Nissim Ben Yaakov. According to Moshe Shaltiel, Yoseph was assassinated in a pogrom in Granada (1062) where he served as a Grand Vizier like his father before him.

--------------------
Exilarch Haninai II bar 'Adai ben Bustanai beni David was also called Haninai bar Adai. He was Exilarch at Babylonia before 689.

See "My Lines"

( http://homepages.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~cousin/html/p106.htm#i12948 )

from Compiler: R. B. Stewart, Evans, GA

( http://homepages.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~cousin/html/index.htm )
--------------------
http://www.findagrave.com/cgi-bin/fg.cgi?page=gr&GRid=52651498
--------------------
Hanini* bar 'ADOI

ABT 0610 - ABT 0689

* BIRTH: ABT 0610

* DEATH: ABT 0689

Father: Bustanai* BEN HANINI

Mother: Izdundad Sasanidof PERSIA

Family 1 :

1. +Nehemiah* BEN HANINI

http://www.geni.com/profile/edit_about_me/6000000002093814656?tab=about

RESEARCH NOTES:
Exilarch of Jews

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per03125.htm#0

"BAR ADOI"

Also known as, Theodorich, Theodoric. Also known as Makir.
Theuderic Makir (David) Jud de Narbonne. He was one of the first Exilarchs of Babylon.
For the first time, the early generations of this line have been revised to reflect Judeo Christian ancestry.
Makir who married the daughter of Charles Martel, was a Judiarch of Narbonne, a ranking Jewish leader.
Makir Judiarch was son of Habi Bai Ben Natronai, (Per the Austustan Society).
Born 771 died 793. Judiarch of Narbonne, (Septimania) Source, Royalty for commoners, Roderick W. Stuart, p234.

bar 'Adol; ha-DAVID

bar 'Adol; ha-DAVID

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD7F0ED31EFBBFA9822EF79916C2E6F
geni:6000000001263043349

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]