== Notes for [[Item:Q115431|Q115431]] ==

=Senhorinha Fernandes de Chacim=

* Daughter of Ferdinand Gonçalves Chancino and Maior Alfonso de Cambra
* [https://our-royal-titled-noble-and-commoner-ancestors.com/p3355.htm#i100773 '''Our Royal Titled Noble Ancestors''']

=Married=

* Married: '''Vasco Martins da Cunha, "o Seco", 5º senhor de Tábua,''' son of Martim Vasques da Cunha, "o Velho", 4º senhor de Tábua and Joana Rodrigues de Nomães

=Children=

* '''Theresa Vasques da Cunha,''' married to Fernan Gomez de Guzman, son of Gomez Perez de Guzman and Arabuena Armildes.
* '''Martim Vasques da Cunha,''' married to Violante Lopes Pacheco , daughter of Dom Lopo Fernandes Pacheco and his first wife, Maria Gomes Taveira . Martim died before 1333, and Violante married for the second time, with Diogo Affonso de Sousa , son of Dom Affonso Dinis, Infante de Portugal , and Maria Pires Ribeiro de Sousa .
* '''Joanna Vasques da Cunha,''' married to Ruy Vasques de Azevedo , son of Vasco Paes de Azevedo and Maria Rodrigues de Vasconcellos [cited in 1.4.] .
* '''Berenguela Vasques da Cunha,''' married to Gonçalo Vasques de Azevedo , son of Vasco Paes de Azevedo and Maria Rodrigues de Vasconcellos [cited in 1.3.] .

=Links=

* https://pt.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Martim_Vasques_da_Cunha
* https://www.slideshare.net/mobile/DiamanteHino/rvore-genealgica-cunhas

=Sources=

* FONTES: Livº do Deão 2-AA8; 2-AH7; 3-Z6; 6-H10
* Felgueiras Gayo Nobiliário de Famílias de Portugal 1941,ttª CHANCINHOS #2 N3
* José Augusto de Sotto Mayor Pizarro , Portuguese Medieval Lineages - 3 vols, Modern University, 1st Edition, Porto, 1999. vol. 2-pg. 370.
* Manuel José da Costa Felgueiras Gaio , Furniture of Families of Portugal, Carvalhos de Basto, 2nd Edition, Braga, 1989. vol. IV-pg. 144 (Wedges).
* Estevão Vasques Filipe The journey of a warrior in the end of the Three Hundreds, by Miguel Gomes Martins, in Cadernos do Arquivo Municipal, nº 5, Lisbon, p. 24.
* Santo Tirso Monastery, from 978 to 1588. The silhouette of an entity
* Manuel José da Costa Felgueiras Gaio , Furniture of Families of Portugal , Carvalhos de Basto, 2nd Edition, Braga, 1989. vol. III-pg. 171 and 409 (Chancinhos) and vol. IV-pg. 144 (Wedges).
* José Augusto de Sotto Mayor Pizarro , Portuguese Medieval Lineages, Porto, 1997 . In the 3 vols of the Edition of Universidade Moderna, Porto, 1999, vol. 2-pg. 372.
* José Augusto P. De Sotto Mayor Pizarro, The Patrons of the Monastery of Grijó, Porto, 1987
* Historia genealogica da Casa Real Portugueza, By Antonio Caetano de Sousa - https://books.google.com/books?id=2RNcAAAAcAAJ&pg=PA175&lpg=PA175&dq=Senhorinha+Fernandes+de+Chacim&source=bl&ots=1Sx5KaE4IQ&sig=ACfU3U1brWzyYrrJOQgPKk52A4WmK-wgvg&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwj3hNCRksrvAhV-JzQIHX2WAdg4ChDoATAEegQICBAC#v=onepage&q=Senhorinha%20Fernandes%20de%20Chacim&f=false
* Evidence of the Genealogical History of the Portuguese Royal House: Taken, Volume 1, By António Caetano de Sousa - https://books.google.com/books?id=eoXzCtyoGPUC&pg=PA151&lpg=PA151&dq=Senhorinha+Fernandes+de+Chacim&source=bl&ots=hWUKyc4RRQ&sig=ACfU3U24Yy95EhK0PCD4hkJr2Uw7JCRELw&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwj3hNCRksrvAhV-JzQIHX2WAdg4ChDoATAGegQICRAC#v=onepage&q=Senhorinha%20Fernandes%20de%20Chacim&f=false
* Portugaliae monumenta historica a saeculo octavo post Christum usque ad, edited by Alexandre Herculano - https://books.google.com/books?id=4p2uV9QNPDIC&pg=PA147&lpg=PA147&dq=Senhorinha+Fernandes+de+Chacim&source=bl&ots=w8__0mNfzh&sig=ACfU3U1g2x9808faPwTW0kY8kpo-GaL64w&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwj3hNCRksrvAhV-JzQIHX2WAdg4ChDoATAHegQIBhAC#v=onepage&q=Senhorinha%20Fernandes%20de%20Chacim&f=false

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]