== Notes for [[Item:Q2995|Q2995]] ==

Reference:''' "Divrei ha-Yamim le-Bnei Yahya,( דברי הימים לבני יחייא )"''', by Eliakim Carmoly, Printed in Frankfort am Main/Rodelheim, Published by: Isak Kaufman, 1850. Genealogy of, and biographical work on, the Yahya family by Eliakim Carmoly. There is an introduction from Carmoly, in which he informs that the Yahya family is one of distinction from the time of Maimonides. Originally achieving greatness in Portugal and Spain, they after settled in Italy and Turkey. The text is preceded by a chart of the family, beginning with the Nasi, Don Yahya, and concluding with Don Gedalia. The text, in seven chapters, is set in a single column, primarily in rabbinic type although there are instances of vocalized square letters, and is accompanied by extensive footnotes. The final page is an announcement of the forthcoming publication of seven minor Yerushalmi tractates by Carmoli. The text of this book was compared to the "bin Yahya Family Tapestry", currently stored in the antiquity archives of Jewish Theological Seminary in New York City, by Abraham Greenstein - grandson of Abraham Gindi HaKohen. The text matches the Tapestry.

Chief Rabbi and Court Jew to Alfons V (the African King of Portugal). Shlomo fathered at least three sons: 1) Gedaliah, 2) David, 3) Yaakob; It is possible that Yaakob is the adopted son of Gedaliah. He was rabbi of the Lisbon community, and forbade his children and relatives to accumulate property because he foresaw the coming persecutions. His death occurred before that of Alfonso V. '''Shlomo was a math teacher of Afonso de Albuquerque''' – Afonso was anointed viceroy and "Duke of Goa" by King Manuel I of Portugal, being the first Portuguese duke not from the royal family, and the first Portuguese title landed overseas. .
--------------------
Citado no livro de Elías Lipiner: O tempo dos Judeus: segundo as Ordenações do Reino, página 127, seria o tio de Judá Negro, e membro da família "Ibn Yahia" de Lisboa, e ainda conforme o mesmo livro, seria irmão de Guedelha Negro, Logo foi possível identifica-lo como "Shlomo ben David ben Shlomo ibn Yachya" nascido em 1430, e falecido em 1490, na cidade de Lisboa, e então foi possível mesclar o perfil, e fazer a devida dedução.

Fonte:

http://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ibn_Yahya_(famille)

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051ADA6E7F11EFBBFA9822EF79916C2184
geni:6000000002638769862


[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]