== Notes for [[Item:Q82407|Q82407]] ==

Annia Cornificia Faustina n. en Roma Hija de Marcus Aurelius y Faustina la Menor. Se salvo de la ejecución de Cómodo. cc. Marcus Petronius . Cónsul II Lucio Didio Marinus Recaudador - de Impuestos.SE cree que estuvo involucrada con Pertinax, lo que le valió su eliminación.
--------------------
'''
=Annia Cornificia Faustina=
'''

Annia Cornificia Faustina (122/123-between 152-158) was the youngest child and only daughter to the praetor Marcus Annius Verus and Domitia Lucilla. The parents of Cornificia came from wealthy senatorial families who were of consular rank. Her brother was the future Roman emperor Marcus Aurelius, and both were born and raised in Rome.

'''History'''

In 124, the father of Cornificia died and she and her brother were raised by their mother and their paternal grandfather, the Roman Senator Marcus Annius Verus, who died in 138. Relations between her and her brother appeared to be good. Before Cornificia had married, she had settled her paternal inheritance with her brother.

Cornificia married the Roman Senator Gaius Ummidius Quadratus Annianus Verus, who served as a suffect consul in 146. He descended from one of the leading aristocratic and political influential families in Rome and was a direct descendant of the late suffect consul Gaius Ummidius Durmius Quadratus.

Cornificia bore Annianus Verus two children:

* Marcus Ummidius Quadratus Annianus
* Ummidia Cornificia Faustina

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Annia_Cornificia_Faustina

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]