== Notes for [[Item:Q87508|Q87508]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cato_Salonianus

He was the son of Cato the Elder by his second wife Salonia, who was the freedwoman daughter of one of Cato's own freedman scribes, formerly a slave. His birth was in 154 BC, when his father had completed his eightieth year, and about two years before the death of his half-brother, Marcus Porcius Cato Licinianus. He lost his father when he was five years old, and lived to attain the praetorship, in which office he died.[1][2]

He was father of one son also called Marcus Porcius Cato Salonianus, and one daughter Porcia who married Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus (her husband's nephew, Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus in 54 BC, would marry Porcia).

Cato the Elder
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.
Jump to: navigation, search
Marcus Porcius Cato (Latin: M·PORCIVS·M·F·CATO) (234 BC - 149 BC), Roman statesman, surnamed "The Censor," Sapiens, Priscus, or Major (the Elder), to distinguish him from Cato the Younger (his great-grandson), was born at Tusculum.

He came of an ancient plebeian family, noted for some military services, but not ennobled by the discharge of the higher civil offices. He was bred, after the manner of his Latin forefathers, to agriculture, to which he devoted himself when not engaged in military service. But, having attracted the notice of L. Valerius Flaccus, he was brought to Rome, and became successively quaestor (204), aedile (199), praetor (198), and consul (195) with his old patron.

During his early career he vainly opposed the repeal of the lex Oppia, passed during the Second Punic War to restrict luxury and extravagance on the part of women. Meanwhile he served in Africa, taking part in the crowning campaign of Zama. He held commands in Sardinia, where he first showed his strict public morality, and in Hispania, which he reduced to subjection with great cruelty, gaining thereby the honour of a triumph (194).

In the year 191 BC he acted as military tribune in the war against Antiochus of Syria, and played an important part in a battle at Thermopylae, which signalled the end of the Seleucid invasion of Greece.

His reputation as a soldier was now established; henceforth he preferred to serve the state at home, scrutinizing the conduct of the candidates for public honours and of generals in the field. If he was not personally engaged in the prosecution of the Scipios (Africanus and Asiaticus) for corruption, it was his spirit that animated the attack upon them. Even Scipio Africanus, who refused to reply to the charge, saying only, "Romans, this is the day on which I conquered Hannibal," and was absolved by acclamation, found it necessary to retire self-banished to his villa at Liternum. Cato's enmity dated from the African campaign when he quarrelled with Scipio for his lavish distribution of the spoil amongst the troops, and his general luxury and extravagance.

Cato had, however, a more serious task to perform in opposing the spread of the new Hellenic culture which threatened to destroy the rugged simplicity of the conventional Roman type. He conceived it to be his special mission to resist this invasion. It was in the discharge of the censorship that this determination was most strongly exhibited, and hence that he derived the title (the Censor) by which he is most generally distinguished. He revised with unsparing severity the lists of senators and knights, ejecting from either order the men whom he judged unworthy of it, either on moral grounds or from their want of the prescribed means. The expulsion of L. Quinctius Flamininus for wanton cruelty was an example of his rigid justice.

His regulations against luxury were very stringent. He imposed a heavy tax upon dress and personal adornment, especially of women, and upon young slaves purchased as favourites. In 181 BC he supported the lex Orchia (according to others, he first opposed its introduction, and subsequently its repeal), which prescribed a limit to the number of guests at an entertainment, and in 169 BC the lex Voconia, one of the provisions of which was intended to check the accumulation of an undue proportion of wealth in the hands of women.

Amongst other things he repaired the aqueducts, cleansed the sewers, prevented private persons drawing off public water for their own use, ordered the demolition of houses which encroached on the public way, and built the first basilica in the Forum near the Curia (Livy, History, 39.44; Plutarch, Marcus Cato, 19). He raised the amount paid by the publicani for the right of farming the taxes, and at the same time diminished the contract prices for the construction of public works.

From the date of his censorship (184) to his death in 149 BC, Cato held no public office, but continued to distinguish himself in the senate as the persistent opponent of the new ideas. He was struck with horror, along with many other Romans of the graver stamp, at the licence of the Bacchanalian mysteries, which he attributed to the fatal influence of Greek manners; and he vehemently urged the dismissal of the philosophers (Carneades, Diogenes, and Critolaus), who came as ambassadors from Athens, on account of the dangerous nature of the views expressed by them.

He had a horror of physicians, who were chiefly Greeks. He procured the release of Polybius, the historian, and his fellow prisoners, contemptuously asking whether the senate had nothing more important to do than discuss whether a few Greeks should die at Rome or in their own land. It was not till his eightieth year that he made his first acquaintance with Greek literature, though some think after examining his writings that he may have had a knowledge of Greek works for much of his life.

Almost his last public act was to urge his countrymen to the Third Punic War and the destruction of Carthage. In 157 BC he was one of the deputies sent to Carthage to arbitrate between the Carthaginians and Massinissa, king of Numidia. The mission was unsuccessful and the commissioners returned home. But Cato was so struck by the evidences of Carthaginian prosperity that he was convinced that the security of Rome depended on the annihilation of Carthage. From this time, in season and out of season, he kept repeating the cry: "Ceterum censeo Carthaginem esse delendam." (Moreover, I advise that Carthage should be destroyed. - Plutarch, Life of Cato) He was known for saying this at the conclusion of each of his speeches.

To Cato the individual life was a continual discipline, and public life was the discipline of the many. He regarded the individual householder as the germ of the family, the family as the germ of the state. By strict economy of time he accomplished an immense amount of work; he exacted similar application from his dependents, and proved himself a hard husband, a strict father, a severe and cruel master. There was little difference apparently, in the esteem in which he held his wife and his slaves; his pride alone induced him to take a warmer interest in his sons.

To the Romans themselves there was little in this behaviour which seemed worthy of censure; it was respected rather as a traditional example of the old Roman manners. In the remarkable passage (xxxix. 40) in which Livy describes the character of Cato, there is no word of blame for the rigid discipline of his household.

Cato perhaps deserves even more notice as a literary man than as a statesman or a soldier. He was an annalist, the first Latin prose writer of any importance, and the first author of a history of Rome in Latin. His treatise on agriculture (De Agricultura or De Re Rustica) is the only work by him that has been preserved; it is not agreed whether the work we possess is the original or a later revision. It contains a miscellaneous collection of rules of good husbandry, conveying much curious information on the domestic habits of the Romans of his age. His most important work, Origines, in seven books, related the history of Rome from its earliest foundations to his own day. It was so called from the second and third books, which described the rise of the different Italian towns. Some consider that if it were not for his impact of Latin prose, Latin might have been supplanted by Greek.

His speeches, of which as many as 150 were collected, were principally directed against the young free-thinking and loose-principled nobles of the day. He also wrote a set of maxims for the use of his son (Praecepta ad Filium) and a simple history of Rome "In Big Letters" (Plutarch), also for his sons, and some rules for everyday life in verse (Carmen de Moribus).

The two collections of proverbs (Distichs of Cato, Monosticha Catonis) in hexameter verse, probably belong to the 4th century AD, and are mistakenly attributed to Cato the Elder.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Marcus Cato (Porcius) - 'Cato the Elder' (234-149 BC)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

also known as Cato the Censor (to distinguish him from his great-grandson)

"Censeo Carthaginem esse delendam" or "I declare that Carthage must be destroyed."

Marcus Porcius Cato was born in 234 bc in Tusculum, a self-governing town of Latium (Lazio) fifteen miles south of Rome. Its citizens, including Cato’s father, were Roman citizens.

But his father’s living was as a farmer in the mountainous Sabine country, well to the southeast. ‘I spent all my boyhood in frugality, privation and hard work, reclaiming the Sabine rocks, digging and planting those flinty fields’ (Cato, Speeches 128).

Porcius was his nomen, his wider family name. The cognomen Cato went back in the family at least to his great-grandfather Cato, who was ‘more than once rewarded for bravery, and was reimbursed from public funds, five times successively, when war-horses of his were killed in battle’ (Plutarch, Cato 1.1).

‘I first enlisted at seventeen, when Hannibal was having his run of luck, setting Italy on fire’ (Cato, Speeches 187-8). The friendship and patronage of L. Valerius Flaccus, roughly Cato’s age and the son of a consul, helped him to the rank of military tribune under Q. Fabius Maximus in 21

After some years of fighting, Cato was elected quaestor in 204, again under Flaccus’ patronage. The work before him was still military, but this was now the first rung on the ladder of Roman electoral politics. ‘The Romans had a special term, New Men, for people who rose in politics without any family precedent. This was what they called Cato. He liked to say that in terms of office and power he was New, but in terms of his family’s bravery and prowess he was extremely Old’ (Plutarch, Cato 1.2). As quaestor he served under P. Cornelius Scipio ‘Africanus’, then gathering forces in Sicily for the invasion of Africa that would end the war. Scipio enjoyed the Greek culture and fine living of Syracuse. Cato did not, and thought them bad for Roman soldiers.

As a politician, Cato could now wield patronage himself. His powers as a speaker were employed on behalf of people in nearby villages and towns who wished to use him as an advocate, and he will have begun to prosper. His next elected office was as one of the two aediles, with responsibilities in Rome itself, in 199: he and his colleague found excuses to organise more Games than usual, not an unpopular move.

In 195 he and his friend Flaccus were elected consuls, the climax of many Roman political careers. Cato’s task as consul was to command the Roman army in the northeastern half of the vast new territory of Spain, captured from the Carthaginians a few years before but almost continually in revolt. Within the limit of the single campaigning season, from a ‘very difficult and unfavourable starting point’ (Speeches 19) he ran an effective campaign, training, disciplining and stretching his troops, ending rebellions, even rescuing his junior colleague, the praetor P. Manlius, from threatened disaster in the southwest beyond his own province. He seemed so successful that he was voted the honour of celebrating a Triumph on his return to Rome; the booty he had won made up a bonus of a pound of silver to every legionary; and the Senate decided to disband his army. Whereupon revolts broke out once more — but these were a problem for his successor in Spain, Scipio Africanus.

In the course of his career Cato served the expanding Roman state in Sicily and north Africa in 214, in Sardinia in 198, in Spain in 195, in Greece in 191 and 189. But his real fame came — and still comes — from what he did and said in Rome. From the outset of his political career, he was the conviction politician of the day. He knew Roman behaviour, Roman morality, the Roman way. From this standpoint he attacked, and generally discredited, for embezzlement and other illegal acts while abroad, a succession of victims: M’. Acilius Glabrio, his commander in 191, another New Man; the great Scipio Africanus, Cato’s commander in Sicily and Africa, and his brother L. Cornelius Scipio; Q. Minucius Thermus, one of those who followed Cato in Spain. By 184 he had a well-deserved reputation for stubborn righteousness and fiery oratory.

Every five years Rome elected two censors. These held office for a year and their task was to review the lists of the Senate, the Equites ‘knights’ and the citizen body, expelling those unworthy of the rank or too poor to meet their obligations. The censorship was sometimes looked on as an honourable sinecure, but in 184 a climate had been created, with Cato’s help, in which Romans wanted better behaviour from their aristocrats. In 184 there was fierce competition for the censorship: all other candidates, except Flaccus, directed their campaigns against Cato personally. Cato and Flaccus were elected. Their famous censorship of 184/3 aroused rivalries that ‘occupied Cato for the rest of his life’ (Livy 39.44.9). They demoted several senators and knights, for reasons including personal morals. Victims included M. Fulvius Nobilior, whom Cato served in 189; L. Quinctius Flamininus, brother of one of Rome’s greatest generals. Cato concerned himself freely with issues of morality and private expenditure, speaking out On Clothes and Vehicles and On Statues and Pictures. The censors imposed penalties for encroachment on public land and misuse of the public water supply. They extended Rome’s sewer network to serve the Aventine hill, at great cost.

Cato, it is reliably said, disapproved of humour when censorial business was in hand. L. Nasica was asked formally at registration, ‘Answer to your mind. Have you a wife?’ replied, ‘Yes, but not to my mind!’ and was immediately demoted.

Cato held no more elected offices, but his involvement in Roman politics was uninterrupted. As senator, advocate, prosecutor, he continued to target misbehaviour by generals on campaign and by governors in overseas provinces. His oratorical skills were used in long-running disputes with old adversaries and their relatives as well as in defending, or rewriting, his own past acts.

As Rome’s involvement in the eastern Mediterranean grew, Cato found himself the patron or advocate of Greek delegations who had come to press a case in Rome. As a self-proclaimed traditional Roman, a self-proclaimed distruster of Greeks, he might have found this position uncomfortable, but it did not leave him at a loss for words. Asked in 150 to help get a thousand state hostages released and sent home to Greece, Cato rose in the Senate and said, ‘As if we had nothing to do, we sit all day deciding whether some old Greeks should be buried by our undertakers or by Achaean ones.’ The intervention was well-judged: the vote was for release. Among these ‘old Greeks’, who had had a seventeen years’ enforced holiday in Rome, was the future historian Polybius.

Cato’s last major contribution to Roman public affairs was to urge war against Carthage, the ‘Third Punic War’ as it is now known — a war that was eventually declared in his lifetime and ended, after his death, with the complete destruction of Rome’s great rival. As Cato had so insistently repeated, Carthago delenda est, ‘Carthage must be razed.’ Its destroyer would be P. Cornelius Scipio Aemilianus, brother of Cato’s daughter-in-law Tertia. ‘He alone has a mind,’ said the aged Cato about Aemilianus; ‘the rest are darting shadows’ (Polybius 36 fragment 8.7).

Cato had married Licinia, ‘noble but not rich’, about the time of his consulship. He was said to have joked ‘that his wife never put her arms round him except when there was a thunderstorm: he was a happy man when Jove thundered’ (Plutarch, Cato 17.7). He was also said to be a good husband and a thoughtful and painstaking father.

His first son, Marcus Cato later called ‘Licinianus’, was born around 192. Cato took personal charge of his son’s education, and himself wrote out a history of Rome ‘in big letters’ to teach Marcus to read. Marcus fought honourably in Greece in 168 under the eminent L. Aemilius Paullus. He married Tertia, his commander’s daughter, in the 160s and died just after being elected praetor in the late 150s.

Licinia, too, died relatively young. At the age of about 80, still vigorous, Cato married a much younger woman, Salonia, the daughter of one of his secretaries — so probably not of Roman descent. He had a son by Salonia, also called Marcus and known to later historians as ‘Cato Salonius’ or ‘Salonianus’. Cato died in 149.

Cato the Elder was born probably in 234 BC at Tusculum where he was brought up in the country of the Sabines on his father's farm. His father the descendant of a family for many generations resident in Latium, died when he was very young, and left him a small estate at a considerable distance from his birthplace, in the territory of the Sabines. Here he spent his early youth in work upon his land, leading a simple life, and studying such subjects as he thought would best advance the career of patriotic service which he had already marked out for himself. When 17 yrs of age, in 217, he entered the Roman Army, and served in the campaign of that year against Hannibal. In 214 he served at Capua and in 209 he was with Fabius Maximum at Tarentum. During the short periods between his various terms of service he devoted his time to labor at his farm.

He was consul in 195 BC and led his army to great victory in Spain.

Cato, from the very beginning of his life, established his thoughts and feelings about the "simple life." With little formal education during his youth, Cato became a soldier, then tribune, then quaestor (treasurer) during the Second Punic War to fight against Hannibal and the Carthanians. He retired from the army in 191 BC. As a senator he participated fervently in debates.

Near this favorite resort a Roman patrician, Lucius Valerius Flaccus, had a large estate. Cato was constantly brought into contact with him, and impressed the Nobleman so favorably that the latter begged him to go to Rome with him, and under his patronage as the custom was, to study law and oratory. Cato consented and made his entry into the political world and marked sucess rapidly acquiring celebrity as a pleader and oratorin the forum and becoming a candidate for the quaestorship, an office which he attained in 205.

In this capacity he accompanied Scipio Africanus to Sicily in 204 but went back to Rome before the return of his general whom he accused to the senate of prodigality and mis-management. This is the story given by some authorities, though Livy says the inhabitants of Locri were the complainants against Scripio and does not mention Cato by name as having pleaded the cause. A commission of investigation was the result of the complaint and Scipio was acquitted.

Because of his bravery and success on the battle field his surname, originally Priscus, was changed to Cato (Catus for the Romans meant "skilled man"). The progress from quaestor to consul via offices of aedile and praetor was a natural one and came more quickly to men who had proved themselves able soldiers in times of war. However, no one man could hold the same office twice in ten years. Therefore, unless there was a provincial governor needed somewhere, some men could at the very height of their power suddenly find themselves unemployed.





Feud with Scipio
Cato's greatest enemy was the outstanding general Scipio Africanus (who defeated Hannibal !), whom Cato hassled wherever and whenever he could. People tended to like Scipio and in 189 BC when Scipio returned from Asia following his defeat of Antiochus, his triumph surely should have sealed his fame. And yet Cato did all to to disgrace him. A staunch defender of tradition Cato charged Scipio with spending too much time in the gymnasium, at the theatre and the baths, and accused him of indulging in 'Greek customs'. Althugh Cato's accusations failed to stick, the authorities were alas goaded into a trial which Scipio won. But at what cost Cato had in essence managed to ruin his reputation, forcing him out of politics. Scipio's fall is a prime example of Cato's determination to succeed and political skill as well as his bigotry.

Repeal of the lex Oppia
In Rome tribunes proposed repealing the lex Oppia, passed twenty years before, that limited the jewelry, colored clothing, and carriage-riding of Roman women. When many women lobbied officials, consul Marcus Cato spoke against repeal, arguing that the husband's authority over his wife prevents trouble with women. Known for renouncing luxuries, Cato warned against this mass movement and compared it to the secession of the plebeians in 494 BC. He asked if the men could endure equality with women and suggested that once equality was granted, women would be superior. Cato cautioned that excessive spending led to the vices of extravagance and avarice, which destroy empires. He pitied the husbands, who would be entreated by their wives for money whether they yield or refuse. Tribune Lucius Valerius argued that women benefited Rome in the past and should not have to suffer this war-time measure in peace-time, believing women's finery should be controlled by husbands and fathers, not by the law; greater power requires greater moderation. A crowd of women besieged the doors of those who intended to veto the tribunes' proposal until they relented; then the tribes voted for the repeal.

Governor of Sardinia
As governor of Sardinia, Marcus Cato had greatly reduced government expenditures by his simple living.

Suspicious of Eumenes II, Cato described a king as an animal that lives on human flesh. He said that he would rather do what was right and go unrewarded than do wrong and be unpunished, and he was prepared to forgive everyone's mistakes except his own. He noted that the wise learn from the mistakes of fools; but fools do not imitate the wise. Cato undertook numerous prosecutions and caused Lucius Scipio to pay a heavy fine, but 44 impeachments were brought against Cato himself.

In Spain he defeated rebellions by giving his army little opportunity to flee from battle. In less than a year he captured 400 cities in Spain, and his soldiers received a pound of silver each, which he said was better than having the pockets of a few filled with gold. Succeeded early in Spain by his adversary Scipio Africanus, Cato on his march to Rome subdued the Lacetani and executed 600 deserters they handed over to him. Cato was the first to publish his speeches and wrote other works such as histories; his only extant book, On Agriculture, is the oldest Latin book we have. Full of practical advice he described the duties of the overseer as the following:

He must show good management. The feast days must be observed. He must withhold his hands from another's goods and diligently preserve his own. He must settle disputes among the slaves; and if anyone commits an offense he must punish him properly in proportion to the fault. He must see that the servants are well provided for, and that they do not suffer from cold or hunger. Let him keep them busy with their work - he will more easily keep them from wrongdoing and meddling. If the overseer set his face against wrongdoing, they will not do it; if he allows it, the master must not let him go unpunished. He must express his appreciation of good work, so that others may take pleasure in well-doing.6


He was hated for his rural ways, his harshness and his outspokenness. Though he was respected as a skilled politician and a effective public speaker.
And it was in his last political act, as an eighty-four year old senator, that he should initiate a war which should result in the complete destruction of an entire civilization - Carthage.
Cato never really retired from active life. He compiled the earliest Roman encyclopedia, wrote a medical work, a history of Rome, and even a treatise on agriculture; the latter being the oldest surviving complete prose work in Latin.

Men in love were thought laughable by Romans, especially old dodderers who married young girls. Yet this is precisely what Cato eventually did. Being a sensible old man, on losing his wife he had married off his son. Cato himself then frequented a certain slave girl, who came to see him every evening in his room, but his son felt that this carrying-on was rather shocking in a house where there was a young bride, his wife. Cato went straight to the forum where his friends gathered around him, forming an escort. Among them was a scribe, Salonius, who had worked at Cato's house when the the great man had been a magistrate and who had since remained his client. Cato called him over and asked wether he had found a husband yet for his daughter. Salonius replied that he had not, and that he was reluctant to do so without asking Cato's opinion. 'Well then', said Cato, 'I have found a suitable son-in-law for you, unless you find his age an obstacle. He is a worthy man in all respects, but he is very old.' Salonius could hardly object. Cato then declared that he himself was the fiancé. Astounded but honoured, Salonius rushed to put his signature on the contract. Cato's young wife gave him a son who assumed as surname the name of his maternal grandfather, Salonius.

Concerning the next few years of Cato's life we have slight details but know that he was aedile in 199 and that in 198 he was made praetor and received the province of Sardinia. Here he showed in his administration and mode of life the enconomy simplicity and impartial justice which distinguished his whole career. By the frugality of his habits by his example in public and his prompt punishment of venality and corrupt practices, he endeavored to combat the introduction of habits of luxury and extravagance from Greece and to restore the old severity and strength of the Roman character. In 195 he was chosen consul, Lucius Valerius Flaccus his former patron being his colleague.

Cato in Spain
It was then customary for one of the conssuls to take the governorship of a distant portion of the Roman possessions and Cato was assigned to that of Hither Spain, a province then in a state of revolt and great disorder. Here he showed remarkable ability as a military leader, suppressed the rebellion, compelled the Spanish cities to destroy the greater part of their fortifications and restored affairs to their old condition. on his return to Rome in 194 he received the honor of his triumph.

Cato in Greece
In the consulship of Manius Acillius Glabrio which immediately followed his own Cato accompanied that leader as legate in his campaign against Greece. Here, by a sudden and remarkably difficult march he decided the principal battle of the war in favor of the Romans and compelled the retreat of the enemy.

Returning to Rome, he from this time abandoned military life and resumed his place as a popular orator in the forum and the courts.

Election as Censor
(A Censor is a political office that had election every five years to classify citizens for military service or to judge moral fitness of public functions.) In 184 BC he was made Censor, again having his old friend Flaccus as his colleague. Although most candidates for censor, whose duty was to watch, regulate, and punish any licentious behavior, campaigned promising leniency, in 184 BC Cato and Lucius Valerius were elected censors by promising drastic purification like the strenuous treatment of a physician. Their inexorable administration of justice made Roman authority greatly feared and respected. In attacking extravagance Cato asked how could a city be saved where people pay more for pickled fish than for an ox. Taxes on luxuries valued over 1500 drachmas were increased tenfold. Cato said, "A man who beats his wife or child is laying sacrilegious hands on the most sacred thing in the world." Cato owned many slaves he bought as prisoners of war; they could earn their freedom, and a man could pay a price to sleep with one of the women and no other; but those found guilty of a capital crime in his formal trial, he executed.

Though he said that he would rather have people ask why there is not a statue of him than why there is one, a statue was erected in his honor in the temple of Hygieia with the following inscription:

When the Roman state was sinking into decay,
he became censor and through his wise leadership,
sober discipline and sound principles restored its strength.5

It was while holding this position that Cato did most of the work he is famous for. He prosecuted multiple officials for extortion and corruptions. He pushed his idea of simplicity and frugality on both the government and the people during a time when there was an increase in personal wealth and a desire for more. He did this by revising the roles of the Senate and Calvary as well as inventing a way to tax luxurious items.
Cato took his duties as the guardian of public morals rather seriously. He expelled Manilius, a prospective candidate for the consulship, from the senate on the grounds that he had embraced his wife in broad daylight in front of their daughter !
Commenting on the event, Cato said that for his own part he never embraced his wife unless it was thundering loudly, and he would sometimes joke that he was a happy man indeed when it thundered.
He strenuously pursued those who would misuse public property. He cut off pipes by which people habitually siphoned off part off the municipal water supply into their houses and gardens and knocked down private buildings which encroached on pu

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]