== Notes for [[Item:Q109745|Q109745]] ==

Al-Sharif al-Murtada, was a great theologian and jurist. Because of his great position among Shi'a Theologians, al-Sharif al-Murtada was given the title, ʿAlam al-Huda (the sign of guidance).

'Alī b. al-Ḥusayn b. Mūsā b. Muḥammad b. Mūsā b. Ibrāhīm b. Imām Mūsā al-Kāẓim (a) (Arabic: علي بن الحسين بن موسی بن محمد بن موسی بن ابراهيم بن الامام موسی الکاظم ع ) (known as al-Sharīf al-Murtaḍā, al-Sayyid al-Murtaḍā, and ʿAlam al-Hudā) (b. 355/965 - d. 436/1044) was a Twelver Shia jurists and theologians. He was the elder brother of al-Sayyid al-Radi, the compiler of Nahj al-Balagha, supporter of Shia, Naqib of Talibids in Baghdad, Amir al-Hajj, and the head of diwan al-mazalim (supreme court) after his brother al-Radi who had these positions after their father.

Like his teacher, al-Shaykh al-Mufid, al-Sayyid al-Murtada had rationalistic tendencies and was interested in theology. Indeed, his most significant contributions are theological. He also had a rationalistic tendency in jurisprudence. He wrote a book concerning principles of jurisprudence which is considered as the first comprehensive, independent Shi'a work in this field. His best-known student is al-Shaykh al-Tusi. Al-Sayyid al-Murtada was a distinguished man of literature as well. He also wrote books concerning the exegesis of the Qur'an.

Ali b. al-Husayn b. Musa b. Muhammad b. Musa b. Ibrahim b. Imam Musa al-Kazim (a) was born in 355/965.[1] Al-Sayyid al-Murtada was the elder brother of al-Sharif al-Radi and was known as al-Sharif al-Murtada and 'Alam al-Huda. His kunya was Abu l-Qasim.[2] His other title was Dhu l-Majdayn, which was given to him by Baha' al-Dawla Buyahi.

His father was the scholar, leader, and representative of Talibids. His mother was daughter of al-Hasan (or al-Husayn) b. Ahmad b. al-Hasan b. Ali b. 'Umar al-Ashraf b. Imam al-Sajjad (a) (d. 385/995-6).[3]

https://en.wikishia.net/view/Al-Sharif_al-Murtada

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]