== Notes for [[Item:Q89364|Q89364]] ==

=Amnius Nicomachus Paulinus Anicius=

Amnius was born in year 0294.1

Birth Notes

+ B: Abt. 294

Amnius' father was Amnius Julianus Anicius and his mother was Caesonia Manilia. His paternal grandparents were Sextus Faustus Paulinus Anicius and Amnia Demetrias; his maternal grandparents were L. C. Ovinius R. M. Bassus and Junia Maximus. He was an only child.

Amnius' family with Auchenia Bassa Bassus

They had a son named Anicius.

Male Prefect of the Roman Empire Anicius Auchenius Bassus

Anicius was born in year 0314.1

+ Birth Notes

# B: Abt. 314

1 http://wc.rootsweb.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=PED&db=jdp-fam&id=I82362&style=TABLE

This page is within a frameset. View the entire genealogy report of Anicius families, or surname index of Anicius pedigrees or report summary of Anicius heritage from "The Skaggs-Files".
family history.

--------------------
'''
=Amnius Anicius Paulinus=
'''

Amnius Anicius Paulinus, full name Amnius Manius Caesonius Nicomachus Anicius Paulinus Honorius (fl. 334–335) was a politician of the Roman Empire.

'''Biography'''

Paulinus was the son of Amnius Anicius Julianus, consul in 322, and the nephew of Sextus Anicius Faustus Paulinus, consul in 325. He was thus a member of the gens Anicia.

Paulinus was consul in 334 and praefectus urbi of Rome in 334–335. In 334 he erected an equestrian statue to emperor Constantine I in the Roman Forum; a statue was dedicated to him in the Forum of Trajan, whose inscription celebrates Paulinus for "his high birth, his eloquence, his fairness, and his good judgement, for which he is renowned in private and in public".

'''Family'''

Christian Settipani has tried to reconstruct Paulinus' familiar bonds. According to Settipani, Paulinus was married to Pincia (born ca 305) or better, to Auchenia. His wife was perhaps the daughter of Pincius (b. ca 280 and c.v. in the beginning of the 4th century) and wife Caeionia (b. 285 or 290), in turn perhaps the daughter of (Marcus) Caeionius Proculus, suffect consul of Rome in 289, and wife Alfenia Juliana.

They were perhaps the parents of Anicius Auchenius Bassus, praefectus urbi of Rome in 382.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amnius_Anicius_Paulinus

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per04542.htm#0

RESEARCH NOTES:
Consul 334, prefect of Rome 334-5

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.hdhdata.org/roots/d0020.shtml#f00055

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]]


==Charlemagne boilerplate==

{{q|Q154064|Q154061}} is a relative of Charlemagne. We need to check this page to see if they have proper wikidata links.
 
This page contains source notes and references for this entity.

==Source Notes==

==Note 1==
This [[Category:Charlemagne dfa notes]]
entry is derived from https://www.reddit.com/r/UsefulCharts/comments/1hzt99c/project_settipanicharlemange_pt2_from_charlemagne/#lightbox unless it already is in [ [:Category:Part 1 derived]] at which point it is only derived from part 1. Later once this code gets into the notes pages remove [[:Category:Part 2 or 1 derived]] from all of the pages in that categor y using Catalot

==Note 2==
This tree portion [[Category:Part 1 derived]]
has been made from the work of Settipani with an intermediate reference of a diagram created by Redditor Lower_Gift_1656 here https://www.reddit.com/r/UsefulCharts/comments/1hvsqm7/project_settipanicharlemange_pt1_from_charlemagne/  https://drive.google.com/file/d/1L03SSL-ag5dUPm56Hhxd4r5-TbNH3qt-/view

==Note 3==
This tree portion [[Category:Part 1 derived]]
has been made from the work of Settipani with an intermediate reference of a diagram created by Redditor Lower_Gift_1656 here https://www.reddit.com/r/UsefulCharts/comments/1hvsqm7/project_settipanicharlemange_pt1_from_charlemagne/  https://drive.google.com/file/d/1L03SSL-ag5dUPm56Hhxd4r5-TbNH3qt-/view

==Note 4==
<p>REFERENCE_NUMBERS:</p>
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]