== Notes for [[Item:Q100514|Q100514]] ==

[https://he.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D7%A8%D7%9E%D7%91%22%D7%9F ]

[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nahmanides  '''Nahmanides [Nah-man-nid-ez] (רבי משה בן נחמן), also known as Rabbi Moses ben Naḥman Girondi, Bonastruc ça (de) Porta and by his acronym Ramban (1194 – 1270), was a leading medieval Jewish scholar, Catalan Sephardic rabbi, philosopher, physician, kabbalist, and biblical commentator. He was raised, studied, and lived for most of his life in Girona, Catalonia.

The Ramban was born in Girona in 1194, where he grew up and studied (hence his name "Girondi"), and died in the Land of Israel about 1270. He was the grandson of Isaac ben Reuben of Barcelona and cousin of Jonah Gerondi (the Rabbeinu Yonah); possibly his brother was Benveniste de Porta, the bailie of Barcelona. Among his teachers in Talmud were Judah ben Yakkar and Meïr ben Nathan of Trinquetaille, and he is said to have been instructed in Kabbalah (Jewish mysticism) by his countryman Azriel of Gerona, who was in turn a disciple of Isaac the Blind.

Nahmanides studied medicine which he practiced as a means of livelihood; he also studied philosophy. During his teens he began to get a reputation as a learned Jewish scholar. At age 16 he began his writings on Jewish law. In his Milhamot Hashem (Wars of the Lord) he defended Alfasi's decisions against the criticisms of Zerachiah ha-Levi of Girona. These writings reveal a conservative tendency that distinguished his later works — an unbounded respect for the earlier authorities.  [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nahmanides  ''biography continued]

#[http://www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/jsource/judaica/ejud_0002_0014_0_14480.html Nahmanides]
#[http://www.jewishencyclopedia.com/articles/11129-moses-ben-nahman-gerondi Moses ben Nahman Gerondi]
#[http://www3.nd.edu/~undpress/excerpts/P01210-ex.pdf NAHMANIDES in Medieval Catalonia]
#[http://www.girona.cat/call/eng/institut.php  Nahmanides Institute for Jewish Studies (scroll down to see list of personalities )

#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nahmanides Nahmanides] Wikipedia
# [http://jwa.org/encyclopedia/article/iggeret-ha-kodesh Iggeret Ha-Kodesh]
# Commentary on Torah, Genesis 1:1, Naḥmanides, quoted in Gerald Schroeder “Genesis and the Big Bang: The Discovery of Harmony Between modern Science and the Bible” ISBN 0-553-35413-2 p.65
# p. 73 in Jonathan Sacks (2005) To Heal a Fractured World : The Ethics of Responsibility. London : Continuum (ISBN 9780826480392)
# Caputo, Nina, Nahmanides in Medieval Catalonia: History, Community and Messianism. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 2008. Pp. 384.
#[http://wiki.geni.com/index.php/Jewish_Dynasties Jewish Dynasties]

**************************************

Please note that the JE article says: "... possibly his brother was Benveniste de Porta, the bailie of Barcelona." New evidence in the form of a will from 1268 CE demonstrates that Ramban WAS NOT THE BROTHER OF BENVENISTE DE PORTA. I have recommended that this connection be severed: see Discussion under https://www.geni.com/people/Perfet-Nasi/6000000017177766072

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD8FBE751EFBBFA9822EF79916C54FE
geni:6000000017177761816

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]]
[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]][[Category:Pages]]