== Notes for [[Item:Q88473|Q88473]] ==

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rhodogune_(daughter_of_Artaxerxes_II)

Rhodogune was a Persian princess from the Achaemenid dynasty, who was a daughter of Artaxerxes II (r. 404–358 BC).

Following the Battle of Cunaxa in 401 BC, she was given by her father in marriage to the Bactrian nobleman Orontes I, who was the satrap of the satrapy of Armenia. Their marriage is mentioned in one of the stelae of Mount Nemrut, erected by their descendant Antiochus I of Commagene

This woman is commonly list in genealogies as the 2nd wife of https://www.geni.com/people/Zerubbabel-3rd-Exilarch-%D7%96%D7%A8%D7%95%D7%91%D7%91%D7%9C/6000000000961704850, and the mother of his son Rhesa (ancestor of Jesus). I can not find ANY significant source for this, and it does not make any sense. As such, they will NOT be connected.

Birth: 571 B.C.

Rhodogune (?) married Satrap of Parthia Hystaspes Achaemenid, son of King of Persia Arsames Achaemenid, 0551 B.C; Her 2nd.1,2 She was born 0571 B.C.. She married governor of Judah Zerubbabel ha-David , son of Salathiel ha-David ; His 2nd.3

* Children of Rhodogune (?) and Satrap of Parthia Hystaspes Achaemenid:

** King of Persia and Egypt Darius I "the Great" Achaemenid + b. 0550 B.C., d. 0486 B.C.

* Child of Rhodogune (?) and governor of Judah Zerubbabel:

** Rhesa

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, Royalty for Commoners: The Complete Lineage of John of Gaunt, Son of Edward III, Kings of England, and Queen Philippa (.: ., 3rd Ed., 1998), 414-89. Hereinafter cited as RfC.

[S1083] Davidic Dynasty, online , "her 2nd". Hereinafter cited as Davidic Dynasty.

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per01185.htm#0
http://www.gbnf.com/genealogy/sahlin/html/d0004/I1549.HTM

1 UID 1E4CDD221BB0FD44A241BDC7CF1B4A6474EB

1 UID F11AD3AE59EE4D4BA689A9B33ECF2DC8F8EC

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]