== Notes for [[Item:Q88471|Q88471]] ==

[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hystaspes_(father_of_Darius_I) Hystaspes (father of Darius I).]

Vishtaspa (fl. 550 BC), known under his Hellenized name Hystaspes (Ὑστάσπης), was a Persian satrap (kšathra-pāvan) of Bactria and Persis. He was the father of Darius I, king of the Achaemenid Empire, and Artabanus, who was a trusted advisor to both his brother Darius as well as Darius's son and successor, Xerxes I.

The son of Arsames, Hystaspes was a member of the Persian royal house of the Achaemenids. He was satrap of Persis under Cambyses, and probably under Cyrus the Great also. He accompanied Cyrus on his expedition against the Massagetae. But he was sent back to Persis, to keep watch over his eldest son Darius, whom Cyrus, in consequence of a dream, suspected of considering treason.

Besides Darius, Hystaspes had two sons, Artabanus and Artanes. Ammianus Marcellinus makes him a chief of the Magians, and tells a story of his studying in India under the Brahmins. His name occurs in the inscriptions at Persepolis.

SOURCE NOTES:
FW5; http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per00550.htm#0
http://www.gbnf.com/genealogy/sahlin/html/d0089/I2123.HTM

RESEARCH NOTES:
Prince of Anshan; King in Persia 550?- BCE; Satrap in Parthia;

Konge av Persia ca 600 f.Kr.

OR "HYSTASPES"; SATRAP OF PARTHIA AND HYRCANIA; b. 550 BC-d. ca. 518/7 BC; HAD
4 OR 5 OTHER SONS AND 2 DAUGHTERS

IN BACTRIA; d. 464 BC

Hystaspes
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.
Jump to: navigation, search
Hystaspes (Greek form of Old Persian Vishtaspa) can refer to two individuals:

A semi-legendary Vishtasp (modern Persian ?????? Goshtâsb) or "ancient poet and leader" praised by Zoroaster as his protector and a true believer, the son of Aurvataspa (Persian Lohrasp). The later tradition and the Shahnama of Firdousi makes him (in the modern form of his name, Key Gushtasp) a "king of Iran". Since Zoroaster probably preached his religion in what is now eastern Iran, Vishtaspa must have been a dynast in Bactria or Sogdiana.
A Persian, son of Arsames, king of Persia, and father of Darius I, great king of Media and Persia. He was satrap of Parthia under the rule of Cambyses II, Smerdis and his own son. Darius himself mentions this in the Behistun inscription (2. 65).
Ammianus Marcellinus (xxiii. 6. 32) and many modern authors have identified the father of Darius with the protector of Zoroaster. This identification is not universally accepted and whether it is deemed possible depends on the date one assigns to Zoroaster.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]