== Notes for [[Item:Q115965|Q115965]] ==

----
===Family

https://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/GASCONY.htm#GarciaGasconydiedafter920B

'''GARCIA [I]''' "le Tors/el Curvo" Sancho, son of SANCHO "Mitarra/Menditarra" Duke of Gascony & his wife --- ([850/60]-after 920). The Genealogica Comitum Guasconiæ names "Garsiam-Sancium Curvum" as son of "Mitarra-Sancius"[89]. His birth date is estimated consistent with his father´s estimated birth date range. Comte de Gascogne. He is named in charters dated [886/87][90]. "Walfridus…abba…monachorum monasterii Soricinensis" sold "cella Modulfi", donated by "Arrichoatus comes", to "dominus Garcias, comes et marchio in limitibus oceanis" by charter dated Oct 904, which names "uxoris suæ Aminianæ et…filiis et filiabus"[91]. "Garsias Sanctii consul filius regis Sancii" granted "Astaracensem pagum" to "Arnaldo filio meo" by charter dated to [920], signed by "Garciæ Sancii Consulis, Sancii Wilhelmi comitis filii, Salii Vivari, Sancii Amanevi, Gumbaudi, Eneci fratris eius"[92].

/!\ '''m''' AMUNA [Munia], daughter of ---. "Walfridus…abba…monachorum monasterii Soricinensis" sold "cella Modulfi", donated by "Arrichoatus comes", to "dominus Garcias, comes et marchio in limitibus oceanis" by charter dated Oct 904, which names "uxoris suæ Aminianæ et…filiis et filiabus"[93]. The Historia Abbatiæ Condomensis records that "comitissa…coniux…Garsiæ Principis cognomento Curvi" restored the convent of Condom






-------






García II Sánchez of Gascony

García II Sánchez (Basque: Gartzia Antso, French: Garsie-Sanche le Tors or le Courbé, Gascon: Gassia Sans, Latin: Garsia Sancius Corvum, died circa 930), called the Bent, was the duke of Gascony from sometime before 887 to his death.

He was probably a son of Sancho Sánchez or of Sancho Mitarra, though older sources give a genealogy with a Spanish origin.[1]

His ancestry is, in the end, unknown. He may have been a cousin of Arnold, who some sources claim acted as regent during his minority following his father’s death in 864 (if his father was Sánchez). Other sources place Arnold as Sancho’s successor and date his death to that same year. Whatever the case, García was in power by 887.

In that year, he appeared in a charter issued by the grandees of Aquitaine assembled at Bourges to decide on a course of action in the twilight of the reign of Charles the Fat. In 904, he was using the title comes et marchio in limitibus oceani: "count and margrave to the limits of the ocean." García was the first of a line of dukes which ruled Gascony until 1032 and incorporated the county of Bordeaux into its demesne. García’s daughter Andregoto married one Raymond, who fathered William the Good, Count of Bordeaux. García divided his domain between his three sons by Amuna:

Sancho IV inherited a rump duchy of Gascony with the ducal title

William inherited the county of Fézensac (including Armagnac)

Arnold inherited the county of Astarac

Andregoto, married William the Good, Count of Bordeaux

Garsinda, married Raymond III Pons, Count of Toulouse

Acibella, married Galindo II Aznárez, Count of Aragon

[edit]

--------------------

García Sánchez "le Courbe"

b. circa 870, d. 924

Father Sancho II, duc de Gascogne1 b. circa 845

García Sánchez "le Courbe" was born circa 870. He was the son of Sancho II, duc de Gascogne.1 Margrave of Gascony at France between 886 and 920.2 García Sánchez "le Courbe" married Aminiana (?) before 890.3 García Sánchez "le Courbe" was living between 893 and 920.4 He died in 924.1

Family 1

Aminiana (?) b. circa 865

Children

Acibella Garcés de Gascuña+ 5

Arnaldo, comte d'Astarac+ b. c 890, d. a 9601

Guillaume, comte de Fézenzac+ b. c 8956,1

Family 2

Child

Garsinde de Gascogne+ b. 9234

Citations

[S467] GdRdF, online http://jeanjacques.villemag.free.fr/

[S653] PoH, online http://www.friesian.com/

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 289-38.

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 329-35.

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 290-38.

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 289-37.
--------------------
http://gw.geneanet.org/pierfit?lang=sv;p=garsia+sanchez;n=de+gascogne;oc=1

Garcie II Le Courbé (Garsia Sanchez de GASCOGNE) Titlar: duc de Gascogne (893-920), duc d'Agen, comte de Fézensac (871)

Född omkring 860 Död 926 , livslängd: kanske 66 år Föräldrar

Sanche IV Mitarra (le Montagnard) , duc de Gascogne ca 837- Donna Tuta d'URGEL ca 835- Vigslar, barn, barnbarnen och barnbarns barnen

Gift med Amuna d'ANGOULÊME , comtesse d'Agen , född omkring 865 , död (Föräldrar : M Bougrin Ier d'ANGOULÊME , comte Angoulême ca 830-/886 & K Sancie d'AQUITAINE , héritière d'Agen ca 842-886 ) barn M Sanche IV , duc de Gascogne ca 890-961 gift med demoiselle N*** barn M Sanche V , duc de Gascogne M Guillaume Ier , duc de Gascogne †997 gift omkring 972 med Urraca Garcez de PAMPELUNE †1041 barn : K Gersende de GASCOGNE K Brisce de GASCOGNE ca 980-1018 M Bernard , duc de Gascogne †1009 K Ne,peut-être une des précédentes de GASCOGNE

Guillaume Ier, duc de Gascogne †997 förhållande med demoiselle N*** barn : M Sanche VI bâtard , duc de Gascogne †1032 M Donat de GASCOGNE , vicomte de Lomagne gift med ? ? barn : M Guillaume Ier de GASCOGNE , vicomte de Lomagne †994 M Odon Ier Donat , vicomte de Gascogne ca 955-1000/ M Gombaud , duc de Gascogne ca 930-/983 gift med ? ? barn : M Hugues de GASCOGNE , évêque d'Agen M Aner Ier , vicomte d'Oloron gift med demoiselle N*** barn : M Loup Aner , vicomte d'Oloron M Donat-Aner de GABARDAN-PARLEBOSCQ , vicomte de Gabardan M Sanche-Aner , vicomte de Tursan M Amanieu de GASCOGNE , vicomte d'Albret (40) gift med ? ? barn : M Vézian de GASCOGNE †978 M Ezi , vicomte de Marsan gift med ? ? barn : M Aner Ier , vicomte de Marsan ca 945- M Aznel-Ezi de SAMADET M Guillaume , comte de Fézensac ca 895-ca 960 gift med Garsende de TOULOUSE barn K Gersende de FEZENSAC ca 920-961/ gift med Raimond II de RIBAGORZA ca 915-970 barn : K Ava de Ribagorza †997 K Toda de RIBAGORZA 945- M Othon Falta de FEZENSAC ca 925-960/ gift med Ne Inconnu barn : M Bernard Ier Odon le Teigneux , comte de Fezensac ca 950-980 M Bernard le Louche d'ARMAGNAC , Comte de Fézensac ca 940-987 gift med Emerine Nee barn : K Sibylle d'ARMAGNAC ca 965- M Géraud Ier dit Trancaléon , comte d'Armagnac ca 985-1040 M Arnaud Ier Nonnatus (Le Moine) , comte d'Astarac ca 900-960 gift med demoiselle N*** barn K Faquilène d'ASTARAC , comtesse d'Aure ca 920- gift med Raymond Ier Dat , comte de Bigorre ca 910-956 barn : M Louis de BIGORRE M Arnaud de BIGORRE 945-986

Faquilène d'ASTARAC, comtesse d'Aure ca 920- gift med Garsie Arnaud Ier d'AURE , comte de Bigorre ca 920- barn : M Arnaud II d'ASTARAC , comte d'Aure ca 960-1039/ M Garcia I°, co-comte d'AURE M Mansion , vicomte de La Barthe ca 960- M Arnaud II , comte d'Astarac ca 940-975 gift med demoiselle N*** barn : K Richarde , comtesse d'Astarac ca 970-1046 K Acibella de GASCOGNE gift med GalindoII , comte d'Aragon 893-922 barn K Toda d'ARAGON gift med BernardI° Ct de Ribagorza K Andregota de GASCOGNE K Garsende de GASCOGNE gift med Raymond III Pons de TOULOUSE , duc d'Aquitaine †942 barn M Raymond ( IV ) , comte de Toulouse †/961 gift omkring 920 med Guinidilde de CERDAGNE barn : M Raimond ( V ) Pons dit Pons Ier de Gothie de TOULOUSE , duc d'Aquitaine ca 921-999 M Guillaume de TOULOUSE ca 930- K Archimberte de TOULOUSE ?930- gift med Ilduin , comte de Lodève ca 925- barn : M Odon , vicomte de Lodève 955- K Saixa de LODÈVE Syskon

M Garcie II Le Courbé , duc de Gascogne ca 860-926 M Aznar , seigneur de Larron Källor

Person: Semele, jjulien / Apollon
--------------------
* Duc de Gascogne

--------------------
http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garc%C3%ADa_Jim%C3%A9nez

http://genealogics.org/getperson.php?personID=I00106646&tree=LEO

García Jiménez (835 - ?) fue hijo del Duque Jimeno de Pamplona. Nació en la región de los Pirineos que hoy corresponde a Navarra, donde su familia tenía sus dominios.

De su matrimonio con Onneca, "Rebelle de Sangüesa", fue padre de Sancha Garcés de Pamplona, quien desposó al conde Galindo II Aznárez de Aragón, y de Íñigo Garcés. Su segundo matrimonio fue con Dadildis de Pallars (hija de Lupo de Bigorra y una hija del Conde de Toulouse, Ramón I) con quien tuvo a quien sería el primer rey de Navarra de la dinastía Jimena, Sancho Garcés I de Navarra, y Jimeno Garcés de Navarra.

--------------------

García Jiménez or García II was (sub- or co-)king of a part of Pamplona in the late 9th century.

The Basque ruling dynasty (Jiménez) was apparently in control of a part of what would become the kingdom of Navarre distinct from that held by the descendants of Iñigo Arista. García presumably succeeded his father during the lifetime of García Íñiguez, and is listed by the Códice de Roda as being of "another part of the kingdom" of Pamplona.

By a popular reconstruction, when King García I supposedly died in 870 while his son and heir Fortún Garcés was imprisoned in Córdoba, García Jiménez is said to have become uncontested regent of the kingdom until he was killed at Aybar (882) in a battle against the Emir of Córdoba. However, there is evidence that García Íñiguez was still living at the time of his son's return in 880, and it may well have been that monarch who was killed in 882. In fact, there is no documentary evidence of García Jiménez playing any role in the government of the greater kingdom.

García Jiménez married firstly to Oneca, "Rebel of Sangüesa" with whom he had the following issue:

Íñigo, called 'king' in the Roda Codex, perhaps his father's successor.

Sancha, married as her first husband Íñigo Fortúnez, son of king Fortún of Pamplona, and remarried Galindo Aznárez II, Count of Aragon.

García Jiménez married secondly Dadildis de Pallars, sister of count Raymond I of Pallars and Ribagorza, with whom he had the following issue:

Sancho, later sole king of Pamplona.

Jimeno, king in succession to Sancho.

--------------------

García Jiménez of Pamplona

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

(Redirected from García II of Pamplona)

García Jiménez or García II was (sub- or co-)king of a part of Pamplona in the late 9th century.

The Basque ruling dynasty (Jiménez) was apparently in control of a part of what would become the kingdom of Navarre distinct from that held by the descendants of Iñigo Arista. García presumably succeeded his father during the lifetime of García Íñiguez, and is listed by the Códice de Roda as ruler of "another part of the kingdom" of Pamplona.

By a popular reconstruction, when King García I supposedly died in 870 while his son and heir Fortún Garcés was imprisoned in Córdoba, García Jiménez is said to have become uncontested regent of the kingdom until he was killed at Aybar (882) in a battle against the Emir of Córdoba. However, there is evidence that García Íñiguez was still living at the time of his son's return in 880, and it may well have been that monarch who was killed in 882. In fact, there is no documentary evidence of García Jiménez playing any role in the government of the greater kingdom.

García Jiménez married firstly a woman named Oneca Rebelle de Sangüesa with whom he had the following issue:

Íñigo, called 'king' in the Roda Codex, perhaps his father's successor.

Sancha, married as her first husband Íñigo Fortúnez, son of king Fortún of Pamplona, and remarried Galindo II Aznárez, Count of Aragon.

García Jiménez married secondly Dadildis de Pallars, sister of Count Raymond I of Pallars and Ribagorza, with whom he had the following issue:

Sancho, later sole king of Pamplona.

Jimeno, king in succession to Sancho.
--------------------
García Jiménez or García II was (sub- or co-)king of a part of Pamplona in the late 9th century.

The Basque ruling dynasty (Jiménez) was apparently in control of a part of what would become the kingdom of Navarre distinct from that held by the descendants of Iñigo Arista. García presumably succeeded his father during the lifetime of García Íñiguez, and is listed by the Códice de Roda as being of "another part of the kingdom" of Pamplona.

By a popular reconstruction, when King García I supposedly died in 870 while his son and heir Fortún Garcés was imprisoned in Córdoba, García Jiménez is said to have become uncontested regent of the kingdom until he was killed at Aybar (882) in a battle against the Emir of Córdoba. However, there is evidence that García Íñiguez was still living at the time of his son's return in 880, and it may well have been that monarch who was killed in 882. In fact, there is no documentary evidence of García Jiménez playing any role in the government of the greater kingdom.

García Jiménez married firstly to Oneca, "Rebel of Sangüesa" with whom he had the following issue:

Íñigo, called 'king' in the Roda Codex, perhaps his father's successor.

Sancha, married as her first husband Íñigo Fortúnez, son of king Fortún of Pamplona, and remarried Galindo Aznárez II, Count of Aragon.

García Jiménez married secondly Dadildis de Pallars, sister of count Raymond I of Pallars and Ribagorza, with whom he had the following issue:

Sancho, later sole king of Pamplona.

Jimeno, king in succession to Sancho.
--------------------

García Jiménez (835 - ?) fue bisnieto[1] del Duque Jimeno de Pamplona, en algunas fuentes se lo indica como su hijo pero un ánálisis cronológico descarta esa posibilibidad. Nació en la región de los Pirineos o Marca Hispánica que hoy corresponde a Navarra, donde su familia tenía sus dominios.

De su matrimonio con Onneca, "Rebelle de Sangüesa", fue padre de Sancha Garcés de Pamplona, quien desposó al conde Galindo II Aznárez de Aragón, y de Íñigo Garcés. Su segundo matrimonio fue con Dadildis de Pallars (hija de Lupo de Bigorra y una hija del Conde de Toulouse, Ramón I) con quien tuvo a quien sería el primer rey de Navarra de la dinastía Jimena, Sancho Garcés I de Navarra, y Jimeno Garcés de Navarra.

--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garc%C3%ADa_%C3%8D%C3%B1iguez_of_Pamplona

García Íñiguez of Pamplona

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

García Íñiguez, sometimes García I, II, or III (Arabic: قرسية بن ونّقه البشكنشي‎, Garsiya ibn Wannaqo al Baškuniši; died 882) was king of Pamplona from 851/2 until his death.

[edit] Biography

He was educated in Córdoba, as a guest at the court of the Emir of Córdoba. He was the son of Íñigo Arista, the first king of their dynasty. When his father was stricken by paralysis in 842, he became regent of the kingdom (or perhaps co-regent with his uncle Fortún Íñiguez). He and his kinsman Mūsā ibn Mūsā ibn Fortún of the Banu Qasi rebelled against the Cordoban emir in 843. This rebellion was put down by Emir Abd-ar-Rahman II, who attacked the Kingdom of Pamplona, defeating García badly and killing Fortún. At his father's death in 851/2, he succeeded to the crown.

Following the death of Íñigo Arista, the Banu Qasi leader Mūsā ibn Mūsā pursued a policy of closer allegiance with Muhammad I of Córdoba, leaving García to look to Christian Asturias for an ally. In 859, Mūsā ibn Mūsā allowed a contingent of Vikings to pass through his lands and attack Navarre, resulting in the capture García, who was forced to pay at least 70,000 gold dinars in ransom. Later the same year, Mūsā ibn Mūsā attacked the Pamplonese city of Albelda. García and his new friend Ordoño I of Asturias together dealt Mūsā a crushing blow, killing, it is said, 10,000 of his magnates in the Battle of Albelda. This, in turn, provoked a Muslim response and the next year, 860, saw García's son and heir Fortún captured and imprisoned by the Moors. He languished in Córdoba for the next 20 years. In 870, García formed an alliance with the Muslim rebel Amrūs ibn Amr ibn Amrūs, who had killed Garcia's nephew Mūsā ibn Galindo of Huesca, and the next year was apparently in a new alliance with the sons of Mūsā ibn Mūsā, now in rebellion against Córdoba.

García I favoured the pilgrims who travelled to Santiago de Compostela, and attempted to guarantee peace for that traffic.

García's death has been subject to scholarly dispute, a result of a paucity of records from the last years of his reign. The lack of subsequent mention of him after 870 led to the suggestion that he died in that year, and as his heir was in the hands of his enemies, it was argued that García Jiménez then governed the kingdom as regent. García's son, Fortún Garcés, is then made to succeed upon his released in 880. There is, however, no evidence for such a regency, and Sanchéz Albornoz has cited evidence that García was still living at the time of his son's return. Thus it is likely that Balparda was reporting accurate tradition when he suggested García and ally Umar ibn Hafsun, fought a battle at Aybar against the troops of Emir of Córdoba in 882, García dying there (although the age provided him, 84 years, is clearly exaggerated).

The identity of García's wife or wives is poorly documented, and has been subject to much speculation. An undated confirmation of an earlier lost charter refers to King García and Queen Urraca Mayor, and this is thought by some to refer to García Íñiguez and an otherwise unknown wife. Based on her name alone, it has been suggested that she was of the Banu Qasi, but other historians have given her different parentage, or even a different king as husband. Likewise, royal princess Leodegundia Ordoñez of Asturias, daughter of Ordoño I of Asturias, is known to have married a ruler of Pamplona, and García Íñiguez is one of those speculated to have been this prince.

García Íñiguez had following children:

* Fortún Garcés, the future king.

* Sancho Garcés, whose only known child, Aznar Sánchez, married a daughter of king Fortún Garcés and by her had queens Toda Aznárez, wife of king Sancho Garcés I, and Sancha Aznárez, wife of king Jimeno Garcés.

* Onneca Garcés, wife of Aznar Galíndez II.

* Velasquita Garcés, married to Mutarrīf ibn Mūsā ibn Qasi, Wali of Huesca, son of Mūsā ibn Mūsā.

* (perhaps) Jimena, wife of Alfonso III of León (assignment of her parentage based on political, chronological and onomastic arguments).

[edit] Sources

* Barrau-Dihigo, Lucien. Les origines du royaume de Navarre d'apres une théorie récente. Revue Hispanique. 7: 141-222 (1900).

* Cañada Juste, Alberto. "Los Banu Qasi (714-924)". Princípe de Viana 41:5-95 (1980).

* Lacarra de Miguel, José María. "Textos navarros del Códice de Roda". Estudios de Edad Media de la Corona de Aragon. 1:194-283 (1945).

* Lévi-Provençal, Évariste. "Du nouveau sur le Royaume de Pampelune au IXe Siècle". Bulletin Hispanique. 55:5-22 (1953).

* Lévi-Provençal, Évariste and Emilio García Gómez. "Textos inéditos del Muqtabis de Ibn Hayyan sobre los orígines del Reino de Pamplona". Al-Andalus. 19:295-315 (1954).

* Mello Vaz de São Payo, Luiz. "A Ascendência de D. Afonso Henriques". Raízes & Memórias 6:23-57 (1990).

* Pérez de Urbel, Justo. "Lo viejo y lo nuevo sobre el origin del Reino de Pamplona". Al-Andalus. 19:1-42 (1954).

* Sánchez Albernoz, Claudio. "Problemas de la historia Navarra del siglo IX". Princípe de Viana, 20:5-62 (1959).

Preceded by

Íñigo Arista King of Pamplona

851/2–882 Succeeded by

Fortún Garcés

--------------------
García Íñiguez de Pamplona

De Wikipedia, la enciclopedia libre

García I Íñiguez (c. 805 - 870), rey de Pamplona. Fue regente desde 842.

Hijo de Íñigo Arista, rey de Pamplona, García fue educado en Córdoba. Llevó la dirección de las campañas militares durante los últimos años de vida de su padre.

En mayo de 843 ayudó a Musa II en su insurrección contra el emir de Córdoba. El resultado fue el ataque de Abd al-Rahman II de Córdoba a las tierras de Pamplona, que terminó el mes siguiente con una rotunda victoria del emir sobre García Íñiguez y Musa.

En 859 fue apresado por una expedición vikinga. Liberado tras pagar un rescate, Navarra abandonó las antiguas alianzas con los Banu Qasi y se acercó al reino de Asturias. García se alió con el rey asturiano Ordoño I y juntos obtuvieron un importante triunfo ante los musulmanes en la batalla de Albelda (859). Esta victoria cristiana motivó la quiebra del poder de los Banu Qasi y la consiguiente reacción cordobesa.

Su hijo Fortún Garcés fue hecho prisionero por los musulmanes en 860 y estuvo retenido en Córdoba más de 20 años. Entre los años 870 (muerte de García Íñiguez) y 880 (regreso de Fortún Garcés I), parece que gobernó como Regente en Pamplona García Jiménez, hijo de Jimeno García (dinastía Jimena).

Durante su reinado se tomaron las primeras medidas para favorecer el paso de peregrinos que acudían a Compostela, poniendo las primeras piedras del futuro "Camino de Santiago".

Estuvo casado en primeras nupcias en 858 con Leodegundia, hija de Ordoño I de Asturias, y en segundas nupcias con Urraca de quien no existe ningún dato documental para conocer su linaje, aunque Jaime de Salazar y Acha opina que, teniendo en cuenta que fue madre de un hijo llamado Fortún y que, conociendo la presencia constante de este nombre en la dinastía muladí, podría ser hija de Fortún Ibn Musa (muerto en 874) y prima de hermana de Muhammad ibn Lub, el abuelo de la Urraca, reina Asturiana.

Hijos:

Fortún Garcés I, Rey de Pamplona, casado con Oria (Áurea), posiblemente hija de Lopo Ibn Musa.

Sancho Garcés de Pamplona, padre de Aznar Sánchez de Larraún, conde de Aragón y Valasquita Sánchez, casada con Mutarif Ibn Musa, walí de Huesca

Jimena de Pamplona, casada con Alfonso III "el Magno".

Oneca de Pamplona, casada con Aznar II Galíndez.

Velasquita Garcés.

--------------------
Leo: Europäische Stammtafeln, J.A. Stargardt Verlag, Marburg, Schwennicke, Detlev (Ed.), Reference: II 54.

Managers of Garcia II Sanchez le Tors, Comte de Gascogne,

I am contacting you about this profile: https://www.geni.com/people/Garcia-II-Sanche-le-Tors-Comte-de-Gasco...

Hello, Just a point of information, the coat of arms being used here is incorrect. These areas are those of the Dukes of Gascony but we’re awarded by Louis XIV in 1696, much later. The House of Gascony ancient arms are attributed (hypothetical) and are argent a lion passant gules. I’ve put a copy in the media tab.

Sincerely,

David Vincent Bigelow

RESEARCH NOTES:
Prince of Navarre. 4 children, 2 wives

_P_CCINFO 1-20792

Sources dont say which wife is the mother of who. See EuropäischStammtafeln Bund II tafel 43.

[Custer February 1, 2002 Family Tree.FTW]

[merge G675.FTW]

Sources dont say which wife is the mother of who. See EuropäischStammtafeln Bund II tafel 43.

Sucedió a García Íñiguez como Regente de Pamplona.
¿Príncipe de Navarra?
Murió "a mano airada" en el Valle de Salazar

Sucedió a García Íñiguez como Regente de Pamplona.
¿Príncipe de Navarra?
Murió "a mano airada" en el Valle de Salazar

[large-G675.FTW]

Sources dont say which wife is the mother of who. See EuropäischStammtafeln Bund II tafel 43.

Garc&#237;a Jim&#233;nez of Pamplona
http://trees.ancestry.com/rd?f=document&guid=5501b200-3ea6-4d23-a5b5-c64be6a2d35a&tid=10145763&pid=-531579132

Garc&#237;a Jim&#233;nez of Pamplona
http://trees.ancestry.com/rd?f=document&guid=5501b200-3ea6-4d23-a5b5-c64be6a2d35a&tid=10145763&pid=-531579132

SOURCE NOTES:
www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal07679

Rebelled against the Cordoban Emir in 843 along with his kinsman, Musa ibn Musa ibn Fortun of the Banu Qasi. He lost his bid for victory and his kinsman, Musa ibn Musa ibn Fortun was killed by Emir Abd ar Rahman at the battle of Ayhar
Also known as Sancho Garces de Navarre
Source: Codex Roda. The Roda Codex, Real Academia de la Historia.

Rootsweb Feldman
URL: http://worldconnect.genealogy.rootsweb.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=:3044567&id=I08240
# ID: I08240
# Name: Garcia Count of Gascony SANCHEZ*** 1 2 3 4
# Sex: M
# Name: Garcia Count of Gascony SANCHEZ 2 5 4
# Birth: 857 in Spain 1 2 3 4 5
# Death: 920 1 2 3 4 5
# Change Date: 15 JAN 2004 4
# Change Date: 25 DEC 2001 2 3 4 5
# Note:

[Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED]

2 SOUR S332582
3 DATA
4 TEXT Date of Import: 14 Jan 2004


[daveanthes.FTW]

TYPE Book
AUTH Stuart, Roderick W.
PERI Royalty for Commoners
EDTN 3d
PUBL Genealogical Publishing co., Inc, Baltimore, MD (1998)
ISB 0-8063-1561-X
TEXT 216-37; 289-38; 290-39; (329-35)
DATE 31 MAY 2000

GIVN Garcia Count of Gascony
SURN Sanchez
STAT LIVE
TITL Royalty for Commoners: The Complete Known Lineage of John of Gaunt, Son of Edward III, King of England, and Queen Philip
AUTH Roderick W. Stuart
PUBL 3rd ed., 1998, Genealogical Publishing Co., Inc., Baltimore, MD
ABBR Royalty for Commoners
DATE 2 FEB 2000
TIME 20:36:57

OCCU Count of Gascony
SOUR HAWKINS.GED
SOUR HAWKINS.GED[Spare.FTW]

Father: II SANCHO , Duke of Gascony

Marriage 1 Aminiana de GASCONY b: ABT 857 in Spain X

Children

1. Has Children Acibella OF GASCONY b: 872
2. Has Children William I Garcis Count of FESENZAC b: 878
3. Has Children Arnaldo Count of ASTARAC*** b: 882 in Spain
4. Has Children Garsinde Countess Of TOULOUSE b: ABT 920 in France


Sources:

1. Title: daveanthes.FTW
Note: ABBR daveanthes.FTW
Note: Source Media Type: Other
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Book
Text: Date of Import: 14 Jan 2004
2. Title: daveanthes.FTW
Note: ABBR daveanthes.FTW
Note: Source Media Type: Other
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Book
Text: Date of Import: Jan 13, 2004
3. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Jan 18, 2004
4. Title: Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Feb 6, 2004
5. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: 21 Jan 2004

García I of Pamplona
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

García Íñiguez (Arabic: ????? ?? ???? ????????? (Garsiya ibn Wannaqo al Baškuniši)) was king of Pamplona from 851/2 to his death in 882. He was educated in Córdoba, as a guest at the court of the Emir of Córdoba. He was the son of Íñigo Arista, the first king of their dynasty. When his father was stricken by paralysis in 842, he became regent of the kingdom (or perhaps co-regent with his uncle Fortún Íñiguez). He and his kinsman Musa ibn Musa ibn Fortún of the Banu Qasi rebelled against the Cordoban emir in 843. This rebellion was put down by Emir Abd-ar-Rahman II, who attacked the Kingdom of Pamplona, defeating García badly and killing Fortún. At his father's death in 851/2, he succeeded to the crown.

Following the death of Íñigo Arista, the Banu Qasi leader Musa ibn Musa pursued a policy of closer allegiance with Muhammad I of Córdoba, leaving García to look to Christian Asturias for an ally. In 859, Musa ibn Musa allowed a contingent of Vikings to pass through his lands and attack Navarre, resulting in the capture García, who was forced to pay at least 70,000 gold dinars in ransom. Later the same year, Musa ibn Musa attacked the Pamplonese city of Albelda. García and his new friend Ordoño I of Asturias together dealt Musa a crushing blow, killing, it is said, 10,000 of his magnates in the Battle of Albelda. This, in turn, provoked a Muslim response and the next year, 860, saw García's son and heir Fortún captured and imprisoned by the Moors. He languished in Córdoba for the next 20 years. In 870, García formed an alliance with the Muslim rebel Amrus ibn Amr ibn Amrus, who had killed Garcia's nephew Musa ibn Galindo of Huesca, and the next year was apparently in a new alliance with the sons of Musa ibn Musa, now in rebellion against Córdoba.

García I favoured the pilgrims who travelled to Santiago de Compostela, and attempted to guarantee peace for that traffic.

García's death has been subject to scholarly dispute, a result of a paucity of records from the last years of his reign. The lack of subsequent mention of him after 870 led to the suggestion that he died in that year, and as his heir was in the hands of his enemies, it was argued that García Jiménez then governed the kingdom as regent. García's son, Fortún Garcés, is then made to succeed upon his released in 880. There is, however, no evidence for such a regency, and Sanchéz Albornoz has cited evidence that García was still living at the time of his son's return, and he (and not García Jiménez) is likely the García whose death is reported to have occurred in 882 at Ayhar in battle with the Emir of Córdoba.

The identity of García's wife or wives is poorly documented, and has been subject to much speculation. An undated confirmation of an earlier lost charter refers to King García and Queen Urraca Mayor, and this is thought by some to refer to García Íñiguez and an otherwise unknown wife. Based on her name alone, it has been suggested that she was of the Banu Qasi, but other historians have given her different parentage, or even a different king as husband. Likewise, royal princess Leodegundia Ordoñez of Asturias, daughter of Ordoño I of Asturias, is known to have married a ruler of Pamplona, and García Íñiguez is one of those speculated to have been this prince.

García Íñiguez had following children:

Fortún Garcés, the future king.
Sancho Garcés, whose only known child, Aznar Sánchez, married a daughter of king Fortún Garcés and by her had queens Toda Aznárez, wife of king Sancho Garcés I, and Sancha Aznárez, wife of king Jimeno Garcés.
Onneca Garcés, wife of Aznar II Galíndez.
Velasquita Garcés, married to Mutarrif ibn Musa ibn Qasi, Wali of Huesca, son of Musa ibn Musa.
(perhaps) Jimena, wife of Alfonso III of León (assignment of her parentage based on political, chronological and onomastic arguments).

[edit] Sources
Lacarra de Miguel, José María. "Textos navarros del Códice de Roda". Estudios de Edad Media de la Corona de Aragon. 1:194-283 (1945).
Lévi-Provençal, Evariste. "Du nouveau sur le Royaume de Pampelune au IXe Siècle". Bulletin Hispanique. 55:5-22 (1953).
Lévi-Provençal, Evariste and Emilio García Gómez. "Textos inéditos del Muqtabis de Ibn Hayyan sobre los orígines del Reino de Pamplona". Al-Andalus. 19:295-315 (1954).
Mello Vaz de São Payo, Luiz. "A Ascendência de D. Afonso Henriques". Raízes & Memórias 6:23-57 (1990).
Pérez de Urbel, Justo. "Lo viejo y lo nuevo sobre el origin del Reino de Pamplona". Al-Andalus. 19:1-42 (1954).
Sánchez Albernoz, Claudio. "Problemas de la historia Navarra del siglo IX". Princípe de Viana, 20:5-62 (1959).
Cañada Juste, Alberto. "Los Banu Qasi (714-924)". Princípe de Viana 41:5-95 (1980).
Preceded by
Íñigo Arista King of Pamplona
851/2–882 Succeeded by
Fortún Garcés

[s2.FTW]

[Brøderbund WFT Vol. 2, Ed. 1, Tree #1241, Date of Import: May 8, 1997]

!COUNT OF GASCONY[Brøderbund WFT Vol. 2, Ed. 1, Tree #1241, Date of Import: May 8, 1997]

!COUNT OF GASCONY

[Wikipedia, "García II of Pamplona", retrieved 5 Oct 07]
García II Jiménez was the regent of Pamplona from 870 until 880 and apparently (sub- or co-)king until his death in 882.

The Basque ruling dynasty (Jiménez) was apparently in control of a part of what would become the kingdom of Navarre distinct from that held by the the descendants of Iñigo Arista, and García's father Jimeno I of Pamplona appears as equal to Iñigo in a Frankish chronicle in 850. García presumably succeeded his father during the lifetime of García I, and is listed by the Códice de Roda as ruler of "another part of the kingdom" of Pamplona.

When King García I died in 870, while his son and heir Fortún Garcés was imprisoned in Córdoba, García Jiménez is thought to have became uncontested regent of the kingdom and was at least treated as king and used the royal title.

García zealously defended his country against the encroachments of the Moors and Islam, but was killed at Ayhar (882) in a battle against the Emir of Córdoba. King Fortún had been released from captivity in 880 and returned to be king. After the coup against Fortún in 905, Jimeno's house took over the kingship undisputedly.

García Jiménez married firstly a woman named Oneca Rebelle de Sangüesa with whom he had the following issue:
- Íñigo, later co-king
- Sancha, married as her first husband Íñigo Fortúnez, son of king Fortún of Pamplona, and remarried Galindo II Aznárez, Count of Aragon.

García Jiménez married secondly Dadildis de Pallars, sister of Count Raymond I of Pallars and Ribagorza, with whom he had the following issue:
- Sancho, later sole king
- Jimeno, later co-king of his elder brother Sancho's son

It is possible that their branch of the Basque ruling dynasty (Jiménez) was entitled to the position of co-king, thus García II may have been a co-regent already in the lifetime of García I.
When his kinsman, King García I, died in 870 and Fortún Garcés, his son and heir, was imprisoned in Córdoba, García Jiménez became uncontested regent of the kingdom and was at least treated as king. Thus, he is usually called co-king – as were many of his house who reigned thusly.
García zealously defended his country against the encroachments of the Moors and Islam, but was killed at Ayhar (882) in a battle against the Emir of Córdoba.

#Générale##Générale#Profession : Roi de Navarre de 860 à 884.

#Générale##Générale#Profession : Duc de Gascogne de 885 à 926.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]