== Notes for [[Item:Q87937|Q87937]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mithridates_II_of_Pontus
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mithridates_II_of_Pontus
--------------------
http://mek.niif.hu/03400/03410/html/5259.html

Mithridates MiJridathV (így a görög írók szerint, míg az érmek és feliratok a MiJradathV névalakot használják, magyarul annyi mint «Mithrastól adott»), egy, a keleti népek történetében, így a perzsáknál gyakran előforduló személynév. Így hívták ama pásztort, ki a Nagy Cyrust felnevelte (Her. 1, 110), valamint az ifjabb Cyrus gyilkosát. Plut. Artax. 11. M. volt annak a perzsa főúrnak is a neve, a ki előbb ifjabb Cyrusszal tartott (Xen. an. 2, 5, 35 sk.), annak eleste után pedig Artaxerxeshez szegődött, kinek szolgálatában Lycaonia és Cappadocia helytartójává emelkedett. Xen. an. 7, 8, 25. Különösen Pontusban divatozott a M. név. A pontusi birodalom alapítójára Ariobarzanesre (Kr. e. 363–337) fia I. Mithridates (KtisthV, 337–302) következett a trónon, a kit csak Nagy Sándor tudott meghódolásra bírni és a ki később Antigonus kezétől esett el. II. Mithridates (302–266) meg tudta védelmezni országát a diadochusok ellen és északi Cappadociában is hódított, melyre azután a Pontus elnevezést kezdték alkalmazni. III. és IV. Mithridates és Pharnaces a galatákkal és más rokon népekkel folytattak háborút és ez utóbbi Eumenesszel harczolt és megszerezte Sinope városát, melyet Kr. e. 183-ban országának új fő- és székvárosává szemelt ki. V. Mithridates Euergetes (156–121) király a 3. pún háborúban és a pergamumi trónkövetelő Andronicus ellen folytatott harczban a rómaiak oldalán találjuk, minek fejében jutalomképen Nagy Phrygiát kapta tőlük (Just. 37, 1, 38, 5), melyet azonban halála után a rómaiak megint visszavettek. Midőn a 121. év körül Sinopéban gyilkos kéztől elesett, fia következett a trónon. VI. Mithridates Eupator (v. Dionysus), kit Keleten, a hol jót és rosszat egyaránt szoktak nagyítani, Nagynak is neveztek. Szül. 134 körül Kr. e. Sinopéban, uralkodott 121-től–63-ig mint a rómaiak engesztelhetetlen, félelmetes ellensége.

--------------------
Mithridates II (in Greek Mιθριδάτης; lived 3rd century BC), third king of Pontus and son of Ariobarzanes, whom he succeeded on the throne. He was a minor when his father died, but the period of his accession cannot be determined. It seems probable that it must be placed considerably before 240 BC, as Memnon tells us that he was a child at his father's death, and he had a daughter of marriageable age in 222 BC. Shortly after his accession, his kingdom was invaded by the Gauls, who were eventually repulsed.1

After he attained manhood, he married Laodice, a sister of Seleucus II Callinicus, with whom he is said to have received the province of Phrygia as a dowry.2 But notwithstanding this alliance, we find Mithridates II fighting against Seleucus during a war between Seleucus and Antiochus Hierax. Eventually, Mithridates defeated Seleucus in a great battle at Ancyra in 239 BC whereby Seleucus lost twenty thousand of his troops and narrowly escaped with his own life.3

In 222 BC, Mithridates gave his daughter Laodice in marriage to the Seleucid king Antiochus III: another of his daughters, also named Laodice, was married about the same time to Achaeus, the cousin of Antiochus.4

In 220 BC, Mithridates declared war upon the wealthy and powerful city of Sinope. However, he was unable to weaken it and the city did not fall into the power of the kings of Pontus until 183 BC.5 At an earlier period, we find Mithridates II vying with the other monarchs of Asia in sending magnificent presents to the Rhodians, after the subversion of their city by an earthquake in 227 BC.6 The date of his death is utterly unknown. He was succeeded by his son Mithridates III.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mithridates_II_of_Pontus
--------------------
'''
=Mithridates II of Pontus=
'''

Mithridates II (in Greek Mιθριδάτης; lived 3rd century BC), third king of Pontus and son of Ariobarzanes, whom he succeeded on the throne.

He was a minor when his father died, but the period of his accession cannot be determined. It seems probable that it must be placed considerably before 240 BC, as Memnon tells us that he was a child at his father's death, and he had a daughter of marriageable age in 222 BC. Shortly after his accession, his kingdom was invaded by the Gauls, who were eventually repulsed. After he attained manhood, he married Laodice, a sister of Seleucus II Callinicus, with whom he is said to have received the province of Phrygia as a dowry. But notwithstanding this alliance, we find Mithridates II fighting against Seleucus during a war between Seleucus and Antiochus Hierax. Eventually, Mithridates defeated Seleucus in a great battle at Ancyra in 239 BC whereby Seleucus lost twenty thousand of his troops and narrowly escaped with his own life. In 222 BC, Mithridates gave his daughter Laodice in marriage to the Seleucid king Antiochus III: another of his daughters, also named Laodice, was married about the same time to Achaeus, the cousin of Antiochus.

In 220 BC, Mithridates declared war upon the wealthy and powerful city of Sinope. However, he was unable to weaken it and the city did not fall into the power of the kings of Pontus until 183 BC. At an earlier period, we find Mithridates II vying with the other monarchs of Asia in sending magnificent presents to the Rhodians, after the subversion of their city by an earthquake in 227 BC. The date of his death is utterly unknown. He was succeeded by Mithridates III, his son with Laodice.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mithridates_II_of_Pontus

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Pontus 256/250-220 BC

KING OF PONTUS ca.250-190BC

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per00563.htm#0

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Pontus/Pontos 302/281-266 BCE

SOURCE NOTES:
FW13; http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per00565.htm#0
http://www.gbnf.com/genealogy/sahlin/html/d0097/I2262.HTM

He ruled from 301 to 265 b.c.

He ruled from 301 to 265 b.c.

Event: Ruled 250 - 220 BC, King of Pontus 2
Event: Ruled 302/301 BC - 266/265 BC, King of Pontus 3
Note: Mithradates II, to whom scholars before Rostovtzeff commonly assigned the titled Mithradates I Ctistes, was the son of Mithradates I.Warned by his friend Demetrius Poliorcetes, the son of Antigonus, that he had incurred the same disfavour as his father, he fled to Paphlagonia, where he seized Cimiata, a fort at the foot of the Olgassys range. Joined by the Macedonian garrison and by neighbouring populations,he conquered Cappadocian and Paphlagonian territories on both sides of the Halys to form the nucleus of his kingdom of Pontic Cappadocia or Pontus. He died in 266/265 B.C., leaving the kingdom to his son Ariobarzanes.

Event: Ruled 250 - 220 BC, King of Pontus 2
Event: Ruled 302/301 BC - 266/265 BC, King of Pontus 3
Note: Mithradates II, to whom scholars before Rostovtzeff commonly assigned the titled Mithradates I Ctistes, was the son of Mithradates I.Warned by his friend Demetrius Poliorcetes, the son of Antigonus, that he had incurred the same disfavour as his father, he fled to Paphlagonia, where he seized Cimiata, a fort at the foot of the Olgassys range. Joined by the Macedonian garrison and by neighbouring populations,he conquered Cappadocian and Paphlagonian territories on both sides of the Halys to form the nucleus of his kingdom of Pontic Cappadocia or Pontus. He died in 266/265 B.C., leaving the kingdom to his son Ariobarzanes.

Event: Ruled 250 - 220 BC, King of Pontus 2
Event: Ruled 302/301 BC - 266/265 BC, King of Pontus 3
Note: Mithradates II, to whom scholars before Rostovtzeff commonly assigned the titled Mithradates I Ctistes, was the son of Mithradates I.Warned by his friend Demetrius Poliorcetes, the son of Antigonus, that he had incurred the same disfavour as his father, he fled to Paphlagonia, where he seized Cimiata, a fort at the foot of the Olgassys range. Joined by the Macedonian garrison and by neighbouring populations,he conquered Cappadocian and Paphlagonian territories on both sides of the Halys to form the nucleus of his kingdom of Pontic Cappadocia or Pontus. He died in 266/265 B.C., leaving the kingdom to his son Ariobarzanes.

Mithridates II of Pontus
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Mithridates II (in Greek M????d?t??; lived 3rd century BC), third king of Pontus and son of Ariobarzanes, whom he succeeded on the throne. He was a minor when his father died, but the period of his accession cannot be deter­mined. It seems probable that it must be placed considerably before 240 BC, as Memnon tells us that he was a child at his father's death, and he had a daughter of marriageable age in 222 BC. Shortly after his accession, his kingdom was invaded by the Gauls, who were eventually repulsed.1 After he attained manhood, he married Laodice, a sister of Seleucus II Callinicus, with whom he is said to have received the province of Phrygia as a dowry.2 But notwithstanding this alliance, we find Mithridates II fighting against Seleucus during a war between Seleucus and Antiochus Hierax. Eventually, Mithridates defeated Seleucus in a great battle whereby Seleucus lost twenty thousand of his troops and narrowly escaped with his own life.3 In 222 BC, Mithridates gave his daughter Laodice in marriage to the Seleucid king Antiochus III: another of his daughters, also named Laodice, was married about the same time to Achaeus, the cousin of Antiochus.4 In 220 BC, Mithridates declared war upon the wealthy and powerful city of Sinope. However, he was unable to weaken it and the city did not fall into the power of the kings of Pontus until 183 BC.5 At an earlier period, we find Mithridates II vying with the other monarchs of Asia in sending magnificent presents to the Rhodians, after the subversion of their city by an earthquake in 227 BC.6 The date of his death is utterly unknown. He was succeeded by his son Mithridates III.
Preceded by:
Ariobarzanes King of Pontus
c. 250 BC – c. 210 BC Succeeded by:
Mithridates III
[edit]

References

* Hazel, John. Who's Who in the Greek World. "Mithridates II", 2003.
* Smith, William (editor); Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology, "Mithridates IV", Boston, (1867)

[edit]

Notes
1 Memnon, History of Heracleia, 24
2 Eusebius of Caesarea, Chronicon (Schoene ed.), pag. 251; Justin, Epitome, xxxviii. 5
3 Eusebius, Ibid.
4 Polybius, Histories, v. 43, 74, viii. 22
5 Ibid., iv. 56
6 Ibid., v. 90

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]