== Notes for [[Item:Q112015|Q112015]] ==

----


Aznar Galíndez I

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

He married Eneca Garcés, probably a Basque, and they had four children:

Matrona, who married García Galíndez

Eilo

Centulf

Galindo Aznárez I, later Count of Aragon
--------------------
--------------------
Princess of Pamplona

1st cousin of her 2nd husband

[LINKS]


--------------------

===Biography

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Onneca_Fortunez

Onneca Fortúnez or Iñiga Fortúnez [1] [2] (c. 848 - after 890) [3] was a Basque princess [4] of the Kingdom of Pamplona, ​​later called the Kingdom of Navarre. She was the daughter of Fortún Garcés de Pamplona and his wife Oria.

By the time Onneca was born (848-850?), The Iberian peninsula was under the rule of the Umayyad Muslim dynasty. Only the northern kingdoms of Asturias and Pamplona remained Christian, perpetuating Visigothic Hispano-Roman traditions. Onneca was member of the House of the Íñiguez, that towards honor to his great-grandfather Íñigo Arista, who had founded the Kingdom of Pamplona towards 824, just 25 years before the birth of Onneca. Information about Onneca's life is partial. Biographical data on it come from two main sources: the Codex de Roda, and from the accounts of Andalusian Muslim historians, who refer to Onneca by the Arabic name Durr (در), which means "pearl".

Onneca is mainly known for having married a prince of the Umayyad dynasty. Although the marriage unions between Christian slave concubines and Muslim rulers were frequent, the case of Onneca is one of the few examples in which a Christian princess contracts marriage with the Muslim royalty. This marriage generated familiar ties between the Christian and Muslim ruling families of the Iberian Peninsula, leading initially to a close collaboration between the house of Íñiguez and the Muslim Umayyads. The political effects of Onneca's marriage were felt beyond his death, occurring at an uncertain date.

Fortun Garcés father of Onneca, who was the heir to the throne of Pamplona, ​​was captured in 860 in the town of Milagro during a punitive expedition against the small kingdom of Pamplona commanded by Muhammad I, Muslim emir of Cordova. The expedition ravaged the Christian territory of the kingdom and the Muslim forces captured three castles. Fortun Garcés, dubbed al-Anqar (الأنقر) by the Muslims because of being one-eyed, was taken to Cordoba where he remained detained for two decades in a golden captivity. Onneca accompanied or followed his father to Cordoba, where he married Abdullah (or Abd Allah) the son of Muhammad I around 862/863. It is unknown when or how he arrived in Córdoba. She may have been caught together with her father, or sent to accompany her father to court at a later date. Possibly Onneca was still a teenager when she gave to Abdullah a son called Muhammad in the year 864. [3] On becoming the wife of Abdullah, Onneca happened to be called Durr, an Arab name that means "pearl". According to some sources, she converted to Islam. [9] [10]

In addition to Muhammad, Onneca and Abdullah were the parents of two daughters: al-Baha 'and Fatima the younger. [11] Abdullah became emir in 888, and Muhammad the son of Onneca was appointed heir to the throne. However, on January 28, 891 Muhammad was killed by al-Mutarrif his younger half-brother. There are discrepancies among historians as to whether al-Mutarrif acted on his own account or whether he was instigated by his father Abdullah. Al-Mutarrif was beheaded in 895 by order of his father. Therefore Abd-ar-Rahman, the son of Muhammad who had been born three weeks before the murder of his father, was the one who succeeded his grandfather Abdullah as emir of Cordova. Known in the West as Abd-ar-Rahman III, later Caliph was crowned.

Therefore, Onneca was a paternal grandmother on the part of Abd-ar-Rahman III, who inherited from her and her mother Muzna of frank roots, European features such as blue eyes and light reddish hair which Abd-ar-Rahman attempted to modify Tingling his beard to resemble a typical Arab.

Towards 882, after remaining almost two decades in Cordova, Onneca left to its Muslim children [13] and returned to Pamplona with its father, who had recently taken possession of the throne. Shortly after returning, he married his cousin Aznar Sánchez de Larraún, son of Sancho Garces and grandson of Garcia Iniguez of Pamplona. They had a son and two daughters, probably born between 883 and 890. Their daughters, Toda and Sancha would become queen consorts of Pamplona when contracting marriage with members of the dynasty Jimena, that came to power in 905 after moving from the throne to the Father of Onneca, Fortun Garcés:

Sancho, of whom one only has news through the genealogies of Codex de Roda, probably deceased being young.

All Aznárez married Sancho I Garces, joining the royal houses of Iniguez and Jimena. Sancha Aznárez contracted marriage with the brother of Sancho Garcés I of Pamplona and that would be his successor Jimeno Garcés. According to the Code of Roda, she was murdered in Galias in Villa Laco by her son Garc a Jiménez, who was later murdered by Ihoannes Belescones and Cardelle Belascones in Salerazo.

----

http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/NAVARRE.htm#AssonaIniguez

*Íñigo "Arista" & his wife ONECA had four children:
**1. GARCÍA Iñíguez ([810]-killed by Arabs [Lumberri] 882[57], bur Leire Monastery). The Codex de Roda names "Garsea Enneconis et domna Assona…et domna ---" m [firstly] URRACA, daughter of ---. García I & his [first] wife had [four] children:
***b) SANCHO García . The Codex de Roda names "Fortunio Garseanis et Sanzio Garseanis et domna Onneca" as the children of "Garsea Enneconis" and his unnamed wife[68]. m ---. The name of Sancho's wife is not known. Sancho García & his wife had [two] children: …
****i) '''AZNAR Sánchez de Larraún''' . The Codex de Roda names "Asnari Sanziones qui et Larron" as son of "Sanzio Garseanis"[69]. m (880) [as her second husband,] his first cousin, ONECA [%C3%8D%C3%B1iga] Fortún de Pamplona, [repudiated wife of ABD ALLAH later ABD ALLAH I Emir of Córdoba], … Aznar Sánchez & his wife had three children:
***** (a) SANCHO Aznárez . The Codex de Roda names "Santio Asnari et domna Tota regina et domna Sanzia" as the children of "Asnari Sanziones qui et Larron" and his wife[73].
*****(b) TODA Aznárez ([885]-after 970). The Codex de Roda names "Santio Asnari et domna Tota regina et domna Sanzia" as the children of "Asnari Sanziones qui et Larron" and his wife, one manuscript specifying that Tota was the wife of "Sanctii Obtimi regis"[74]. m SANCHO I García King of Navarre, son of GARCÍA II Jiménez King of Pamplona & his second wife Dadildis de Pallars ([880]-11 Dec 925, bur San Estebán).
*****(c) SANCHA Aznárez. The Codex de Roda names "Santio Asnari et domna Tota regina et domna Sanzia" as the children of "Asnari Sanziones qui et Larron" and his wife, in a later passage naming "domna Sanzia, Asnari Santionis filia" as wife of "Scemeno Garseanis" and recording that she was killed "in Galias in villa…Laco" by her son García Jiménez[75]. m JIMENO García de Pamplona, son of GARCÍA II Jimenez King of Pamplona & his second wife Dadildis de Pallars (-931).

----
===References
* http://www.stirnet.com/genie/data/ancient/il/iberia02.php#con3
* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Onneca_Fortunez

** Leo: Europäische Stammtafeln, J.A. Stargardt Verlag, Marburg, Schwennicke, Detlev (Ed.), Reference: II 53 .

Oneca selon la Wikipedia ES.

Source for the Belascotones, Galindo and Galindez dysnasties:
Collins, Roger, The Basques. Blackwell Publishing, London 1990

Rootsweb Feldman
URL: http://worldconnect.genealogy.rootsweb.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=:3044567&id=I01068
# D: I01068
# Name: Aznar Ier Galindez D'ARAGON 1 2 3 4 5
# Sex: M
# Birth: ABT 775 1 2 3 4 5
# Death: 841 1 2 3 4 5
# Change Date: 15 JAN 2004 5
# Change Date: 16 SEP 2001 2 3 4 5
# Note:

[Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED]

2 SOUR S332582
3 DATA
4 TEXT Date of Import: 14 Jan 2004


[daveanthes.FTW]

#Générale# Vérifier : est-ce le même Aznar qui a eu Garcia deComminges et Galindo d'Aragon ?
Comte d'Aragon, de Gascogne et d'Urgel
Attesté en 808.
Déc ès : 836 (père de Garcia) ou 841 (père de Galindo).[Spare.FTW]

Father: Galindo Ou Oriol D'ARAGON b: ABT 750

Marriage 1 Spouse Unknown

Children

1. Has Children Aznares D'ARAGON b: ABT 795
2. Has No Children Garcia Aznares DE COMMINGES b: 805
3. Has No Children Sancia D'ARAGON b: ABT 810
4. Has No Children Galindo Ier Aznarez D'ARAGON b: ABT 820


Sources:

1. Title: daveanthes.FTW
Note: ABBR daveanthes.FTW
Note: Source Media Type: Other
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Book
Text: Date of Import: 14 Jan 2004
2. Title: daveanthes.FTW
Note: ABBR daveanthes.FTW
Note: Source Media Type: Other
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Book
Text: Date of Import: Jan 13, 2004
3. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Jan 18, 2004
4. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: 21 Jan 2004
5. Title: Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Feb 6, 2004

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]