== Notes for [[Item:Q106028|Q106028]] ==

* '''4th Umayyad Caliph'''
* Reign: 684 – 685 AD

Source 1: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marwan_I

Source 2: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marwan_ibn_al-Hakam

Source 3: http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marwan_I.

Marwan ibn al-Hakam (623–685) (Arabic: مروان بن الحكم‎) was the fourth Umayyad Caliph, who took over the dynasty after Muawiya II abdicated in 684. Marwan's ascension pointed to a shift in the lineage of the Umayyad dynasty from descendants of Abu Sufyan to those of Hakam, both of whom were grandsons of Umayya (for whom the Umayyad dynasty is named). Hakam was a first cousin of Uthman ibn Affan.

During the "Battle of the Camel" Marwan ibn al-Hakam is said to have shot his general Talhah with an arrow to the thigh, resulting in his death. Marwan killed Talha in revenge for Talha's alleged betrayal of the third Caliph Uthman.

He was removed from this position by Ali, only to be reappointed by Muawiya I. Marwan was eventually removed from the city when Abdullah ibn Zubayr rebelled against Yazid I. From here, Marwan went to Damascus, where he was made the caliph after Muawiya II abdicated.

Marwan's short reign was marked by a civil war among the Umayyads as well as a war against Abdullah ibn Zubayr who continued to rule over the Hejaz, Iraq, Egypt and parts of Syria. Marwan was able to win the Umayyad civil war, the result of which was a new Marwanid line of Umayyad caliphs. He was also able to recapture Egypt and Syria from Abdullah, but was not able to completely defeat him. Shi'a hold that none of the Umayyad caliphs were legitimate. See Succession to Muhammad for more details.

-

Marwân I ibn al-Hakam al-Qurayshi, 4th Umayyad Caliph1,2

b. 623, d. 685

Father al-Hakim ibn Abûl 'Âs1,3,4 b. circa 599

Mother Amina bint `Alkama al-Kinaniyya1,3 b. circa 604

Of the Umayyad. Marwân I ibn al-Hakam al-Qurayshi, 4th Umayyad Caliph was named in full: Marwan bin Al-Hakam bin Abi Al-`As bin Umaiyah.5 Also called Abu `l-Kasim = Father of 'l-Kasim.1 Also called Abu `Abd al-Malik = Father of 'Abd al-Malik. He was born in 623.5,6 He was the son of al-Hakim ibn Abûl 'Âs and Amina bint `Alkama al-Kinaniyya.1,3,4 Marwân I ibn al-Hakam al-Qurayshi, 4th Umayyad Caliph married 'A'isha bint Mu`awiya ben al-Mughira, daughter of Mu`awiya ben al-Mughira, before 646.1 Marwân I ibn al-Hakam al-Qurayshi, 4th Umayyad Caliph was a loyal follower of the Caliph 'Uthman bin 'Affan.5 'A'isha, the widow of the Prophet Muhammed, rebelled against the Caliphs. Her resistance ended with her defeat in this battle. In 658 at the Battle of the Camel, Basra (now Az-Zubayr), southeastern Iraq.7 He a participant in 658 at the Battle of the Camel, Basra (now Az-Zubayr), southeastern Iraq.5 He married Aisha bint 'Uthman ibn 'Affan, daughter of 'Uthman ibn 'Affan al-Qurayshi, 3rd Rightly Guided Caliph of Islam and Ruqaiyah bint Muhammad Banu Hâshim, before 659; 1st cousins, 1x removed. Marwân I ibn al-Hakam al-Qurayshi, 4th Umayyad Caliph was the fourth Umayyad caliph, and forefather of the Marwanids in 683.5 4th Umayyad Caliph at Damascus, Syria, between 683 and 685.5 He was an old man in poor health when he ascended the throne himself in 684.6 He was established the standards for weights and measurements.5 He died in 685 at Damascus, Syria, at age 62 years. He died of plague.1,2,5,6 He was able to arrange the succession of his son, 'Abd al-Malik, by eliminating all other contenders for the caliphate.6

Family 1

'A'isha bint Mu`awiya ben al-Mughira b. circa 630

Child

'Abd al-Malik ibn Marwân, 5th Umayyad Caliph+ b. c 646, d. Oct 7051,8

Family 2

Children

'Abd al-'Azîz ibn Marwân, Governor of Egypt+ b. c 650, d. May 7059,4

Muhammad ibn Marwân Banu 'Abd Shams+ b. c 6559

Family 3

Aisha bint 'Uthman ibn 'Affan b. circa 617

Child

N. N. bint Marwân ibn al-Hakam+ b. c 659

Citations

[S187] Royal Genealogy Database, online http://www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/public/genealogy/

[S278] DfAdam, online unknown url, The Line of Ishmael, 82.

[S976] Francisco Antonio Doria (e-mail address), Banu-Qasi conjectured line in "Re: Banu-Qasi conjectured line," newsgroup message 2001-06-12 06:42:26 PST.

[S1411] Stanley Lane-Pool, The Mohammadan Dynasties, pg. 11.

[S469] Al-Islam.com, online http://www.al-islam.com/

[S172] Various Encyclopaedea Britannica.

[S862] Various EB CD 2001, Zubayr, Az- (Iraq) .

[S862] Various EB CD 2001, 'Abd al-Malik (Umayyad caliph).

[S653] PoH, online http://www.friesian.com/
--------------------
Marwan I

Marwan ibn al-Hakam (623 - 685) (árabe: مروان بن الحكم) era el cuarto Califa Omeya, que asumió el control de la dinastía después de que Muawiya II abdicara en 684. La ascensión de Marwan señaló un cambio en el linaje de la dinastía Omeya al ser descendientes de Abu Sufyan a las de Hakam, ambas quienes eran nietos de Umayya (quién da su nombre a la dinastía). Hakam era primo del Uthman ibn Affan.

El profeta Mahoma envió a ambos y a su padre, Hakam ibn al-Aas al exilio, con la orden de nunca volver. Durante el reinado de Uthman, él envió por Marwan y posiblemente por su padre. Marwan se aprovechó de su relación con él califa y fue designado gobernador de Medina. Un número de historiadores posteriores tales como Ibn Taymiyya y los sunis en general se preguntan sobre la autenticidad de esta historia, la cual no viene de ningún escritor después de la muerte de Mahoma.

Durante la “batalla del camello” Marwan ibn al-Hakam se dice que disparo una flecha en el muslo al general Talha, resultando en su muerte. Marwan mato a Talha en venganza por la traición alegada a Talha al tercer Califa Uthman.

El fue removido de esta posición por Ali, sólo fue repuesto por Muawiya I. Marwan se le quito eventual la ciudad cuando Abdullah ibn Zubayr se rebeló contra Yazid I. De aquí, Marwan fue a Damasco, en donde lo proclamaron califa después de que Muawiya II abdicara.

El reinado corto de Marwan fue marcado por una guerra civil entre los Omeyas así como una guerra contra Abdullah ibn Zubayr que continuó gobernando sobre el Hejaz, Iraq, Egipto y partes de Siria. Marwan pudo ganar la guerra civil de los Omeyasd, el resultado de la cual fue una nueva línea de los Califas Omeyas en los Marwanidas. Él pudo también recobrar Egipto y Siria de Abdullah, pero no pudo derrotarlo totalmente.

Marwan ibn al-Hakam (623 - 685) (Arabic: مروان بن الحكم‎) was the fourth Umayyad Caliph, who took over the dynasty after Muawiya II abdicated in 684. Marwan's ascension pointed to a shift in the lineage of the Umayyad dynasty from descendants of Abu Sufyan to those of Hakam, both of whom were grandsons of Umayya (for whom the Umayyad dynasty is named). Hakam was a first cousin of Uthman ibn Affan.

During the "Battle of the Camel" Marwan ibn al-Hakam is said to have shot his general Talha with an arrow to the thigh, resulting in his death. Marwan killed Talha in revenge for Talha's alleged betrayal of the third Caliph Uthman.

He was removed from this position by Ali, only to be reappointed by Muawiya I. Marwan was eventually removed from the city when Abdullah ibn Zubayr rebelled against Yazid I. From here, Marwan went to Damascus, where he was made the caliph after Muawiya II abdicated.

Marwan's short reign was marked by a civil war among the Umayyads as well as a war against Abdullah ibn Zubayr who continued to rule over the Hejaz, Iraq, Egypt and parts of Syria. Marwan was able to win the Umayyad civil war, the result of which was a new Marwanid line of Umayyad caliphs. He was also able to recapture Egypt and Syria from Abdullah, but was not able to completely defeat him. Shi'a hold that none of the Umayyad caliphs were legitimate. See Succession to Muhammad for more details.
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marwan_I Marwan ibn al-Hakam ibn Abu al-'As ibn Umayyah (623 – 7 May 685) (Arabic: مروان بن الحكم بن ابو العاص بن أمية‎) was the fourth Umayyad Caliph,
--------------------
Aisha bint 'Uthman ibn 'Affan married Marwân I ibn al-Hakam al-Qurayshi, 4th Umayyad Caliph, son of al-Hakim ibn Abûl 'Âs and Amina bint `Alkama al-Kinaniyya, before 659; 1st cousins, 1x removed.

Marwan I ibn Abu al-Hakim (born 28th March 623), Governor of Medina, later 8th CALIPH OF DAMASCUS (684-85), married his second-cousin once-removed [MOSQ223]A'isha bint 'Uthman ibn 'Affan (see 2 entries earlier). He died 7th May 685.

[MOSQ222] --- bint Marwan I married [MOSN221] Musa ibn Nuseir al-Bekir (see al-ANDALUS below).

Place of Burial:Immediate Family: Marwân I al-Hakam, 4th Umayyad Caliph Also Known As: "مروان بن الحكم‎" Birthdate: March 28, 623 Birthplace: Damascus, Syria Death: Died May 7, 685 in Damascus, Syria Damascus, Syria Son of al-Hakam bin Abu al-ʻAs and Aminah binte al-Kama al-Kinaniyya Husband of 'Aisha binte ʻUthmān; A'isha binte Mu`awiyah bin al-Mughirah and Ruqayya binte Umar al-Hakam Father of 'Abd al-'Aziz bin Marwân I bin al-Hakam;Amîna binte Marwân I bin al-Hakam; 'Abd al-Malik I bin Marwân I bin al-Hakam and Muhammad bin Marwân I bin al-Hakam

Occupation: Calife, de Damas, Fourth Omayyad Caliph, Enkel Mohammeds Marwan ibn al-Hakam ibn Abu al-'As ibn Umayyah (623 – 7 May 685) (Arabic: مروان بن الحكم بن ابو العاص بن أمية‎) a Sahaba and also was the fourth Umayyad Caliph, and the cousin of Uthman ibn Affan, who took over the dynasty after Muawiya II abdicated in 684. Marwan's ascension pointed to a shift in the lineage of the Umayyad dynasty from descendants of Abu Sufyan (the "Sufyanids") to those of Hakam (the "Marwanids"), both of whom were grandsons of Umayya (for whom the Umayyad dynasty is named). Hakam was also the uncle of Uthman ibn Affan.

Life During the "Battle of the Camel" Marwan ibn al-Hakam is said to have shot his general Talhah with an arrow to the thigh, resulting in his death. Marwan killed Talhah in revenge for his alleged betrayal of the third Caliph, Uthman. He was removed from this position by Ali, only to be reappointed by Muawiya I. Marwan was eventually removed from the city when Abdullah ibn Zubayr rebelled against Yazid I. From here, Marwan went to Damascus, where he was made the caliph afterMuawiya II abdicated.

Marwan's short reign was marked by a civil war among the Syrian Arabs as well as a war against Abdullah ibn Zubayr who continued to rule over the Hejaz, Iraq, Egypt and parts of Syria. Marwan was able to prevail in Syria at the Battle of Marj Rahit, the result of which was a new Marwanid line of Umayyad caliphs. He was also able to recapture Egypt and Syria from Abdullah, but was not able to completely defeat him.

Wikipédia (corrigée par JFB) : Marwân Ier ou Abû `Abd al-Malik Marwân ben al-Hakam (623-685) (&#1571;&#1576;&#1608; &#1593;&#1576;&#1583; &#1575;&#1604;&#1605;&#1604;&#1603; &#1605;&#1585;&#1608;&#1575;&#1606; &#1576;&#1606; &#1575;&#1604;&#1581;&#1603;&#1605; ) fut un calife marwanide, d'une branche cousine des Omeyyades, qui prit le contrôle de la dynastie après la mort de Muawiya II en 684. Histoire <p> Marwân et son père Al-Hakam ben Abi al-As sont allés résider à Tâ'if au sud de La Mecque. Mahomet les auraient chassés de Médine (ou de La Mecque ?), les exilant à Tâ'if. <p> Durant son califat, `Uthman cousin de Al-Hakam lui demanda de venir à La Mecque avec son fils. Une contestation entre Chiites et Sunnites à ce sujet, est de savoir s'il y a eu condamnation à l'exil, si cette condamnation était définitive ou temporaire, et si `Uthman a transgressé ou non les volontés du Prophète. Il est sûr que Marwân profita du soutien de `Uthman pour devenir gouverneur de Médine (ou devenir son vizir). <p> Marwân ben al-Hakam participa à une série de campagnes en Ifriqiya (648)[3]. <p> Des insurgés virent d'Égypte et d'Irak pour contester `Uthman. Ceux-ci essayèrent de rallier `Alî à leur mouvement. Un message intercepté par les insurgés agrandit la méfiance entre `Uthman et `Alî. Portant le sceau d'`Uthman, à l'écriture ressemblant à celle de Marwân, cette lettre adressé au gouverneur d'Égypte lui enjoignait de réprimer à la source l'insurrection. <p> Lorsque les insurgés vinrent attaquer `Uthman dans sa résidence à Médine, Marwân reçut de l'un d'eux, un coup d'épée dans le cou. Passant pour mort, il fut caché et soigné mais son cou resta tordu. Après la mort de `Uthman (656), Marwân perdit son poste de gouverneur de La Mecque. Il soutint Aïcha contre `Alî. <p> Au cours de la bataille du Chameau (656), Talha ben `Ubayd Allah l'un des généraux de l'armée d'Aïcha fut tué d'une flèche dans la jambe causant une hémorragie. Selon certains c'est Marwân qui a tiré cette flèche mortelle. Lors de l'affaire du message Talha aurait accusé Marwân d'en être l'auteur. Marwân aurait alors dit « J'ai vu cet homme (Talha) pendant les jours où Uthman a été assiégé dans sa maison. Il excitait la foule à entrer et à le tuer.» <p> Marwân fut nommé gouverneur du Hedjaz par Muawiya Ier peu après son accession au pouvoir (662). Marwân a été par la suite chassé de Médine quand `Abd Allah ben al-Zubayr s'est rebellé contre Yazîd Ier (682). Marwân est allé à Damas, où il a été fait au calife après que Mu`âwîya II ait abdiqué. Après le décès de Yazîd Ier des désordres se sont développés dans le Hedjaz (683). <p> Le califat <p> Le règne court (neuf mois) de Marwân a été marqué par une guerre civile à l'intérieur de la famille omeyyade et par la guerre contre « l'anti-calife » `Abd Allah ben al-Zubayr qui a continué à régner sur le Hedjaz, l'Irak, l'Égypte et une partie de la Syrie. Marwân gagna la guerre civile, le résultat fut que la nouvelle lignée des califes omeyyades fut celle des Marwanides (684). Il put également reprendre l'Égypte et la Syrie, mais il ne réussit pas à vaincre complètement `Abd Allah ben al-Zubayr. <p> En 685, Marwân rentre en Syrie après une campagne en Ègypte. Marwân avait épousé la mère de Khâlid fils de Yazîd Ier et prétendant à la succession. Mais Marwân fil nommer son fils Abd al-Malik comme héritier. Alors la mère de Khâlid vengeat son fils en l'étouffant sous un coussin dans son sommeil. Certaines sources le donnent mort de la peste. C'est Abd al-Malik son fils qui lui succéda (685). <p> Son uvre <p> Il établit les poids et mesures standards. <p> Les chiites ne considèrent pas Marwân comme un calife légitime.

Marwar I was cursed along with his father and exhiled by Muhammad ibn Abd Allah.
He said he would never return as long as Uthman was Caliph.
But Uthman paod a large sum to Marwar and he did go back upon his words.
Marwar ibn Al Hakim was the Umayyad Caliph who took over after Muawiya II abdicated in 684.

Musa ibn Nusair, Abú Abd al-Rahmán

(el moro Muza ) Gobernador musulmán del norte de África que dirigió laocupación de la península Ibérica (Yemen, h. 640 - Damasco ?,716/718). Era un liberto del walí de Egipto, hermano del sultán Omeya,que le nombró gobernador de las provincias occidentales de Ifriqiya yel Magreb (704). Completó la islamización de la segunda y la extendiócon la conquista de Marruecos. Fue entonces cuando el conde donJulián, gobernador visigodo de Ceuta y miembro del partido vitizano,contrario al rey Rodrigo, convenció a Musa para que pasara con sustropas a España y ayudara a derrocarle. Musa envió a Tarif ben Malluken una primera expedición de reconocimiento, rechazada por las fuerzasde Rodrigo (710), y a su lugarteniente, Tariq ben Ziyad, en unasegunda definitiva, ya autorizada por el califa (711). La rápidapenetración de Tariq en el territorio peninsular aconsejó a Musa pasarpersonalmente a al-Ándalus para consolidar la conquista en el 712. Conayuda de los vitizanos fue tomando ciudades sobrepasadas en su avancepor Tariq, dirigiendo su ejército desde Algeciras hasta Sevilla,Mérida, Toledo, Zaragoza, Asturias y Lugo. Pero en el 714 hubo deregresar a Damasco ante los insistentes requerimientos del califaSulaymán, dejando como gobernador de al-Ándalus a su hijo Abd al-Aziz.Al llegar a Damasco halló a un nuevo califa, Sulaymán, que le condenópor la forma en que había repartido el botín de sus conquistas. Nopudo regresar nunca a al-Ándalus y murió oscuramente.
© Biografías y Vidas, 2004.

Marwan I
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 Marwan ibn al-Hakam (623 - 685) (Arabic: ????? ?? ?????) was the fourth Ummayad Caliph, who took over the dynasty after Muawiya II gave up the title in 684. Marwan's ascension pointed to a shift in the lineage of the Umayyad dynasty from descendants of Abu Sufyan to those of Hakam, both of whom were grandsons of Umayya (for whom the Umayyad dynasty is named). Hakam was a first cousin of Uthman ibn Affan.

The Prophet Muhammad sent both him and his father, Hakam ibn al-Aas to exile, saying they should never return. During the reign of Uthman, he sent Marwan and possibly his father back. Marwan took advantage of his relationship to the caliph and was appointed governor of Medina. A number of early historians such as Ibn Taymiyya and the Sunnis in general question the authenticity of this story, which doesn't come from any Sahih hadiths or from a reputable writer from soon after Muhammad's death.

During the "Battle of the Camel" Marwan ibn al-Hakam is said to have shot his general Talha with an arrow to the thigh, resuting in his death. Marwan killed Talha in revenge for Talha's alleged betrayal of the third Caliph Uthman:

"I saw this man (Talha) during the days when Uthman was besieged in his house. He was inciting and urging the crowd to enter the house, and to kill him." 23

He was removed from this position by Ali, only to be reappointed by Muawiya I. Marwan was eventually removed from the city when Abdullah ibn Zubayr rebelled against Yazid I. From here, Marwan went to Damascus, where he was made the caliph after Muawiya II abdicated.

Marwan's short reign was marked by a civil war among the Umayyads as well as a war against Abdullah bin Zubayr who continued to rule over the Hejaz, Iraq, Egypt and parts of Syria. Marwan was able to win the Umayyad civil war, the result of which was a new Marwanid line of Umayyad caliphs. He was also able to recapture Egypt and Syria from Abdullah, but was not able to completely defeat him.

Note that Shi'a do not consider any of the Umayyad caliphs or any of the three predecessors to Ali to be legitimate. See Succession to Muhammad for more details.
Preceded by
Muawiya II Caliph
684–685 Succeeded by
Abd al-Malik

-- MERGED NOTE ------------

Wikidata: https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q298577 | Geni: https://www.geni.com/people/6000000003153451632

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000003153451632

[[Category:Wikipedia overwrite]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]