== Notes for [[Item:Q88177|Q88177]] ==

Demetrius I (Greek: Δημήτριος, 337-283 BC), called Poliorcetes (Greek: Πολιορκητής - "The Besieger"), son of Antigonus I Monophthalmus and Stratonice, was a king of Macedon (294–288 BC). He belonged to the Antigonid dynasty.

At the age of twenty-two he was left by his father to defend Syria against Ptolemy the son of Lagus; he was totally defeated in Battle of Gaza, but soon partially repaired his loss by a victory in the neighbourhood of Myus. In the spring of 310, he was soundly defeated when he tried to expel Seleucus I Nicator from Babylon; his father was defeated in the autumn. As a result of this Babylonian War, Antigonus lost almost two thirds of his empire: all eastern satrapies became Seleucus'.

After several campaigns against Ptolemy on the coasts of Cilicia and Cyprus, Demetrius sailed with a fleet of 250 ships to Athens. He freed the city from the power of Cassander and Ptolemy, expelled the garrison which had been stationed there under Demetrius of Phalerum, and besieged and took Munychia (307 BC). After these victories he was worshipped by the Athenians as a tutelary deity under the title of Soter (σωτήρ) ("Preserver").

In the campaign of 306 BC against Ptolemy he defeated Menelaus, Ptolemy's brother, in the naval Battle of Salamis, completely destroying the naval power of Egypt. In 305 BC, now bearing the title of king bestowed upon him by his father, he endeavoured to punish the Rhodians for having deserted his cause; his ingenuity in devising new siege engines in his unsuccessful attempt to reduce the capital gained him the title of Poliorcetes. Among his creations were a battering ram 180 feet (55 m) long, requiring 1000 men to operate it; and a wheeled siege tower named "Helepolis" (or "Taker of Cities") which stood 125 feet (38 m) tall and 60 feet (18 m) wide, weighing 360,000 pounds.

Coin of Demetrius I (337-283 BC). Greek inscription reads ΒΑΣΙΛΕΩΣ ΔΗΜΗΤΡΙΟΥ ([coin] of King Demetrius)In 302 BC he returned a second time to Greece as liberator, and reinstated the Corinthian League. But his licentiousness and extravagance made the Athenians long for the government of Cassander. Among his outrages was his courtship of a young boy named Democles the Handsome. The youth kept on refusing his attention but one day found himself cornered at the baths. Having no way out and being unable to physically resist his suitor, he took the lid off the hot water cauldron and jumped in. His death is seen as a mark of honor for himself and his country. In another instance, he waived a fine of 50 talents imposed on a citizen in exchange for the favors of Cleaenetus, that man's son.[1] He also sought the attention of Lamia, a Greek courtesan. She demanded a price of 250 talents. He put a tax on soap to raise the money.[2]

He also roused the jealousy of Alexander's Diadochi; Seleucus, Cassander and Lysimachus united to destroy him and his father. The hostile armies met at the Ipsus in Phrygia (301 BC). Antigonus was killed, and Demetrius, after sustaining severe losses, retired to Ephesus. This reversal of fortune stirred up many enemies against him—the Athenians refused even to admit him into their city. But he soon afterwards ravaged the territory of Lysimachus and effected a reconciliation with Seleucus, to whom he gave his daughter Stratonice in marriage. Athens was at this time oppressed by the tyranny of Lachares - a popular leader who made himself supreme in Athens in 296 BC - but Demetrius, after a protracted blockade, gained possession of the city (294 BC) and pardoned the inhabitants for their misconduct in 301.

In the same year he established himself on the throne of Macedonia by murdering Alexander V, the son of Cassander. In 291 BC he married Lanassa, the former wife of Pyrrhus. But his new position as ruler of Macedonia was continually threatened by Pyrrhus, who took advantage of his occasional absence to ravage the defenceless part of his kingdom (Plutarch, Pyrrhus, 7 if.); at length, the combined forces of Pyrrhus, Ptolemy and Lysimachus, assisted by the disaffected among his own subjects, obliged him to leave Macedonia in 288 BC.

He passed into Asia and attacked some of the provinces of Lysimachus with varying success. Famine and pestilence destroyed the greater part of his army, and he solicited Seleucus' support and assistance. But before he reached Syria hostilities broke out, and after he had gained some advantages over his son-in-law, Demetrius was totally forsaken by his troops on the field of battle and surrendered to Seleucus.

His son Antigonus offered all his possessions, and even his own person, in order to procure his father's liberty. But all proved unavailing, and Demetrius died after a confinement of three years (283 BC). His remains were given to Antigonus and honoured with a splendid funeral at Corinth.

His descendants remained in possession of the Macedonian throne till the time of Perseus, when Macedon was conquered by the Romans in 168 BC.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demetrius_I_of_Macedon
--------------------
Demetrius I The Besieger Poliocretes, King of Macedonia, was born circa 337 BC; died circa 283 BC.
--------------------
'''
=Demetrius I of Macedon=
'''

Demetrius I (/dɪˈmiːtriəs/; Greek: Δημήτριος; 337–283 BC), called Poliorcetes (/ˌpɒli.ɔːrˈsiːtiːz/; Greek: Πολιορκητής, "The Besieger"), son of Antigonus I Monophthalmus and Stratonice, was a Macedonian nobleman, military leader, and finally king of Macedon (294–288 BC). He belonged to the Antigonid dynasty and was its first member to rule Macedonia.

'''Biography'''

At the age of twenty-two he was left by his father to defend Syria against Ptolemy the son of Lagus. He was defeated at the Battle of Gaza, but soon partially repaired his loss by a victory in the neighbourhood of Myus. In the spring of 310, he was soundly defeated when he tried to expel Seleucus I Nicator from Babylon; his father was defeated in the autumn. As a result of this Babylonian War, Antigonus lost almost two thirds of his empire: all eastern satrapies fell to Seleucus.

After several campaigns against Ptolemy on the coasts of Cilicia and Cyprus, Demetrius sailed with a fleet of 250 ships to Athens. He freed the city from the power of Cassander and Ptolemy, expelled the garrison which had been stationed there under Demetrius of Phalerum, and besieged and took Munychia (307 BC). After these victories he was worshipped by the Athenians as a tutelary deity under the title of Soter (σωτήρ) ("Preserver").

In the campaign of 306 BC he defeated Ptolemy and Menelaus, Ptolemy's brother, in the naval Battle of Salamis, completely destroying the naval power of Ptolemaic Egypt. Demetrius conquered Cyprus in 306 BC, capturing one of Ptolemy's sons. Following the victory Antigonus assumed the title king and bestowed the same upon his son Demetrius. In 305 BC, now bearing the title of king bestowed upon him by his father, he endeavoured to punish the Rhodians for having deserted his cause; his ingenuity in devising new siege engines in his unsuccessful attempt to reduce the capital gained him the title of Poliorcetes. Among his creations were a battering ram 180 feet (55 m) long, requiring 1000 men to operate it; and a wheeled siege tower named "Helepolis" (or "Taker of Cities") which stood 125 feet (38 m) tall and 60 feet (18 m) wide, weighing 360,000 pounds.

In 302 BC he returned a second time to Greece as liberator, and reinstated the Corinthian League. But his licentiousness and extravagance made the Athenians long for the government of Cassander. Among his outrages was his courtship of a young boy named Democles the Handsome. The youth kept on refusing his attention but one day found himself cornered at the baths. Having no way out and being unable to physically resist his suitor, he took the lid off the hot water cauldron and jumped in. His death was seen as a mark of honor for himself and his country. In another instance, Demetrius waived a fine of 50 talents imposed on a citizen in exchange for the favors of Cleaenetus, that man's son.[3] He also sought the attention of Lamia, a Greek courtesan. He demanded 250 talents from the Athenians, which he then gave to Lamia and other courtesans to buy soap and cosmetics.

He also roused the jealousy of Alexander's Diadochi; Seleucus, Cassander and Lysimachus united to destroy him and his father. The hostile armies met at the Battle of Ipsus in Phrygia (301 BC). Antigonus was killed, and Demetrius, after sustaining severe losses, retired to Ephesus. This reversal of fortune stirred up many enemies against him—the Athenians refused even to admit him into their city. But he soon afterwards ravaged the territory of Lysimachus and effected a reconciliation with Seleucus, to whom he gave his daughter Stratonice in marriage. Athens was at this time oppressed by the tyranny of Lachares—a popular leader who made himself supreme in Athens in 296 BC—but Demetrius, after a protracted blockade, gained possession of the city (294 BC) and pardoned the inhabitants for their misconduct in 301.

''King of Macedonia''

In 294 he established himself on the throne of Macedonia by murdering Alexander V, the son of Cassander. He faced rebellion from the Boeotians but secured the region after capturing Thebes in 291 BC. That year he married Lanassa, the former wife of Pyrrhus. But his new position as ruler of Macedonia was continually threatened by Pyrrhus, who took advantage of his occasional absence to ravage the defenceless part of his kingdom (Plutarch, Pyrrhus, 7 if.); at length, the combined forces of Pyrrhus, Ptolemy and Lysimachus, assisted by the disaffected among his own subjects, obliged him to leave Macedonia in 288 BC.

After besieging Athens without success he passed into Asia and attacked some of the provinces of Lysimachus with varying success. Famine and pestilence destroyed the greater part of his army, and he solicited Seleucus' support and assistance. But before he reached Syria hostilities broke out, and after he had gained some advantages over his son-in-law, Demetrius was totally forsaken by his troops on the field of battle and surrendered to Seleucus.

His son Antigonus offered all his possessions, and even his own person, in order to procure his father's liberty. But all proved unavailing, and Demetrius died after a confinement of three years (283 BC). His remains were given to Antigonus and honoured with a splendid funeral at Corinth. His descendants remained in possession of the Macedonian throne till the time of Perseus, when Macedon was conquered by the Romans in 168 BC.

'''Family'''

Demetrius was married five times:

# His first wife was Phila daughter of Regent Antipater by whom he had two children: Stratonice of Syria and Antigonus II Gonatas.
# His second wife was Eurydice of Athens, by whom he is said to have had a son called Corrhabus.
# His third wife was Deidamia, a sister of Pyrrhus of Epirus. Deidamia bore him a son called Alexander who is said by Plutarch to have spent his life in Egypt, probably in an honourable captivity.
# His fourth wife was Lanassa, the former wife of his brother-in-law Pyrrhus of Epirus.
# His fifth wife was Ptolemais, daughter of Ptolemy I Soter and Eurydice of Egypt, by whom he had a son called Demetrius the Fair.

He also had an affair with a celebrated courtesan called Lamia of Athens, by whom he had a daughter called Phila.

'''Literary references'''

''Plutarch''

Plutarch wrote a biography of Demetrius (http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Plutarch/Lives/Demetrius*.html)

''Hegel''

Hegel, in the Lectures on the History of Philosophy, says of another Demetrius, Demetrius Phalereus that "Demetrius Phalereus and others were thus soon after [Alexander] honoured and worshipped in Athens as God." What the exact source was for Hegel's claim is unclear. Diogenes Laërtius in his short biography of Demetrius Phalereus does not mention this. Apparently Hegel's error comes from a misreading of Plutarch's Life of Demetrius which is about Demetrius Poliorcetes and not Demetrius of Phalereus. Plutarch describes in the work how Demetrius Poliorcetes conquered Demetrius Phalereus at Athens. Then, in chapter 12 of the work, Plutarch describes how Demetrius Poliorcetes was given honors due to the god Dionysus. This account by Plutarch was confusing not only for Hegel, but for others as well.

''Others''

Plutarch's account of Demetrius' departure from Macedonia in 288 BC inspired Constantine Cavafy to write "King Demetrius" (ὁ βασιλεὺς Δημήτριος) in 1906, his earliest surviving poem on a historical theme.

Demetrius is the main character of the opera Demetrio a Rodi (Turin, 1789) with libretto by Giandomenico Boggio and Giuseppe Banti. The music is set by Gaetano Pugnani (1731-1798).

Demetrius appears (under the Greek form of his name, Demetrios) in L. Sprague de Camp's historical novel, The Bronze God of Rhodes, which largely concerns itself with his siege of Rhodes.

Alfred Duggan's novel Elephants and Castles provides a lively fictionalised account of his life.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demetrius_I_of_Macedon

The generals who succeed Alexander are Antigonus Cyclops orMonophthalmus, so-called because he lost an eye in battle, and his sonDemetrius Poliocertes, Antipater and his son Cassander, Seleucus,Ptolemy, Eumenes and Lysimachus. They argue bitterly among themselves foreach is determined to build a Hellenistic or Greek monarchy on the ruinsof Alexander's empire.

Ptolemy, son of a Macedonian nobleman and the most trusted of Alexander'sgenerals, was among the seven bodyguards attached to his person. In thedivision of the empire, Ptolemy takes Egypt as the safest and farthestplace to establish a dynasty. He even manages to carry off the body ofAlexander from Babylon to Egypt in order to bury him in Alexandria andthus enhance his own position.

Later Ptolemy mints a gold coin at Alexandria on which we see a car drawnby four elephants. Perhaps this is an attempt made by him to representAlexander's funeral cortege that included elephants.

Antipater establishes himself in Macedon. He dies soon after and issucceeded by Cassander, his son.

Seleucus Nicator, a youth of twenty-three of age when he accompaniesAlexander to Asia, wins distinction in the Indian campaign. Seleucus isgiven the government of the Babylonian satrapy.

Antigonus defeats Eumenes, installed as satrap of Cappadocia, and has himput to death. He thus gets rid of his most dangerous rival. OstensiblyAntigonus and his son Demetrius Poliocertes hope to reunify Alexander'scollapsing empire but for their own purposes. Antigonus also controlsparts of Greece, Asia Minor and Syria.

Lysimachus sets himself up in Thrace.

Military clashes eventually occur as each tries to encroach on theother's territory. Ptolemy annexes Phoenicia to his possessions andplaces garrisons in the Phoenician port cities. Antigonus too decides toenlarge his territory and set himself up as king of Asia Minor.

Returning from successful wars in Babylonia, Antigonus easily takes overthe cities of Phoenicia but meets with firm resistance from Tyre.Seventeen years have passed since Alexander took Tyre and the city hasrecovered rapidly. Antigonus has few ships as Ptolemy is holding allPhoenician vessels and their crews in Egypt, so he decides to build afleet of his own. He camps before Tyre, summons all the kings of thePhoenician cities and the viceroys of Syria and demands them to assisthim in building ships.

Antigonus blockades Tyre by land. He establishes three shipyards, one atTripolis, one at Byblos, one at Sidon. Diodorus Siculus records thatAntigonus collects wood-cutters, sawyers and shipwrights from all regionsand has wood carried from the mountains of Lebanon to the sea. Eightthousand men are employed to cut and saw the timber; one thousand pairsof draught animals are used to transport it. "This mountain range",Diodorus (19.58.3-5) writes, "extends along the territory of Tripolis,Byblos and Sidon and is covered with cedar and cypress trees of wonderfulbeauty and size." We thus have a description of the extent of theluxuriant forests covering the mountains of Lebanon about two thousandthree hundred years ago.

After a siege of fifteen months, Tyre is taken by Antigonus. He allowsPtolemy's garrison to leave and establishes his own in the city.

In order to enhance their personal prestige, Alexander's successorsstrike their own coins. On the obverse of his early silver coinage,Ptolemy has engraved the head of the newly deified Alexander with thesacred ram's horns of Ammon and an elephant headdress. Alexander's name,not his, appears on the reverse of his coins.

On the coins of Seleucus, Alexander is portrayed as the god Dionysuswearing a helmet covered with panther skin adorned with a bull's ear andhorns.

Lysimachus in his turn presents on his coins the diademed head ofAlexander, deified, wearing the sacred horns of Ammon. When Alexanderconquered Egypt, he was hailed by the high-priest of Ammon as the son ofthe god and Alexander's generals are determined to let no one forget it.

In 305 B.C. Antigonus and his son Demetrius assume the title of king.Ptolemy, Cassander, Lysimachus and Seleucus react to the challenge bydoing the same. Henceforth the effigies of these men, wearing theMacedonian diadem, appear on their gold and silver coins. Their patrongods appear on the reverse. This ushurs in the age of royal portraiture.

The battle of lpsus in Phrygia in 301, called the "battle of the kings",signals the great military clash between Alexander's generals. The warelephant plays an important role in the outcome of this battle and is thesymbol of military strength. The armies of Seleucus and Lysimachus withone hundred and fifty elephants cut off the infantry of Antigonus, leftmortally wounded on the battlefield.

Notwithstanding, his son Demetrius rules Phoenicia until 287 when it onceagain passes back to Ptolemy. It remains a dependency of the Ptolemiesfor nearly seventy years. In the year 285 Alexander's empire is neatlydivided between three of his former generals, Ptolemy in Egypt, Seleucusin Syria, Lebanon and Palestine, and Lysimachus in Thrace.

At his death at the age of eight-four Ptolemy leaves behind him a wellorganized kingdom and the great library at Alexandria. He is succeeded byhis son, Ptolemy 11 Philadelphus (285-246).

The persistent lug of war between Ptolemies and Seleucids over Phoenicia,Syria and Palestine also results in great cultural changes in the region.Phoenician is discarded as a literary language and is replaced by Greek.Greek religious practices and beliefs take root but at the same time aPhoenician god travels south to Egypt and is honored with great pomp inAlexandria.

Byblos is the center for the worship of Adonis, a youth of great beauty,loved by Aphrodite. In legendary tradition, Adonis is hunting the wildboar one day in the company of Aphrodite at Afka, the source of a riverhigh up in the mountains of Lebanon. The boar turns on him and gores histhigh. Adonis dies of the wound as his blood flows into the river turningthe waters red and the anemones in the river valley scarlet. Aphroditeappeals to Zeus, king of the gods, to bring her lover back to life. Zeuspities the youth and allows him to pass part of the year on earth, theother part underground in Hades. His death is mourned annually at Byblos.He returns in the spring time to the upper world and there is greatrejoicing. Adonis in Phoenician means "lord" and is the title given tothe young god of vegetation.

Theocritus, a Greek poet born in Syracuse c. 315 B.C., lived inAlexandria in the time of Ptolemy if Philadelphus. In his Idyll 15 hedescribes how the Festival of Adonis is celebrated in the city. On thefirst day a great procession forms as women and children pour out intothe crowded streets to watch. Adonis has come back to life for a briefreunion with Aphrodite and there is great rejoicing. The second day isone of mourning as the women bewail the god's departure once again forthe underworld.

In Alexandria, Adonis is represented by a graceful statue reclining on asilver couch in a temporary bower ornamented with birds and cupids. He isportrayed as a beautiful youth and the women cluster around him as he iscarried through the streets in the procession. The crowd enters the royalpalace as part of the ceremony is performed there. Praises are sung toQueen Berenice, the mother of Philadelphus and Arsinoë, his sister-wife,one way of eulogizing the family of Ptolemy who patronize the festival.

On the second day the women lament the departure of the youthful god. Atthe end of the festival the statue of Adonis is carried outside the cityand flung into the sea amidst the wailing and weeping of the women.

The years roll by...

In Egypt descendants of Ptolemy rule at Alexandria, one after the other.In Syria a line of Seleucid kings, usurpers and imposters alike, sit onthe throne of Antioch.

The Seleucid king Antiochus III the Great (223-187) makes Phoenicia abattlefield in his wars against the Ptolemies. Antiochus III drives theforces of Ptolemy IV Philopator out of Syria, takes Tyre and Acre(Ptolemais) and even threatens Egypt. In the following years the citiesof Phoenicia pass back and forth between the two powers. In 196 B.C.Phoenicia and Coele Syria (the Bekaa valley) pass into the possession ofthe Seleucid kings. The Phoenician cities welcome the change, for theestablishment and commercial expansion of Alexandria is a threat to theircommerce.

The discovery in 1897 of several painted funerary stelae in a gardensouth of Sidon point to the presence of Greek mercenaries in the armiesof the Seleucids during the second century B.C. These soldiers of fortunefrom the Greek mainland and cities of Asia Minor died here while onactive duty and were laid to rest forever in foreign land. The stelaetoday are exposed in the Archaeological Museum, Istanbul.

The Seleucid monarchy is now in a state of chronic civil war. In thestruggle to seize the throne between the usurper Tryphon and AntiochusVII Sidetes during the latter part of the second century B.C., thesituation becomes so unbearable that merchants of Beirut desert the cityand open commercial establishments on the Greek island of Delos wherethey conduct a flourishing business.

But in the West the rise of Rome presents a danger. The Italian wars of91-83 B.C. keep the Romans at home. The chaotic conditions in Syriapermit Tigranes 11 the Great, king of Armenia, to overrun Cappadocia andexpel one of the last feeble representatives of the Seleucid monarchy. By83 B.C. Tigranes sits on the throne at Antioch and his frontier extendsto Mount Lebanon.

In 69 B.C. the Roman general Lucullus arrives in the East, crosses theEuphrates in pursuit of Tigranes and invades Armenia. However his armydoes not support him so he withdraws to Asia Minor.

Pompey replaces Lucullus in 66 B.C. Syria is taken out of the hands ofthe Seleucids once and for all on the ground that they have virtuallyceased to rule. Pompey turns the districts of the Seleucid territory,including Phoenicia, Syria and Palestine into a new province named"Syria". Although this political move consolidates Roman authority in theEast and increases the annual revenue of the Roman treasury, in return ameasure of security is given to the peoples of the region that they hadnot enjoyed since the conquests of Alexander. Anarchy and piracy isbrought under control and the cities of Phoenicia turn to the sea andtrade

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per01226.htm#0

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Macedonia 306-286 BCE

POLIORCETES; KING OF MACEDON 294-288 BC; d. 283 BC; HAD VARIOUS ILLEGITIMATE
CHILDREN

He became King of Macedonia in 336 bc.

He became King of Macedonia in 336 bc.

Birth: in 336 BC, Macedonia 1
Death: in 283 BC, Cilicia [Turkey] 1
Event: Ancestor M
Event: Ruled 294 to 288 BC, King of Macedonia 2
Note:
Demetrius I POLIORCETES (b. 336 BC, Macedonia--d. 283, Cilicia [now in Turkey]), king of Macedonia from 294 to 288 BC.
Demetrius was the son of Alexander the Great's general Antigonus I Monophthalmus, in whose campaigns he commanded with distinction and whose empire, based in Asia, he attempted to rebuild. Unsuccessful against Ptolemy I Soter, satrap of Egypt, and against the Nabataeans, he liberated Athens from the Macedonian Cassander in 307 BC and in 306 decisively defeated Ptolemy at Salamis (Cyprus). From his unsuccessful siege of Rhodes (305) he won the title Poliorcetes ("the Besieger"). Recalled by his father from Greece, he fought in the Battle of Ipsus, in which his father was killed and lost much of his empire (301). Demetrius kept a foothold in Greece and in 294 reoccupied Athens and established himself as king of Macedonia, but in 288 he was driven out by his rivals Lysimachus and Pyrrhus. He finally surrendered to Seleucus I Nicator in Cilicia (285) and died there (283). He is the subject of one of Plutarch's Lives. [Encyclopædia Britannica

Birth: in 336 BC, Macedonia 1
Death: in 283 BC, Cilicia [Turkey] 1
Event: Ancestor M
Event: Ruled 294 to 288 BC, King of Macedonia 2
Note:
Demetrius I POLIORCETES (b. 336 BC, Macedonia--d. 283, Cilicia [now in Turkey]), king of Macedonia from 294 to 288 BC.
Demetrius was the son of Alexander the Great's general Antigonus I Monophthalmus, in whose campaigns he commanded with distinction and whose empire, based in Asia, he attempted to rebuild. Unsuccessful against Ptolemy I Soter, satrap of Egypt, and against the Nabataeans, he liberated Athens from the Macedonian Cassander in 307 BC and in 306 decisively defeated Ptolemy at Salamis (Cyprus). From his unsuccessful siege of Rhodes (305) he won the title Poliorcetes ("the Besieger"). Recalled by his father from Greece, he fought in the Battle of Ipsus, in which his father was killed and lost much of his empire (301). Demetrius kept a foothold in Greece and in 294 reoccupied Athens and established himself as king of Macedonia, but in 288 he was driven out by his rivals Lysimachus and Pyrrhus. He finally surrendered to Seleucus I Nicator in Cilicia (285) and died there (283). He is the subject of one of Plutarch's Lives. [Encyclopædia Britannica

Birth: in 336 BC, Macedonia 1
Death: in 283 BC, Cilicia [Turkey] 1
Event: Ancestor M
Event: Ruled 294 to 288 BC, King of Macedonia 2
Note:
Demetrius I POLIORCETES (b. 336 BC, Macedonia--d. 283, Cilicia [now in Turkey]), king of Macedonia from 294 to 288 BC.
Demetrius was the son of Alexander the Great's general Antigonus I Monophthalmus, in whose campaigns he commanded with distinction and whose empire, based in Asia, he attempted to rebuild. Unsuccessful against Ptolemy I Soter, satrap of Egypt, and against the Nabataeans, he liberated Athens from the Macedonian Cassander in 307 BC and in 306 decisively defeated Ptolemy at Salamis (Cyprus). From his unsuccessful siege of Rhodes (305) he won the title Poliorcetes ("the Besieger"). Recalled by his father from Greece, he fought in the Battle of Ipsus, in which his father was killed and lost much of his empire (301). Demetrius kept a foothold in Greece and in 294 reoccupied Athens and established himself as king of Macedonia, but in 288 he was driven out by his rivals Lysimachus and Pyrrhus. He finally surrendered to Seleucus I Nicator in Cilicia (285) and died there (283). He is the subject of one of Plutarch's Lives. [Encyclopædia Britannica

Demetrius I of Macedon
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Demetrius I (337-283 BC, Greek: ??µ?t????), surnamed Poliorcetes ("Besieger"), son of Antigonus I Monophthalmus and Stratonice, was a king of Macedon (294 - 288 BC). He belonged to the Antigonid dynasty.

At the age of twenty-two he was left by his father to defend Syria against Ptolemy the son of Lagus; he was totally defeated in Battle of Gaza, but soon partially repaired his loss by a victory in the neighbourhood of Myus.

After an unsuccessful expedition against Babylon, and several campaigns against Ptolemy on the coasts of Cilicia and Cyprus, Demetrius sailed with a fleet of 250 ships to Athens. He freed the city from the power of Cassander and Ptolemy, expelled the garrison which had been stationed there under Demetrius of Phalerum, and besieged and took Munychia (307 BC). After these victories he was worshipped by the Athenians as a tutelary deity under the title of Soter ("Preserver").

In the campaign of 306 BC against Ptolemy he defeated Menelaus, Ptolemy's brother, in the naval Battle of Salamis, completely destroying the naval power of Egypt. In 305 BC, now bearing the title of king bestowed upon him by his father, he endeavoured to punish the Rhodians for having deserted his cause; his ingenuity in devising new siege engines in his unsuccessful attempt to reduce the capital gained him the title of Poliorcetes. Among his creations were a battering ram 180 feet long, requiring 1000 men to operate it; and a wheeled siege tower named "Helepolis" (or "Taker of Cities") which stood 125 feet tall and 60 feet wide, weighing 360,000 pounds.
Coin of Demetrius I (337-283 BC). Greek inscription reads ??S???OS ????????? ([coin] of King Demetrius).
Enlarge
Coin of Demetrius I (337-283 BC). Greek inscription reads ??S???OS ????????? ([coin] of King Demetrius).

He returned a second time to Greece as liberator. But his licentiousness and extravagance made the Athenians long for the government of Cassander. He also roused the jealousy of Alexander's Diadochi; Seleucus, Cassander and Lysimachus united to destroy him and his father. The hostile armies met at the Ipsus in Phrygia (301 BC). Antigonus was killed, and Demetrius, after sustaining a severe losses, retired to Ephesus. This reversal of fortune stirred up many enemies against him—the Athenians refused even to admit him into their city. But he soon afterwards ravaged the territory of Lysimachus and effected a reconciliation with Seleucus, to whom he gave his daughter Stratonice in marriage. Athens was at this time oppressed by the tyranny of Lachares, but Demetrius, after a protracted blockade, gained possession of the city (294 BC) and pardoned the inhabitants for their former misconduct.

In the same year he established himself on the throne of Macedonia by murdering Antipater II, the son of Cassander. But his new position was continually threatened by Pyrrhus, who took advantage of his occasional absence to ravage the defenceless part of his kingdom (Plutarch, Pyrrhus, 7 if.); at length, the combined forces of Pyrrhus, Ptolemy and Lysimachus, assisted by the disaffected among his own subjects, obliged him to leave Macedonia in 288 BC.

He passed into Asia and attacked some of the provinces of Lysimachus with varying success. Famine and pestilence destroyed the greater part of his army, and he solicited Seleucus' support and assistance. But before he reached Syria hostilities broke out, and after he had gained some advantages over his son-in-law, Demetrius was totally forsaken by his troops on the field of battle and surrendered to Seleucus. His son Antigonus offered all his possessions, and even his person, in order to procure his father's liberty. But all proved unavailing, and Demetrius died after a confinement of three years (283 BC). His remains were given to Antigonus and honoured with a splendid funeral at Corinth. His descendants remained in possession of the Macedonian throne till the time of Perseus, when Macedon was conquered by the Romans.
[edit]

References

* This article incorporates text from the Encyclopædia Britannica Eleventh Edition, a publication now in the public domain.

Preceded by:
Antigonus I Monophthalmus Antigonid dynasty Succeeded by:
Antigonus II Gonatas
Preceded by:
Antipater II of Macedon King of Macedon
294 BC–288 BC Succeeded by:
Lysimachus and Pyrrhus of Epirus

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]