== Notes for [[Item:Q111612|Q111612]] ==

==Pero Fromarigues de Guimarães==

Pero Fromarigues de Guimarães (c.1080-?) was a Portuguese nobleman, Lord of Melo

Pero was the son of Fromarigo Guterres,[2] great-grandson of Sueiro Belfaguer, and a descendant of the knights of Kingdom of León.[3]

GENEALOGY by Manuel da Silva Costa | mscosta2000@@hotmail.com

Pacheco is very old. At the behest of Julius Caesar, Vivio Pacheco defended Ulia (Basque Country), surrounded by the troops of Pompey (45 BC) ...

The earliest direct ascendant known to the " Pacheco, " Fromarigo Guterres, was married to Elvira Gulfara, living in 1167. She received feuds in Guimarães and Esposende (1110). By D. Afonso Henriques was Alcaide de Guimarães and Alcaide (1131) and Butler (1139) of Coimbra ( http://www.soveral.info/mas/Ribadouro%20e%20Pacheco.htm )
Pero Fromarigues was son of the previous ones and father of Fernão Peres.

Fernão Peres de Guimarães, a knight of Coimbra, documented between 1160 and 1178, married to Usco Godins (daughter of Godinho Fafes de Lanhoso and Ouroana "Gontinha" Mendes) was the father of Pedro Fernandes. Pedro Fernandes de Cambra married Maria Ourigues (daughter of Ourigo "o Velho" da Nobrega and Maria Lourenço da Cunha) and had, among others, Soeiro Pires Pacheco and Tereja Pires de Cambra. Tereja Pires de Cambra was married to Rui Pires de Ferreira (son of Pero Pais and Tereja Ramires Carpinteiro), Rico-man of D. Afonso II. His children Maria, Urraca or Elvira and Fernão Rodrigues adopted the nickname Pacheco of the maternal uncle Soeiro Pires.

Fernão Rodrigues Pacheco went with his wife Constança Afonso (daughter of Afonso Anes de Cambra and Urraca Pires Ribeiro) 5 the Lords of Ferreira de Aves (Sátão). As Mayor of Celorico da Beira, by D. Sancho II with his brother used the morning to serve a trout that an eagle dropped on the Castle, the besiegers to show that it had provisions (1246) ... The children John , Martim and Fernão were nicknamed Pacheco . Already in 1524, in Loulé, in the Acts of Vereação, is Martim Pacheco , about fines.

Duarte Pacheco was born in Loulé in 1900. He graduated in electrotechnical engineering (1923) by IS Technician, of which he was assistant (1924), professor (1925) and director (1926). Minister of Public Instruction (1928) and Public Works (1932), passed away (1943) on his way to the Council of Ministers to deal with the Lajes Agreement ...

==Sources==

Pero Fromarigues de Guimarães - https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pero_Fromarigues_de_Guimar%C3%A3es

Memorias da Academia Real das Sciencias de Lisboa,Classe ..., Volume 1, Part 1. 1864.

Afonso segundo. Hermínia Vasconcelos Vilar.

Apontamentos sobre as relações de Portugal com a Syria no seculo 12., lida. José Barbosa Canaes de Figueiredo Castello-Branco.

Cronologia da Península Ibérica (379-1500) - https://www.ricardocosta.com/cronologia-da-peninsula-iberica-379-1500

GENEALOGY by Manuel da Silva Costa | mscosta2000@@hotmail.com - http://avozdoalgarve.pt/detalhe.php?id=24201

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]