== Notes for [[Item:Q3489|Q3489]] ==

[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Miguel_de_Cervantes '''Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra'''] (Born 1547 (day unknown); died 22 April 1616) was a Spanish novelist, poet, and playwright. His magnum opus, [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don_Quixote '''''Don Quixote'''''], considered the first modern European novel, is a classic of Western literature, and is regarded amongst the best works of fiction ever written. His influence on the Spanish language has been so great that the language is often called '''la lengua de Cervantes''' ("the language of Cervantes"). He was dubbed '''El Príncipe de los Ingenios''' ("The Prince of Wits").

'''Life'''

It is assumed that Miguel de Cervantes was born in Alcalá de Henares, Spain. The exact date of his birth is not known, but it is probable that he was born on September 29, the feast day of Saint Michael the Archangel, given the tradition to name a child with the name of the feast day of his birth. Cervantes was baptized in Alcalá de Henares on October 9, 1549, at the parish church of Santa María la Mayor. The baptismal act read:

> Sunday, the ninth day of the month of October, the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred forty and seven years, Miguel is crowned and baptized, son of Rodrigo Cervantes and his wife doña Lenore. Baptized by the reverend sir Bartolomé Serrano, priest of Our Lady. Witnesses, Baltasar Vázquez, Sacristan, and I, who baptized him and signed this in my name. — Bachelor Serrano

His father was Rodrigo de Cervantes, a surgeon of Galician descent. At the time, a surgeon was not a medical doctor, but a lesser medical practitioner with no exact equivalent in modern English-speaking countries. His paternal grandfather, Juan de Cervantes, was an influential lawyer who held several administrative positions. His uncle was mayor of Cabra for many years. Little is known of his mother, Leonor de Cortinas, except that she was a native of Arganda del Rey. His siblings were Andrés (1543), Andrea (1544), Luisa (1546), Rodrigo (1550), Magdalena (1554) and Juan - known solely because he is mentioned in his father's will.

[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Miguel_de_Cervantes Read more at Wikipedia]

Images and media from Commons of [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Miguel_de_Cervantes Miguel de Cervantes]

==See also==

* https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Miguel_de_Cervantes
* https://www.biografiasyvidas.com/monografia/cervantes
* https://www.cervantesvirtual.com/portales/miguel_de_cervantes/autor_biografia/
* "Hunt for remains of 'Jewish' Don Quixote author." ''Jewish Telegraph'', Manchester, England, 16 May 2014.
* "Was Miguel de Cervantes a 'Converso'?" Linda Jimenez Glassman, European Jewish Press

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051ADB96BE31EFBBFA9822EF79916CA966
geni:6000000015973070193


[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]