== Notes for [[Item:Q3276|Q3276]] ==

Ibn Yaḥya, David ben Solomon

David ben Solomon Ibn Yaḥya (ca. 1440–1524) was a rabbi, grammarian, and scholar who fled Portugal at the end of the fifteenth century. After enduring many hardships, he eventually reached Istanbul and settled there. In his native Lisbon, as a member of a prosperous and distinguished family of rabbis, scholars, and communal leaders, Ibn Yaḥya had been the rabbi of the Jewish community and had taught numerous pupils. Noted for his wealth and generosity, he welcomed and helped many of the Spanish Jews who arrived in Portugal following the expulsion in 1492. As a result, he was accused of encouraging conversos to revert to Judaism. King João II (r. 1481–1495) sought to execute him, but Ibn Yaḥya caught wind of his impending arrest and fled with his family and a small amount of money, leaving behind the bulk of his wealth and property, which João promptly seized.

Ibn Yaḥya went from Portugal to Naples, but Jewish life there became very difficult after Spain conquered the city in 1495. He lost what was left of his fortune and was finally compelled to flee in 1503 to Istanbul in order to join his uncle Gedaliah ben David ibn Yaḥya (1437–1487), who had settled there in 1481. Since he ran out of money by the time he arrived in Kerkyra (Corfu) on the way to Istanbul, David had to sell his precious book collection. He journeyed on to Patras, where Rabbi Isaiah Messene provided him with enough to get to Istanbul. (Messene, a wealthy Romaniot from Messina, had provided similar assistance to Ibn Yaḥya’s uncle Gedaliah in 1481.) From his arrival in Istanbul in 1504 or 1505, when he was in his mid-sixties, until his death twenty years later, David ibn Yaḥya lived in penury, but he found an end to the troubles that had plagued him for over a decade.

David Ibn Yaḥya was the author of a number of Bible and Talmud commentaries and works on Hebrew grammar, although many of them were lost during the course of his travels. His surviving works include Qav ve-Naqi (A Small But Clear Measure; Lisbon, 1492), a commentary on the Book of Proverbs published before he left Portugal and later reprinted in Venice (1518) and Salonica (1522); Leshon Limmudim (The Language of Learning; Istanbul, 1506), on Hebrew grammar, reprinted in 1519 by his son, the noted scholar and intellectual Jacob Tam ibn Yaḥya (ca. 1475–1542); Sheqel ha-Qodesh (The Shekel of the Sanctuary; Istanbul, 1506), a collection of writings on poetry and grammar appended to Leshon Limmudim; and Hilkhot Ṭrefot (Istanbul, ca. 1515–1520), on the dietary laws (however, several sections appeared separately in print). Aside from these works, Ibn Yaḥya wrote a commentary on Maimonides, and most likely left a number of manuscripts that have not survived. The original copy of his letter to Messene can be found in the Bibliothèque Nationale (Hebrew MS 1202, 149a–b).

D Gershon Lewental

Bibliography

Levy, Avigdor (ed.). The Jews of the Ottoman Empire (Princeton, N.J.: Darwin Press, 1994), pp. 5, 39.

Rosanes, Salomon. Qorot ha-Yehudim be-Turkiya ve-Ar ṣ ot ha-Qedem (Tel Aviv: Dvir, 1930), vol. 1, pp. 88–90.

Rozen, Minna. A History of the Jewish Community in Istanbul: The Formative Years, 1453–1566 (Leiden: Brill, 2002), p. 259.

D Gershon Lewental. " Ibn Yaḥya, David ben Solomon." Encyclopedia of Jews in the Islamic World. Executive Editor Norman A. Stillman. Brill Online , 2012. Reference. Jim Harlow. 09 July 2012 <http://referenceworks.brillonline.com/entries/encyclopedia-of-jews-in-the-islamic-world/ibn-yahya-david-ben-solomon-SIM_0011270>

Reference: '''"Divrei ha-Yamim le-Bnei Yahya,( דברי הימים לבני יחייא )"''', by Eliakim Carmoly, Printed in Frankfort am Main/Rodelheim, Published by: Isak Kaufman, 1850. Genealogy of, and biographical work on, the Yahya family by Eliakim Carmoly. There is an introduction from Carmoly, in which he informs that the Yahya family is one of distinction from the time of Maimonides. Originally achieving greatness in Portugal and Spain, they after settled in Italy and Turkey. The text is preceded by a chart of the family, beginning with the Nasi, Don Yahya, and concluding with Don Gedalia. The text, in seven chapters, is set in a single column, primarily in rabbinic type although there are instances of vocalized square letters, and is accompanied by extensive footnotes. The final page is an announcement of the forthcoming publication of seven minor Yerushalmi tractates by Carmoli. The text of this book was compared to the "bin Yahya Family Tapestry", currently stored in the antiquity archives of Jewish Theological Seminary in New York City, by Abraham Greenstein - grandson of Abraham Gindi HaKohen. The text matches the Tapestry.

Last Chief Rabbi of Lisbon - one of the most distinguished rabbis operating in Portugal - prolific writer and scholar. A skilled orator - Chief Rabbi of Lisbon, he fled persecution and traveled throughout Mediterranean region. While in Corfu, he was host to Don Isaac Abravanel, who considered him a distant cousin. Prolific writer, renowned scholar with reputation as one of the most distinguished rabbis to originate in Portugal.

Father of Yacob Tam. He was rabbi of the Lisbon community in 1476. Accused of inducing the Maranos to relapse into Judaism, he was sentenced by King João II. to be burned at the stake. He fled to Naples with his family, but was captured; and he was compelled to sell his library in order to secure sufficient money to purchase his liberty. On his release he fled to Corfu, and later went to Larta, where he died in extreme poverty. He was the author of a Hebrew grammar entitled "Leshon Limmudim," which was published in Constantinople (1506, 1528) and in Venice (1542). While at Larta he wrote to the wealthy Jew Isaiah Messene, asking his aid; and this letter was copied by Joseph David Sinzheim, and later published by Grätz ("Gesch." viii. 482-483).

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051ADA35E191EFBBFA9822EF79916CCA0E
geni:6000000002638833316


[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]