== Notes for [[Item:Q106257|Q106257]] ==

'''6th Shia Itna'shari Imaam/ 5th Shia Ismai'li Imaam'''

* Date of Ascension:
* Period of Imamate:
* Wilaadat (Birth): 17th Rabi' ul-Awwal 83 AH (23rd April 702 AD)
* Wafaat (Death): 15th Shawwal 148 AH (7th December 765 AD)

Source 1: Sahifa

Source 2: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ja%27far_al-Sadiq

Source 3: http://alhamdolillah.net/auliya/sadiq/sadiq.htm

--------------------
ID: I180895

Name: Abu Abd Allah , Ja'far Shia Imam al-Husayn 1

Sex: M

Name: Djafar al-Sadikh Iman In IRAQ 1

Birth: ABT 708 1

Death: 765 1

Occupation: 6th Shia Imam 1

Marriage 1 Fatima bint al-Husayn b: ABT 710

Children

Abd Allah ibn Ja'far al-Husayn b: ABT 730

Umm Farwa bint Ja'far al-Husayn b: ABT 733

Isma'il ibn Ja'far al-Husayn b: 736

Marriage 2 Hamida al-Barbariyya

Children

Musa ibn Abd Allah , Shia Imam al-Husayn

Ishaq ibn Abd Allah , al-Husayn

Muhammad ibn Abd Allah , al-Husayn

Sources:

Title: loren.ged

Repository:

Media: Other

Text: Date of Import: Apr 12, 2006

--------------------
'''5th Fatimid Imaam'''

* ''Imaamate Period/ Reign: 34 years; 95-95 AH (714- AD)''
* Wilaadat (Birth):
* Wafaat (Death): 95 AH (714 AD)
--------------------
Ja'far ibn Muḥammad al-Ṣādiq (Arabic: جعفر بن محمد الصادق‎‎; 700 or 702–765 C.E.), commonly known as Ja'far al-Sadiq or simply al-Sadiq (The Truthful), is the sixth Shia Imam. He was a descendant of Ali from his father Muhammad al-Baqir's side and a descendant of Abu Bakr from his mother Farwa's side. He is the last individual to be recognized by all Shia sects as an Imam (except the Zaydiyyah), and is revered by Sunni Muslims as a transmitter of Hadith and a prominent jurist.

Al-Sadiq was born in either 700 or 702 CE. He inherited the position of imam from his father in his mid-thirties. As imam, al-Sadiq stayed out of the political conflicts that embroiled the region, evading the many requests for support that he received from rebels. He was the victim of some harassment by the Abbasid caliphs, and was eventually, according to most Shi'a Muslims, poisoned at the orders of the Caliph al-Mansur.

He was a significant figure in the formulation of Shia doctrine. The traditions recorded from al-Sadiq are said to be more numerous than all hadiths recorded from all other Shiite imams combined.

As the founder of "Ja'fari jurisprudence", al-Sadiq also elaborated the doctrine of Nass (divinely inspired designation of each imam by the previous imam), and Ismah (the infallibility of the imams), as well as that of Taqiyyah.

The question of succession after al-Sadiq's death was the cause of division among Shiites who considered his eldest son, Isma'il (who had died before his father) to be the next imam, and those who believed his third son Musa al-Kadhim was the imam. The first group became known as the Ismailis and the second, larger, group was named Ja'fari or the Twelvers.

http://bit.ly/1lieQAT

JAʿFAR AL-ṢĀDEQ And Sufism

With a single exception, that of the Naqšbandiya, all the Sufi orders claim initiatic descent from the Prophet exclusively through ʿAli b. Abi Ṭāleb, the first imam of the Ahl al-Bayt (q.v.), and many speak also of a selselat al-ḏahab (golden chain), linking them with all of the first eight of the Twelve Imams.

Jaʿfar al-Ṣādeq, the sixth imam, occupies, however, a position of particular significance in Sufi tradition. A number of Sufis are said to have associated with him; he is lauded for his knowledge of the Path in several foundational works of Sufi literature; and numerous utterances and writings on the topic of spiritual progress have been attributed to him.

What has been asserted concerning him in these respects is in some cases clearly apocryphal and has been the subject of dispute, especially on the part of Shiʿite authors ill-disposed to Sufism, even in its Shiʿite manifestations. Thus, Moqaddas Ardabili (d. 993/1585), probable author of Ḥadiqat al-šiʿa, dismisses the alleged links between Imam Jaʿfar al-Ṣādeq and Sufism as an attempt on the part of some early Sufis to gain the authority of the imam for the teachings they began to elaborate during his lifetime. By way of refutation, Ardabili cited a tradition of the imam condemning Abu Hāšem Kufi, generally regarded as the first person to be designated as Sufi (quoted in Maʿṣum-ʿAlišāh, I, p. 190). Given the duration of Jaʿfar al-Ṣādeq’s imamate and the influence and appeal he exerted beyond the circle of his specifically Shiʿite following, it is, however, likely that he played some role in the gestation of Sufism, even if the nature and extent of that role were distorted in later tradition.

In the Ḥelyat al-awliāʾ, one of the earliest hagiographical compendia, the author Abu Noʿaym Eṣfahāni (d. 430/1038) mentions Jaʿfar al-Ṣādeq immediately after his father, Imam Moḥammad al-Bāqer, and he lauds him for his devout concentration on worship, his chaste abstention from the pursuit of power, and insistence on feeding the poor, even to the detriment of his own family

http://www.iranicaonline.org/articles/jafar-al-sadeq-iii-and-sufism

Imāmi Schism[edit]

A fresco by Raphael depicting Aristotle and Plato, Greek philosophy played a pivotal role in the formation of the Isma'ili school of thought. Imām Ja'far as-Sadiq was married to Fāṭima, herself a member of the Ahl al-Bayt. Together they had two sons, Ismā'īl al-Mubarak (the blessed) and his elder brother Abd-Allah. Following Fatima's death Imām Ja'far as-Sadiq was said to be so devastated he refused to ever remarry.

The majority of available sources - both Ismā'īli and Twelver as well as Sunni - indicate that Imam Jafar as-Sadiq designated Ismā'īl as his successor and the next Imam after him by the rule of "nass" and there is no doubt concerning the authenticity of this designation. However, it is controversially believed that Ismā'īl predeceased his father. However, the same sources report Ismā'īl being seen three days after in Basra. His closest supporters believed Ismail had gone into hiding to protect his life. Therefore, upon as-Sadiq's death, a group of Jafar A'Sadiq's followers turned to the eldest surviving son of al-Sadiq, Abd-Allah, because he was the son of the daughter of the Khalifa, and because he was the oldest son of Jafar al-Sadiq after Ismā'īl's death. He claimed a second designation following Ismā'īl's disappearance. Later most of them went back to the doctrine of the Imamate of his brother, Musa, together with the evidence for the right of the latter and the clear proofs of his Immmate (i.e. his character) When Abd-Allah died within weeks without an heir, many more turned again to another son of as-Sadiq, Musa al-Kazim a son from a slave named Umm Hamida, who Ja'far had taken after his wife's death. While some had already accepted him as the Imam following the death of Jafar as-Sadiq, Abd-Allah's supporters now aligned themselves with him giving him the majority of the Shia.

Ismā'īlīs argue that since a defining quality of an Imām is his infallibility, Ja'far as-Sadiq could not have mistakenly passed his nass on to someone who would be either unfit or predecease him. Therefore, the Imam after Ismā'īl was his eldest son Muhammad b. Ismā'īl - known as al-Maktūm.

--------------------
25. JA'FAR*ASSADIQ-6.
was born between 699-700 in 80h, Madinah and died about 765 in 148h.
Reference Link: http://freepages.family.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~naqobatulasyrof/main/des/d6.htm
Reference Link: http://familytreemaker.genealogy.com/users/a/s/y/Naqobatul-Asyrof-Jakarta/WEBSITE-0001/UHP-0020.html

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000001490130323

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]