== Notes for [[Item:Q112103|Q112103]] ==

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sancho_I_of_Pamplona

Sancho Garcés I (Basque: Antso Ia. Gartzez; c. 860 – 10 December 925),[1] also known as Sancho I, was king of Pamplona from 905 until 925. He was the son of García Jiménez and was the first king of Pamplona of the Jiménez dynasty.[2] Sancho I was the feudal ruler of the Onsella valley, and expanded his power to all the neighboring territories. He was chosen to replace Fortún Garcés by the Pamplonese nobility in 905.

Biography

Sancho Garcés was born around the year 860, son of García Jiménez and his second wife Dadildis de Pallars.[3]

----

Король Наварры, первый представитель наваррской королевской династии Хименесов и первый из правителей королевства Наварра, который вёл завоевательную политику по отношению к соседним мусульманским владениям.

http://www.biografiasyvidas.com/biografia/s/sancho_i_garces.htm

http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sancho_Garc%C3%A9s_I_de_Pamplona

Sancho Garcés I (n.Sangüesa (actual Rocaforte) 865 - † Resa, 10 de diciembre de 925). Rey de Pamplona entre los años 905 y 925.

Hijo de García Jiménez, descendiente de la dinastía Jimena. A la muerte de García I Íñiguez en el año 870, es gobernante de la Valdonsella y pronto comienza a intervenir en todos los territorios circundantes.

Ocupa Pamplona cuando todavía reina Fortún Garcés, ayudado por Alfonso III de Asturias, junto con el conde de Pallars. Eliminados los derechos patrimoniales de los hijos de Fortún Garcés, estos recaerán en su nieta Toda, casada con Sancho Garcés I, que los hizo valer y se proclamó rey de Pamplona en 905, tras destronar a Fortún Garcés.

Al morir el conde de Aragón Galindo Aznárez II, Sancho Garcés I ocupó las tierras de Aragón ignorando los derechos sucesorios de todos. Ésta fue la causa que justificó las luchas del gobernador musulmán de Huesca, al-Tawil, que tenía derechos sucesorios sobre el territorio por estar casado con Sancha, hermana del conde. Se solucionó el problema al prometer en matrimonio a Andregoto Galíndez, hija de Galindo Aznárez II, con el hijo de Sancho Garcés I, el futuro rey García Sánchez I, que era todavía un niño.

Amplió considerablemente las fronteras meridionales del reino hasta llegar a tierras riojanas mediante una serie de campañas militares contra los musulmanes. Conquistó Nájera y estableció allí su corte, dotando de una organización definitiva al reino de Pamplona.

Aliado con Ordoño II de León, venció a un ejército cordobés en San Esteban de Gormaz (917), pero fue derrotado por Abd al-Rahman III en Valdejunquera (920).

Durante su reinado se comienza a acuñar moneda, siendo el primer reino cristiano que use tal regalía. Así mismo, aparece el sistema de tenencias, que se perpetuará en Navarra y Aragón hasta principios del siglo XIII.

El centro político del mundo cristiano estaba en la corte de Nájera que dio como resultado varios matrimonios reales de las hijas de Sancho Garcés I y la reina Toda Aznar:

* Urraca de Pamplona, casada con Ramiro II de León.

* Oneca de Pamplona, casada con Alfonso IV "El Monje" de León. Fue reina de León entre 926 y 931. Murió en 931.

* Sancha de Pamplona, casada en primeras nupcias con Ordoño II de León, en segundas con el Conde alavés Álvaro Herrameliz y en terceras, con Fernán González, Conde de Castilla.

* García I Sánchez, Rey de Pamplona, casado con Andregoto Galíndez y con Teresa de León.

* Velasquita o Belasquita Sánchez, casada en primeras nupcias con el Conde alaves Munio Velaz, en segundas con Galindo de Ribagorza y en terceras con Fortún Galíndez.

* Munia (Muña) de Pamplona, casada con Ordoño I de Asturias.

* Orbita de Navarra, probablemente casada con al-Tawil, gobernador de Huesca. Pudo ser hija póstuma, como hace suponer el significado de su nombre, "la huérfana".

El rey Sancho Garcés I murió en las cercanías de Resa, a orillas del río Ebro, el día 10 de diciembre del año 925 y fue enterrado en San Esteban de Deio en Monjardín.

--------------------

Sancho I Garcés (c. 860 – December 11, 925) was king of Pamplona from 905 to 925. He was a son of García Jiménez, who was regent of Pamplona from 870 to 880 while Fortún Garcés was held captive and apparently co-king of Pamplona from 860 to his death in 882, and Dadildis de Pallars. Sancho may also have been a co-king during the reign of Fortún. The elderly Sancho (already 45 years old) succeeded King Fortún when the latter was deposed by a coalition of enemies: the Banu Qasi under Lope ibn Mohammed, King Alfonso III of Asturias, and Sancho's uncle, the count of Pallars.

Sancho's first wife Urraca, daughter of the count of Aragón, did not have surviving children. So Sancho married a second time to Toda Aznárez in his old age. His children were thus minors upon his death. Queen Toda (born Teuda de Larraun) was a daughter of Aznar Sánchez, lord of Larraun, and Oneca Fortúnez, who herself was a daughter of King Fortún. Thus, Toda's children were also descendants of the Arista dynasty of Navarrese monarchs. Sancho fought against the Moors with repeated success and joined Ultra-Puertos, or Basse-Navarre (Baja Navarra), to his own dominions, also extending his territory as far as Nájera. As a thanksgiving offering for his victories, he founded, in 924, the convent of Albelda. Before his death, all the Moors had been driven from the country.

Sancho was succeeded by his son García Sánchez, with his widow Toda and brother Jimeno (who used the royal title) acting as regents.

The Codex of Roda gives Sancho and Toda six children:

* Oneca (d.931), married Alfonso IV the Monk of León in 926

* Sancha, married firstly Ordoño II of León, secondly Count Alvaro Herraméliz of Álava, and thirdly Fernán González, Count of Castile

* Urraca, married Ramiro II of León

* Velasquita (or Belasquita), married firstly Munio, count of Vizcaya, secondly Galindo, son of Bernard count of Ribagorza.

* Orbita

* García, king of Pamplona, married firstly Andregota Galíndez and secondly Teresa

Sancho also had an illegitimate daughter:

* Lupa, mother of Raymond I, Count of Bigorre

--------------------

Sancho I Garcés (c. 860 – December 11, 925) was king of Pamplona from 905 to 925. He was a son of García Jiménez, who was king of "another part of the kingdom" of Pamplona and Dadildis de Pallars, his second wife. In 905, a coalition of enemies of the king, Fortún Garcés: Lubb ibn Muhammed of the Banu Qasi, King Alfonso III of Asturias, Galindo Aznar II of Aragon and Sancho's uncle, Raymond I of Pallars and Ribagorza, deposed the king, and put Sancho on the throne in his place. Throughout his reign, he involved himself in the squabbles among the Muslim lords to the south with repeated success. In 907, he turned on his former ally Lubb ibn Muhammad, killing him in battle. Four years later, another former ally, Galindo Aznar, joined with his brother-in-law Muhammad al-Tawil and Abd Allah ibn Lubb ibn Qasi to attack Sancho, but they were crushed: al-Tawil was killed, the power of the Banu Qasi was severely crippled, and Galindo forced into vassalage to Sancho, leading to the incorporation of the County of Aragon into Pamplona. In 920, he teamed with Bernard I of Ribagorza and Amrus ibn Muhammed, son of Muhammad al-Tawil, to attack Monzón. He joined Ultra-Puertos, or Basse-Navarre (Baja Navarra), to his own dominions, also extending his territory as far as Nájera. As a thanksgiving offering for his victories, he founded, in 924, the convent of Albelda.

[source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sancho_I_of_Pamplona]

--------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sancho_I_of_Pamplona

Sancho I Garcés (c. 860 – December 11, 925) was king of Pamplona from 905 to 925. He was a son of García Jiménez, who was king of "another part of the kingdom" of Pamplona and Dadildis de Pallars, his second wife. In 905, a coalition of enemies of the king, Fortún Garcés: Lubb ibn Muhammed of the Banu Qasi, King Alfonso III of Asturias, Galindo Aznar II of Aragon and Sancho's uncle, Raymond I of Pallars and Ribagorza, deposed the king, and put Sancho on the throne in his place. Throughout his reign, he involved himself in the squabbles among the Muslim lords to the south with repeated success. In 907, he turned on his former ally Lubb ibn Muhammad, killing him in battle. Four years later, another former ally, Galindo Aznar, joined with his brother-in-law Muhammad al-Tawil and Abd Allah ibn Lubb ibn Qasi to attack Sancho, but they were crushed: al-Tawil was killed, the power of the Banu Qasi was severely crippled, and Galindo forced into vassalage to Sancho, leading to the incorporation of the County of Aragon into Pamplona. In 920, he teamed with Bernard I of Ribagorza and Amrus ibn Muhammed, son of Muhammad al-Tawil, to attack Monzón. He joined Ultra-Puertos, or Basse-Navarre (Baja Navarra), to his own dominions, also extending his territory as far as Nájera. As a thanksgiving offering for his victories, he founded, in 924, the convent of Albelda.

Perhaps to legitimize the succession, Sancho married Toda Aznárez, granddaughter of former king Fortún Garcés. Queen Toda was a daughter of Aznar Sánchez, lord of Larraun, and Oneca Fortúnez, who herself was a daughter of King Fortún. Thus, Sancho and Toda's children were also descendants of the Arista dynasty of Navarrese monarchs, but likewise akin to Abd-ar-Rahman III of Cordoba, a grandson of Oneca by a former husband. When Sancho died in 925, his only son was still quite young. Thus Sancho was succeeded by his brother, Jimeno Garcés, upon whose death Sancho's son García would succeed.

The Codex of Roda gives Sancho and Toda six children:

* Oneca (d.931), married Alfonso IV the Monk of León in 926

* Sancha, married firstly Ordoño II of León, secondly Count Alvaro Herraméliz of Álava, and thirdly Fernán González, Count of Castile

* Urraca, married Ramiro II of León

* Velasquita (or Belasquita), married firstly Munio, count of Vizcaya, secondly Galindo, son of Bernard count of Ribagorza, and third, nobleman Fortún Galíndez.

* Orbita

* García, king of Pamplona, married firstly Andregota Galíndez and secondly Teresa

Sancho also had an illegitimate daughter:

* Lupa, mother of Raymond I, Count of Bigorre

--------------------

Sancho I Garcés, rey de Pamplona1

b. circa 881?, d. 11 October 925

Father García II Jiménez, regente de Pamplona2,1 d. circa 885

Mother Dadailidis de Bigorre b. circa 860?

Also called rey Sancho I Garcés de Navarra. Sancho I Garcés, rey de Pamplona was the father of Sancha Sánchez de Pamplona; daughter of Sancho Gárces I of Navarre (905-925).3 Sancho I Garcés, rey de Pamplona was born circa 881?. He was the son of García II Jiménez, regente de Pamplona and Dadailidis de Bigorre.2,1 Sancho I Garcés, rey de Pamplona associated with N. N. , a concubine of Sancho I before 905; She was a handmaiden. Sancho I Garcés, rey de Pamplona married Toda Aznárez de Larraun, daughter of señor de Larraun Aznar Sánchez and Oneca Fortunez de Navarra; His 2nd. His grandniece.4,5,6 Sancho I Garcés, rey de Pamplona married Urraca Aznárez de Aragón, daughter of Aznar II Galíndez, conde de Aragón, before 905; His 1st.4 Sancho I Garcés, rey de Pamplona succeeded his brother, Fortuno, to the throne of Navarre in 905. He was strenghted the Basque Kingdom centered on Navarre in 905.7 He established a new dynasty in Pamplona in 905.8 King of Pamplona at Navarre, Iberian peninsula, between 905 and 926.9,3,10 He advanced into the upper Ebro Basin to seize Nájera, Calahorra and Viguera, what Spanish historians occasionally define this as the beginning of the Reconquest, before 920. He able to capture Pamplona and fortify a long line of forts in the foothills of the Pyrenees, after the decline of the powerful Banû Qasî clan made such an advance possible, but no further advances were registered during the tenth century, as 'Abd al-Rahmân III was able to turn the Navarrese back in a series of campaigns before 924.9 He was defeated by 'Abd al-Rahmân III, al-Nâsir, of Córdoba, who inflicted heavy losses on the Basque troops and sacked Pamplona in 924.11 He was a witness where 'Abd al-Rahmân III an-Nasir li-din Allah ibn Muhammad, khalifa al-Qurtubi sacked Pamplona and inflicted heavy losses on the Basque troops of Sancho Garcés of Navarre in 924.11 Sancho I Garcés, rey de Pamplona died on 11 October 925.1

Family 1

Toda Aznárez de Larraun b. circa 885, d. after 970

Children

Nunilo Sánchez de Pamplona+ b. c 904?12

Sancha Sánchez de Pamplona+ b. c 915, d. Dec 9594,13,14

Velasquita Sánchez de Pamplona+ b. c 91715

García II Sánchez, rey de Navarra+ b. bt 919 - 921, d. 97016,1

Family 2

Urraca Aznárez de Aragón b. circa 880

Children

Urraca Sánchez de Pamplona+ b. c 905, d. 23 Jun 9563

Oneca Sánchez de Navarra+ b. c 9054

Family 3

N. N. , a concubine of Sancho I b. circa 885

Child

Lopa Sancha de Navarre+ b. a 90517

Citations

[S882] Armerías ilustres, online http://members.xoom.com/chema, Corona de Navarra.

[S1316] Reyes y Reinos Genealogias, online www.homar.org, España - 08.B.

[S1074] Bishop Pelayo "the Fabulist" of Oviedo, "CRL", 79.

[S187] Royal Genealogy Database, online http://www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/public/genealogy/

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 293-40.

[S278] DfAdam, online unknown url, The Line of Ishmael, 91.

[S223] Si, online http://www.sispain.org/english/history/, reconque.html.

[S1312] Stanley G. Payne Payne, pg. 51.

[S515] Thomas F. Glick, Islamic and Christian Spain, pg. 46.

[S1281] De Galíndez, Jesús, online http://www.armiarma.com/andima/gern/gern2216.htm & http://www.armiarma.com/andima/gern/gern2323.htm

[S515] Thomas F. Glick, Islamic and Christian Spain, pg. 41.

[S682] D.S.O. Lt.-Col. W. H. Turton, Turton, pg. 46.

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 285-36.

[S1074] Bishop Pelayo "the Fabulist" of Oviedo, "CRL", CRL (pg. 79).

[S674] Family Trees, A&E Family Forest.

[S172] Various Encyclopaedea Britannica.

[S1265] Genealogy.eu, online genealogy.euweb.cz, Counts of Bigorre, Ribagorza and Pailhars.

Sancho I of Pamplona

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Sancho I Garcés (c. 860 – December 11, 925) was king of Pamplona from 905 to 925. He was a son of García Jiménez, who was king of "another part of the kingdom" of Pamplona and Dadildis de Pallars, his second wife. In 905, a coalition of enemies of the king, Fortún Garcés: Lope ibn Mohammed of the Banu Qasi, King Alfonso III of Asturias, and Sancho's uncle, Raymond, the count of Pallars, deposed the king, and put Sancho on the throne in his place.

About the time of, and perhaps to legitimize the succession, Sancho married Toda Aznárez, granddaughter of former king Fortún Garcés. Queen Toda was a daughter of Aznar Sánchez, lord of Larraun, and Oneca Fortúnez, who herself was a daughter of King Fortún. Thus, Toda's children were also descendants of the Arista dynasty of Navarrese monarchs, but likewise akin to Abd-ar-Rahman III of Cordoba, a grandson of Oneca by a former husband. Sancho fought against the Moors with repeated success and joined Ultra-Puertos, or Basse-Navarre (Baja Navarra), to his own dominions, also extending his territory as far as Nájera. As a thanksgiving offering for his victories, he founded, in 924, the convent of Albelda. Before his death, all the Moors had been driven from the country.

When Sancho died in 925, his children were still minors upon his death, and his only son still quite young. Thus Sancho was succeeded by his brother, Jimeno Garcés, upon whose death Sancho's son García would succeed.

The Codex of Roda gives Sancho and Toda six children:

Oneca (d.931), married Alfonso IV the Monk of León in 926

Sancha, married firstly Ordoño II of León, secondly Count Alvaro Herraméliz of Álava, and thirdly Fernán González, Count of Castile

Urraca, married Ramiro II of León

Velasquita (or Belasquita), married firstly Munio, count of Vizcaya, secondly Galindo, son of Bernard count of Ribagorza.

Orbita

García, king of Pamplona, married firstly Andregota Galíndez and secondly Teresa

Sancho also had an illegitimate daughter:

Lupa, mother of Raymond I, Count of Bigorre

--------------------

Sancho I Garcés (c. 860 – December 11, 925) was king of Pamplona from 905 to 925. He was a son of García Jiménez, who was king of "another part of the kingdom" of Pamplona and Dadildis de Pallars, his second wife. In 905, a coalition of enemies of the king, Fortún Garcés: Lope ibn Muhammed of the Banu Qasi, King Alfonso III of Asturias, and Sancho's uncle, Raymond I of Pallars and Ribagorza, deposed the king, and put Sancho on the throne in his place. Throughout his reign, he involved himself in the squabbles among the Muslim lords to the south with repeated success. In 907, he turned on his former ally Lope ibn Mohammad, killing him in battle. In 920, he teamed with Bernard I of Ribagorza and Amrus ibn Muhammed, son of Muhammad al Tawil, to attack Monzón. He joined Ultra-Puertos, or Basse-Navarre (Baja Navarra), to his own dominions, also extending his territory as far as Nájera. As a thanksgiving offering for his victories, he founded, in 924, the convent of Albelda.

About the time of, and perhaps to legitimize the succession, Sancho married Toda Aznárez, granddaughter of former king Fortún Garcés. Queen Toda was a daughter of Aznar Sánchez, lord of Larraun, and Oneca Fortúnez, who herself was a daughter of King Fortún. Thus, Toda's children were also descendants of the Arista dynasty of Navarrese monarchs, but likewise akin to Abd-ar-Rahman III of Cordoba, a grandson of Oneca by a former husband. When Sancho died in 925, his only son was still quite young. Thus Sancho was succeeded by his brother, Jimeno Garcés, upon whose death Sancho's son García would succeed.

The Codex of Roda gives Sancho and Toda six children:

Oneca (d.931), married Alfonso IV the Monk of León in 926

Sancha, married firstly Ordoño II of León, secondly Count Alvaro Herraméliz of Álava, and thirdly Fernán González, Count of Castile

Urraca, married Ramiro II of León

Velasquita (or Belasquita), married firstly Munio, count of Vizcaya, secondly Galindo, son of Bernard count of Ribagorza.

Orbita

García, king of Pamplona, married firstly Andregota Galíndez and secondly Teresa

Sancho also had an illegitimate daughter:

Lupa, mother of Raymond I, Count of Bigorre
--------------------
García Íñiguez of Pamplona

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

García Íñiguez had following children:

Fortún Garcés, the future king.

Sancho Garcés, whose only known child, Aznar Sánchez, married a daughter of king Fortún Garcés and by her had queens Toda Aznárez, wife of king Sancho Garcés I, and Sancha Aznárez, wife of king Jimeno Garcés.

Onneca Garcés, wife of Aznar Galíndez II.

Velasquita Garcés, married to Mutarrīf ibn Mūsā ibn Qasi, Wali of Huesca, son of Mūsā ibn Mūsā.

(perhaps) Jimena, wife of Alfonso III of León (assignment of her parentage based on political, chronological and onomastic arguments).

[edit]
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sancho_I_of_Pamplona

Sancho I of Pamplona

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This article does not cite any references or sources.

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2009)

The Kingdom of Pamplona at the death of Sancho I

Sancho I Garcés (c. 860 – December 11, 925) was king of Pamplona from 905 to 925. He was a son of García Jiménez, who was king of "another part of the kingdom" of Pamplona and Dadildis de Pallars, his second wife. In 905, a coalition of enemies of the king, Fortún Garcés: Lubb ibn Muhammed of the Banu Qasi, King Alfonso III of Asturias, Galindo Aznar II of Aragon and Sancho's uncle, Raymond I of Pallars and Ribagorza, deposed the king, and put Sancho on the throne in his place. Throughout his reign, he involved himself in the squabbles among the Muslim lords to the south with repeated success. In 907, he turned on his former ally Lubb ibn Muhammad, killing him in battle. Four years later, another former ally, Galindo Aznar, joined with his brother-in-law Muhammad al-Tawil and Abd Allah ibn Lubb ibn Qasi to attack Sancho, but they were crushed: al-Tawil was killed, the power of the Banu Qasi was severely crippled, and Galindo forced into vassalage to Sancho, leading to the incorporation of the County of Aragon into Pamplona. In 920, he teamed with Bernard I of Ribagorza and Amrus ibn Muhammed, son of Muhammad al-Tawil, to attack Monzón. He joined Ultra-Puertos, or Basse-Navarre (Baja Navarra), to his own dominions, also extending his territory as far as Nájera. As a thanksgiving offering for his victories, he founded, in 924, the convent of Albelda.

Perhaps to legitimize the succession, Sancho married Toda Aznárez, daughter of Oneca Fortúnez, (who was a daughter of former king Fortún Garcés) and Aznar Sánchez, lord of Larraun. Thus, Sancho and Toda's children were also descendants of the Arista dynasty of Navarrese monarchs, but likewise akin to Abd-ar-Rahman III of Cordoba, a grandson of Oneca by a former husband. When Sancho died in 925, his only son was still quite young. Thus Sancho was succeeded by his brother, Jimeno Garcés, upon whose death Sancho's son García would succeed. The family would be called the Banu Sancho (Arabic: بنو شانجه‎) by Al-Andalus chroniclers, in his memory.

The Codex of Roda gives Sancho and Toda six children:

* Oneca (d.931), married Alfonso IV the Monk of León in 926

* Sancha, married firstly Ordoño II of León, secondly Count Alvaro Herraméliz of Álava, and thirdly Fernán González, Count of Castile

* Urraca, married Ramiro II of León

* Velasquita (or Belasquita), married firstly Munio, count of Vizcaya, secondly Galindo, son of Bernard count of Ribagorza, and third, nobleman Fortún Galíndez.

* Orbita

* García, king of Pamplona, married firstly Andregota Galíndez and secondly Teresa

Sancho also had an illegitimate daughter:

* Lupa, mother of Raymond I, Count of Bigorre

Preceded by

Fortún Garcés King of Pamplona

905–925 Succeeded by

Jimeno Garcés

This page was last modified on 27 April 2010 at 09:54.
--------------------
Sancho Garcés I de Pamplona

De Wikipedia, la enciclopedia libre

Sancho Garcés I (n.Sangüesa (actual Rocaforte) 865 - † Resa, 10 de diciembre de 925). Rey de Pamplona entre los años 905 y 925.

Hijo de García Jiménez, descendiente de la dinastía Jimena. A la muerte de García I Íñiguez en el año 870, es gobernante de la Valdonsella y pronto comienza a intervenir en todos los territorios circundantes.

Ocupa Pamplona cuando todavía reina Fortún Garcés, ayudado por Alfonso III de Asturias, junto con el conde de Pallars. Eliminados los derechos patrimoniales de los hijos de Fortún Garcés, estos recaerán en su nieta Toda, casada con Sancho Garcés I, que los hizo valer y se proclamó rey de Pamplona en 905, tras destronar a Fortún Garcés.

Al morir el conde de Aragón Galindo Aznárez II, Sancho Garcés I ocupó las tierras de Aragón ignorando los derechos sucesorios de todos. Ésta fue la causa que justificó las luchas del gobernador musulmán de Huesca, al-Tawil, que tenía derechos sucesorios sobre el territorio por estar casado con Sancha, hermana del conde. Se solucionó el problema al prometer en matrimonio a Andregoto Galíndez, hija de Galindo Aznárez II, con el hijo de Sancho Garcés I, el futuro rey García Sánchez I, que era todavía un niño.

Amplió considerablemente las fronteras meridionales del reino hasta llegar a tierras riojanas mediante una serie de campañas militares contra los musulmanes. Conquistó Nájera y estableció allí su corte, dotando de una organización definitiva al reino de Pamplona.

Aliado con Ordoño II de León, venció a un ejército cordobés en San Esteban de Gormaz (917), pero fue derrotado por Abd al-Rahman III en Valdejunquera (920).

Durante su reinado se comienza a acuñar moneda, siendo el primer reino cristiano que use tal regalía. Así mismo, aparece el sistema de tenencias, que se perpetuará en Navarra y Aragón hasta principios del siglo XIII.

El centro político del mundo cristiano estaba en la corte de Nájera que dio como resultado varios matrimonios reales de las hijas de Sancho Garcés I y la reina Toda Aznar:

Urraca de Pamplona, casada con Ramiro II de León.

Oneca de Pamplona, casada con Alfonso IV "El Monje" de León. Fue reina de León entre 926 y 931. Murió en 931.

Sancha de Pamplona, casada en primeras nupcias con Ordoño II de León, en segundas con el Conde alavés Álvaro Herrameliz y en terceras, con Fernán González, Conde de Castilla.

García I Sánchez, Rey de Pamplona, casado con Andregoto Galíndez y con Teresa de León.

Velasquita o Belasquita Sánchez, casada en primeras nupcias con el Conde alaves Munio Velaz, en segundas con Galindo de Ribagorza y en terceras con Fortún Galíndez.

Munia (Muña) de Pamplona.

Orbita de Navarra, probablemente casada con al-Tawil, gobernador de Huesca. Pudo ser hija póstuma, como hace suponer el significado de su nombre, "la huérfana".

El rey Sancho Garcés I murió en las cercanías de Resa, a orillas del río Ebro, el día 10 de diciembre del año 925 y fue enterrado en San Esteban de Deio en Monjardín.

--------------------
Sancho I Garcés (c. 860 – December 11, 925) was king of Pamplona from 905 to 925. He was a son of García Jiménez, who was king of "another part of the kingdom" of Pamplona and Dadildis de Pallars, his second wife. In 905, a coalition of enemies of the king, Fortún Garcés: Lubb ibn Muhammed of the Banu Qasi, King Alfonso III of Asturias, Galindo Aznar II of Aragon and Sancho's uncle, Raymond I of Pallars and Ribagorza, deposed the king, and put Sancho on the throne in his place.

The Codex of Roda gives Sancho and Toda six children:

* Oneca (d.931), married Alfonso IV the Monk of León in 926

* Sancha, married firstly Ordoño II of León, secondly Count Alvaro Herraméliz of Álava, and thirdly Fernán González, Count of Castile

* Urraca, married Ramiro II of León

* Velasquita (or Belasquita), married firstly Munio, count of Vizcaya, secondly Galindo, son of Bernard count of Ribagorza, and third, nobleman Fortún Galíndez.

* Orbita

* García, king of Pamplona, married firstly Andregota Galíndez and secondly Teresa

Sancho also had an illegitimate daughter:

* Lupa, mother of Raymond I, Count of Bigorre

--------------------
Sancho I Garcés (c. 860 – December 11, 925) was king of Pamplona from 905 to 925. He was a son of García Jiménez, who was king of "another part of the kingdom" of Pamplona and Dadildis de Pallars, his second wife. In 905, a coalition of enemies of the king, Fortún Garcés: Lope ibn Muhammed of the Banu Qasi, King Alfonso III of Asturias, and Sancho's uncle, Raymond I of Pallars and Ribagorza, deposed the king, and put Sancho on the throne in his place. Throughout his reign, he involved himself in the squabbles among the Muslim lords to the south with repeated success. In 907, he turned on his former ally Lope ibn Mohammad, killing him in battle. In 920, he teamed with Bernard I of Ribagorza and Amrus ibn Muhammed, son of Muhammad al Tawil, to attack Monzón. He joined Ultra-Puertos, or Basse-Navarre (Baja Navarra), to his own dominions, also extending his territory as far as Nájera. As a thanksgiving offering for his victories, he founded, in 924, the convent of Albelda.

About the time of, and perhaps to legitimize the succession, Sancho married Toda Aznárez, granddaughter of former king Fortún Garcés. Queen Toda was a daughter of Aznar Sánchez, lord of Larraun, and Oneca Fortúnez, who herself was a daughter of King Fortún. Thus, Toda's children were also descendants of the Arista dynasty of Navarrese monarchs, but likewise akin to Abd-ar-Rahman III of Cordoba, a grandson of Oneca by a former husband. When Sancho died in 925, his only son was still quite young. Thus Sancho was succeeded by his brother, Jimeno Garcés, upon whose death Sancho's son García would succeed.

The Codex of Roda gives Sancho and Toda six children:

Oneca (d.931), married Alfonso IV the Monk of León in 926

Sancha, married firstly Ordoño II of León, secondly Count Alvaro Herraméliz of Álava, and thirdly Fernán González, Count of Castile

Urraca, married Ramiro II of León

Velasquita (or Belasquita), married firstly Munio, count of Vizcaya, secondly Galindo, son of Bernard count of Ribagorza.

Orbita

García, king of Pamplona, married firstly Andregota Galíndez and secondly Teresa

Sancho also had an illegitimate daughter:

Lupa, mother of Raymond I, Count of Bigorre
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sancho_I_of_Pamplona
--------------------
III - GARCÍA I ÍÑIGUEZ.

Regent 842, King of Pamplona 852; Deceased 870. Married in 1ªnp with:

URRACA DE GASCUÑA, daughter of Count Sancho Sánchez de Gascony. Parents of:

1.- Fortún Garcés, follow the line.

4.- Sancho Garcés, Coregen of Pamplona with García Jiménez 870-82. Father of:

A.- Aznar Sánchez de Larraún, married his cousin-sister Oneca Durr, daughter of King Fortún Garcés. C / s.

Http://www.abcgenealogia.com/Navarra00.html

<Hr>

Towards 882, after remaining almost two decades in Cordova, Onneca left to its Muslim children [13] and returned to Pamplona with its father, who had recently taken possession of the throne. Shortly after returning, he married his cousin Aznar Sánchez de Larraún, son of Sancho Garces and grandson of Garcia Iniguez of Pamplona.
--------------------
El rey Sancho Garcés I murió en las cercanías de Resa, a orillas del río Ebro, el día 10 de diciembre del año 925​ y fue enterrado en el castillo de San Esteban de Deyo, en Villamayor de Monjardín.
======================

http://www.biografiasyvidas.com/biografia/s/sancho_i_garces.htm

http://www.friesian.com/perifran.htm#basque

http://genealogics.org/getperson.php?personID=I00106643&tree=LEO

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sancho_I_of_Pamplona

https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sanche_Ier_de_Navarre

'''Sancho I Garcés''' (c. 860 – December 11, 925) was king of Pamplona from 905 to 925. He was a son of García Jiménez, who was king of "another part of the kingdom" of Pamplona and Dadildis de Pallars, his second wife.

In 905, a coalition of enemies of the king, Fortún Garcés, consisting of Lubb ibn Muhammed of the Banu Qasi, King Alfonso III of Asturias, Galindo Aznar II of Aragon and Sancho's uncle, Raymond I of Pallars and Ribagorza, deposed Fortún, and put Sancho on the throne in his place. Throughout his reign, he involved himself in the squabbles among the Muslim lords to the south with repeated success. In 907, he turned on his former ally Lubb ibn Muhammad, killing him in battle. Four years later, another former ally, Galindo Aznar, joined with his brother-in-law Muhammad al-Tawil and Abd Allah ibn Lubb ibn Qasi to attack Sancho, but they were defeated and neutralized as a threat. Al-Tawil fled and was killed shortly afterward, and the power of the Banu Qasi was severely crippled, while Galindo was forced into vassalage to Sancho, leading to the incorporation of the County of Aragon into the Pamplona kingdom. In 920, he teamed with Bernard I of Ribagorza and Amrus ibn Muhammed, son of Muhammad al-Tawil, to attack Banu Qasi-held Monzón. His successes allowed him to join Ultra-Puertos, or Basse-Navarre (Baja Navarra), to his own dominions, and extend his territory as far as Nájera. As a thanksgiving offering for his victories, he founded, in 924, the convent of Albelda.

Perhaps to legitimize the succession, Sancho married Toda Aznárez, daughter of Onneca Fortúnez. Thus, Sancho and Toda's children were also descendants of the Arista dynasty of Navarrese monarchs, but likewise akin to Abd-ar-Rahman III of Córdoba, a grandson of Onneca by a former husband. When Sancho died in 925, his only son was still quite young. Thus Sancho was succeeded by his brother, Jimeno Garcés, upon whose death Sancho's son García would succeed under that regency of Toda. In his memory, the family would be called the Banu Sanyo (Arabic: بنو شانجه, 'descendants of Sancho') by Al-Andalus chroniclers.

-----------

Sancho Garcés I (Sangüesa - Resa, 10 de diciembre de 925) fue rey de Pamplona entre los años 905 y 925. Hijo de García Jiménez y de su segunda esposa, Dadildis de Pallars, fue el primer rey de la dinastía Jimena. A la muerte de García I Íñiguez en el año 870, fue gobernante de Valdonsella y pronto comienzó a intervenir en todos los territorios circundantes.

Ocupó Pamplona cuando todavía reinaba Fortún Garcés, ayudado por Alfonso III de Asturias, junto con el conde de Pallars. Eliminados los derechos patrimoniales de los hijos de Fortún Garcés, estos recayeron en su nieta Toda, casada con Sancho Garcés I, que los hizo valer y se proclamó rey de Pamplona en 905, tras destronar a Fortún Garcés.

Al morir el conde de Aragón Galindo II Aznárez, Sancho Garcés I ocupó las tierras de Aragón ignorando los derechos sucesorios de todos. Esta fue la causa que justificó las luchas del gobernador musulmán de Huesca, Muhammad al-Tawil, que tenía derechos sucesorios sobre el territorio por estar casado con Sancha Aznárez, hermana del conde. Se solucionó el problema al prometer en matrimonio a Andregoto Galíndez, hija del conde Galindo, con el hijo de Sancho Garcés I, el futuro rey García Sánchez I, que era todavía un niño.

Amplió considerablemente las fronteras meridionales del reino hasta llegar a tierras riojanas mediante una serie de campañas militares contra los musulmanes. Conquistó Nájera y estableció allí su corte, dotando de una organización definitiva al reino de Pamplona.

Aliado con Ordoño II de León, venció a un ejército cordobés en San Esteban de Gormaz (917), pero fue derrotado por Abd al-Rahman III en la Batalla de Valdejunquera (920).

Durante su reinado se comenzó a acuñar moneda, siendo el primer reino cristiano que usó tal regalía. Así mismo, aparece el sistema de tenencias, que se perpetuará en Navarra y Aragón hasta principios del siglo XIII.

El centro político del mundo cristiano estaba en la corte de Nájera que dio como resultado varios matrimonios reales de las hijas de Sancho Garcés I y la reina Toda Aznar:

Urraca Sánchez, casada con Ramiro II de León.
Oneca de Pamplona, casada con Alfonso IV «El Monje», fue reina de León entre 926 y 931 el año en que falleció.
Sancha de Pamplona, casada en primeras nupcias con Ordoño II de León, en segundas con el conde alavés Álvaro Herrameliz y en terceras, con Fernán González, conde de Castilla. García I Sánchez, rey de Pamplona, casado con Andregoto Galíndez y con Teresa Ramírez, hija de Ramiro II de León y de Adosinda Gutiérrez, Velasquita o Belasquita Sánchez, casada en primeras nupcias con el conde alavés Munio Velaz, en segundas con Galindo de Ribagorza y en terceras con Fortún Galíndez. Munia (Muña) de Pamplona. Orbita de Pamplona, probablemente casada con al-Tawil, gobernador de Huesca. Pudo ser hija póstuma, como hace suponer el significado de su nombre, "la huérfana". El rey también tuvo una hija fuera de matrimonio, probablemente nacida mucho antes que los hijos legítimos, Lupa Sánchez quien, según el Códice de Roda, fue la madre del conde Raimundo de Bigorra.

El rey Sancho Garcés I murió en las cercanías de Resa, a orillas del río Ebro, el día 10 de diciembre del año 925 y fue enterrado en San Esteban de Deio en Monjardín.

http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sancho_Garc%C3%A9s_I_de_Pamplona

--------------------------
Villamayor de Monjardín es un municipio español de la Comunidad Foral de Navarra, situado en la merindad de Estella, en la comarca de Estella Oriental y a 53 km de la capital de la comunidad, Pamplona.
--------------------
Leo: Europäische Stammtafeln, J.A. Stargardt Verlag, Marburg, Schwennicke, Detlev (Ed.), Reference: II 54.
--------------------
De Wikipedia:

Ocupó Pamplona cuando todavía reinaba Fortún Garcés, ayudado por Alfonso III de Asturias, junto con el conde de Pallars. Eliminados los derechos patrimoniales de los hijos de Fortún Garcés, estos recayeron en su nieta Toda, casada con Sancho Garcés I, que los hizo valer y se proclamó rey de Pamplona en 905, tras destronar a Fortún Garcés.

Al morir el conde de Aragón Galindo II Aznárez, Sancho Garcés I ocupó las tierras de Aragón ignorando los derechos sucesorios de todos. Esta fue la causa que justificó las luchas del gobernador musulmán de Huesca, Muhammad al-Tawil, que tenía derechos sucesorios sobre el territorio por estar casado con Sancha Aznárez, hermana del conde. Se solucionó el problema al prometer en matrimonio a Andregoto Galíndez, hija del conde Galindo, con el hijo de Sancho Garcés I, el futuro rey García Sánchez I, que era todavía un niño.

Amplió considerablemente las fronteras meridionales del reino hasta llegar a tierras riojanas mediante una serie de campañas militares contra los musulmanes. Conquistó Nájera y estableció allí su corte, dotando de una organización definitiva al reino de Pamplona.

Aliado con Ordoño II de León, venció a un ejército cordobés en San Esteban de Gormaz (917), pero fue derrotado por Abd al-Rahman III en la Batalla de Valdejunquera (920).

Durante su reinado se comenzó a acuñar moneda, siendo el primer reino cristiano que usó tal regalía. Asimismo, aparece el sistema de tenencias, que se perpetuará en Navarra y Aragón hasta principios del siglo XIII.
--------------------
Sancho Garcés I (Sangüesa [1] -Resa, December 10, 925) was King of Pamplona between 905 and 925. Son of Garcia Jimenez and his second wife, Dadildis de Pallars, was the first king of the Jimena dynasty. On the death of Garcia I Iñiguez in 870, he was governor of Valdonsella and soon began to intervene in all the surrounding territories.

Pamplona occupied when Fortunus Garcés still reigned, helped by Alfonso III of Asturias, along with the count of Pallars. Once the property rights of the sons of Fortuny Garcés were eliminated, they fell to his granddaughter Toda, married to Sancho Garcés I, who asserted them and proclaimed himself King of Pamplona in 905, after dethroning Fortunus Garcés. 2]

When the Count of Aragon Galindo II Aznárez died, Sancho Garcés I occupied the lands of Aragon ignoring the inheritance rights of all. This was the reason that justified the struggles of the Muslim governor of Huesca, Muhammad al-Tawil, who had inheritance rights over the territory because he was married to Sancha Aznárez, the count's sister. The problem was solved by promising in marriage to Andregoto Galendez, daughter of Count Galindo, with the son of Sancho Garcés I, the future king Garcia Sánchez I, who was still a child.

It extended considerably the southern borders of the kingdom until arriving at lands riojanas by means of a series of military campaigns against the Muslims. He conquered Nájera and established his court there, endowing a definitive organization to the kingdom of Pamplona.

Allied with Ordoño II de León, he defeated a Cordovan army in San Esteban de Gormaz (917), but was defeated by Abd al-Rahman III in the Battle of Valdejunquera (920).

During its reign began to mint coin, being the first Christian kingdom that used such royalty. Likewise, it appears the system of holdings, which will be perpetuated in Navarre and Aragon until the beginning of the thirteenth century.

Marriage and descendants The political center of the Christian world was in the court of Nájera that resulted in several royal marriages of the daughters of Sancho Garcés I and the queen Toda Aznar:

Urraca Sánchez, married to Ramiro II de León. Oneca de Pamplona, ​​married to Alfonso IV "El Monje", was Queen of León between 926 and 931 in the year in which she died. Sancha of Pamplona, ​​married in first nuptials with Ordoño II of Leon, in second with the count Alavés Álvaro Tool and in thirds, with Fernán González, count of Castile. García I Sánchez, king of Pamplona, ​​married to Andregoto Galíndez and Teresa Ramírez, daughter of Ramiro II de León and Adosinda Gutiérrez, Velasquita or Belasquita Sánchez, married in the first nuptials with Count Alavés Munio Vélaz, in second with Galindo de Ribagorza And in third with Fortún Galíndez. Munia (Muña) of Pamplona. Orbita de Pamplona, ​​probably married to al-Tawil, governor of Huesca. She could be a posthumous daughter, as she supposes the meaning of her name, "the orphan." The king also had a daughter out of wedlock, probably born long before the legitimate children, Lupa Sánchez who, according to the Codex de Roda, was the mother of Count Raimundo de Bigorra.

Death and burial King Sancho Garcés I died in the vicinity of Resa, on the banks of the Ebro River, on December 10, 925 and was buried in San Esteban de Deio in Monjardín.

55448864. Kong Sancho II. Abarca GARCIASON i Narvarra was a Konge in 970 in Narvarra. (7305) He died in 994.(7306) He was a Greve in Aragonien.(7307) Grevskapet ervervet han ved sitt ekteskap He was married to Grevinne Urraca FERNANCEZ av Aragonien.

887181960. Kong Sancho I. Garcez GRACIASON (21072) died in 925. (21073) Han etterfulgte sin bror Fortun Barcez og utvidet sitt territorium til Tudela. I 905 tok han kongenavn, og i 919 nedla han regjeringen og gikk i kloster. Landet ble imidlertid i 920 truet ved invasjon av muselmennene. Han allierte seg med Ordoro III., men de kristne armeer led et fullstendig nederlag ved Valjunquera. Muselmennene trengte helt frem til Frankrike og led ved tilbaketoget et delvis nederlag ved Roncevaux. I 924 foretok saracerne en ekspesisjon helt frem til Pampelona som de dog måtte oppgi. Han var etterkommer av den aquitanske lendgreve Aznar av Navarra. He was married to Dronning Tota N.NSDTR av Navarra.

Rey de Navarra (905-925).
En varias obras, se le considera como 1er. rey de Aragón
Extendió sus territorios hasta Tudela y Nájera. Como tutor de su hijo García I Sánchez, ejerció el gobierno en el condado de Aragón, y después lo casó con doña Endregoto Galíndez, heredera de dicho condado, preparando así la reunión de ambos estados. Amenazado por una invasión musulmana, se alió al rey de León Ordoño II, pero ambos fueron derrotados en Valdejunquera, en 920. Con Sancho I surge el reino de Navarra como estado independiente

III Conde Soberano de Castilla (995-1017)

III Conde Soberano de Castilla (995-1017)

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Pamplona (905-925), founded Navarre 873

SOURCE NOTES:
www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal07680

1 NAME Sancho Garces, Rei de /Navarra/
2 GIVN Sancho Garces, Rei de
2 SURN Navarra

Source: Codex of Roda:

Founder of the Jimenez dynasty. Regent of Pamplona from 870 through 880. Assumed the throne of Fortun Garces while Fortun was imprisoned by the Berber Moors.

Sancho I of Pamplona
http://trees.ancestry.com/rd?f=document&guid=e34581d7-d87d-43e4-8d18-52595b6d15c9&tid=10145763&pid=-531588714

Sancho I of Pamplona
http://trees.ancestry.com/rd?f=document&guid=e34581d7-d87d-43e4-8d18-52595b6d15c9&tid=10145763&pid=-531588714

1 NAME Sancho Garces, Rei de /Navarra/
2 GIVN Sancho Garces, Rei de
2 SURN Navarra

1 NAME Sancho Garces, Rei de /Navarra/
2 GIVN Sancho Garces, Rei de
2 SURN Navarra

Sancho Garcés I de Pamplona (c. 860 — 10 de Dezembro de 925) também conhecido como Sancho Garcés I, foi rei de Pamplona.

Sua esposa foi a rainha Toda, neta do rei Fortún Garcés, pertenceu a Casa de Aragão.

Rey de Navarra (905-925).
En varias obras, se le considera como 1er. rey de Aragón
Extendió sus territorios hasta Tudela y Nájera. Como tutor de su hijo García I Sánchez, ejerció el gobierno en el condado de Aragón, y después lo casó con doña Endregoto Galíndez, heredera de dicho condado, preparando así la reunión de ambos estados. Amenazado por una invasión musulmana, se alió al rey de León Ordoño II, pero ambos fueron derrotados en Valdejunquera, en 920. Con Sancho I surge el reino de Navarra como estado independiente

Name Suffix:<NSFX> Of Pamplona

Sancho I Garcés (d. 925), king of Pamplona (Navarre) from 905. He expanded his kingdom south of the Ebro River and maintained its independence in spite of the sack of his capital in 924 by the Umayyad caliph 'Abd ar-Rahman III of Córdoba.

Sancho I Garcés (d. 925), king of Pamplona (Navarre) from 905. He expanded his kingdom south of the Ebro River and maintained its independence in spite of the sack of his capital in 924 by the Umayyad caliph 'Abd ar-Rahman III of Córdoba.

Konge av Pamplona (Navarra) 905 - 925.
Navarraslekten var konger av Navarra (Pamplona) fra 810 til 1134. Slekten etterfulgte
Castillaslekten som konger av Castilla fra 1026 til 1230 og Leonslekten som konger av Leon
fra 1037 til 1230. Deretter var slekten konger av Castilla-Leon fra 1230 til 1516. Sidegrenen
var grever av Aragon fra 809 til 922. Aragon ble fra 970 et eget kongerike i union med
Navarra, men ble i 1035 skilt ut som eget kongerike under Aragonslekten.
Det er usikker hvem som er Sancos foreldre. Mogens Bugge angir i ?Våre forfedre?:
Han far, Garcia Jimenéz, var greve av Aragon og døde i 882-84. Han kalles også Garcia
Iñigués. Disse navnene er ofte feilaktig tillagt to forskjellige personer. Han var gift med Urraca
som var av kongelig byrd og mor til Fortun Garcés, bror til Sancho. Det oppgis at hans farfar,
Iñigo Arista, var den første konge av Pamplona og at han døde så sent som i 880.
Bent og Vidar Billing Hansen angir i ?Rosensverdslektens forfedre?:
Den videre rekkefølge angir tradisjonelt at hans far, Garcia I Iñigues, døde i 880 og at
hans farfar, Iñigo Arista, døde i 851 (29 år tidligere enn angitt av Mogens Bugge). Det
oppgis at en kilde, ?Nouvelle Larousse illustré? av Claude Augé, angir at hans far var Garcia
Jimenez som døde i 883 og at hans farfar var Jimeno Garces, født ca. 800.
Sancho etterfulgte sin bror Fortun Garcéz og utvidet sitt territorium til Tudela.
I 905 antok han kongenavn, men nedla regjeringen i 919 og gikk i kloster. Landet ble
imidlertid i 920 truet av invasjon av maurerne. Han allierte seg med Ordoño III, men de
kristne armeer led et fullstendig nederlag ved Valjunquera. Muselmennene trengte helt frem til
Frankrike, men led ved tilbaketoget delvis nederlag ved Roncevaux.
I 924 foretok sarasenerne en ekspedisjon helt frem til Pamplona som de dog måtte
oppgi.

He extended his kingdom south of the Ebro River and maintained its
independence despite the sacking of his capital in 924 by 'Abd ar-Rahman III.
This is the end of this line of Kings of Navarre.

Sancho I of Pamplona
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Sancho I Garcés (c. 860 – December 11, 925) was king of Pamplona from 905 to 925. He was a son of García Jiménez, who was regent of Pamplona from 870 to 880 while Fortún Garcés was held captive and apparently co-king of Pamplona from 860 to his death in 882, and Dadildis de Pallars. Sancho may also have been a co-king during the reign of Fortún. The elderly Sancho (already 45 years old) succeeded King Fortún when the latter was deposed by a coalition of enemies: the Banu Qasi under Lope ibn Mohammed, King Alfonso III of Asturias, and Sancho's uncle, the count of Pallars.

Sancho's first wife Urraca, daughter of the count of Aragón, did not have surviving children. So Sancho married a second time to Toda Aznárez in his old age. His children were thus minors upon his death. Queen Toda (born Teuda de Larraun) was a daughter of Aznar Sánchez, lord of Larraun, and Oneca Fortúnez, who herself was a daughter of King Fortún. Thus, Toda's children were also descendants of the Arista dynasty of Navarrese monarchs. Sancho fought against the Moors with repeated success and joined Ultra-Puertos, or Basse-Navarre (Baja Navarra), to his own dominions, also extending his territory as far as Nájera. As a thanksgiving offering for his victories, he founded, in 924, the convent of Albelda. Before his death, all the Moors had been driven from the country.

Sancho was succeeded by his son García Sánchez, with his widow Toda and brother Jimeno (who used the royal title) acting as regents.

The Codex of Roda gives Sancho and Toda six children:

Oneca (d.931), married Alfonso IV the Monk of León in 926
Sancha, married firstly Ordoño II of León, secondly Count Alvaro Herraméliz of Álava, and thirdly Fernán González, Count of Castile
Urraca, married Ramiro II of León
Velasquita (or Belasquita), married firstly Munio, count of Vizcaya, secondly Galindo, son of Bernard count of Ribagorza.
Orbita
García, king of Pamplona, married firstly Andregota Galíndez and secondly Teresa
Sancho also had an illegitimate daughter:

Lupa, mother of Raymond I, Count of Bigorre
Preceded by
Fortun I King of Pamplona
905–925 Succeeded by
Jimeno II
Succeeded by
García III

He extended his kingdom south of the Ebro River and maintained its
independence despite the sacking of his capital in 924 by 'Abd ar-Rahman III.
This is the end of this line of Kings of Navarre.

[Wikipedia, "Sancho I of Pamplona", retrieved 5 Oct 07]
Sancho I Garcés (c. 860 - December 11, 925) was king of Pamplona from 905 to 925. He was a son of García Jiménez, who was regent of Pamplona from 870 to 880 while Fortún Garcés was held captive and apparently co-king of Pamplona from 860 to his death in 882, and Dadildis de Pallars. Sancho may also have been a co-king during the reign of Fortún. The elderly Sancho (already 45 years old) succeeded King Fortún when the latter was deposed by a coalition of enemies: the Banu Qasi under Lope ibn Mohammed, King Alfonso III of Asturias, and Sancho's uncle, the count of Pallars.

Sancho's first wife Urraca, daughter of the count of Aragón, did not have surviving children. So Sancho married a second time to Toda Aznárez in his old age. His children were thus minors upon his death. Queen Toda (born Teuda de Larraun) was a daughter of Aznar Sánchez, lord of Larraun, and Oneca Fortúnez, who herself was a daughter of King Fortún. Thus, Toda's children were also descendants of the Arista dynasty of Navarrese monarchs. Sancho fought against the Moors with repeated success and joined Ultra-Puertos, or Basse-Navarre (Baja Navarra), to his own dominions, also extending his territory as far as Nájera. As a thanksgiving offering for his victories, he founded, in 924, the convent of Albelda. Before his death, all the Moors had been driven from the country.

Sancho was succeeded by his son García Sánchez, with his widow Toda and brother Jimeno (who used the royal title) acting as regents.

The Codex of Roda gives Sancho and Toda six children:

Oneca (d.931), married Alfonso IV the Monk of León in 926
Sancha, married firstly Ordoño II of León, secondly Count Alvaro Herraméliz of Álava, and thirdly Fernán González, Count of Castile
Urraca, married Ramiro II of León
Velasquita (or Belasquita), married firstly Munio, count of Vizcaya, secondly Galindo, son of Bernard count of Ribagorza.
Orbita
García, king of Pamplona, married firstly Andregota Galíndez and secondly Teresa
Sancho also had an illegitimate daughter:

Lupa, mother of Raymond I, Count of Bigorre

Sancho I Garcés (d. 925), king of Pamplona (Navarre) from 905. He expanded his kingdom south of the Ebro River and maintained its independence in spite of the sack of his capital in 924 by the Umayyad caliph 'Abd ar-Rahman III of Córdoba. Sancho fought against the Moors with repeated success and joined Ultra-Puertos, or Basse-Navarre (Baja Navarra), to his own dominions, also extending his territory as far as Nájera. As a thanksgiving offering for his victories, he founded, in 924, the convent of Albelda. Before his death, all the Moors had been driven from the country[Encyclopaedia Britannica CD '97: SANCHO I]

#Générale##Générale#Profession : Roi de Navarre de 905 à 925.

[s2.FTW]

From @@nsfnet-relay.ac.uk:rikv@@COM.MENTORG.wv Tue Jan 3 17:57:49 1995
Return-Path: <@@nsfnet-relay.ac.uk:rikv@@COM.MENTORG.wv>
Received: from gilbert.ucc.hull.ac.uk by olympus.dcs.hull.ac.uk
(4.1/1.34/indent-1.0) id AA27820; Tue, 3 Jan 95 17:57:48 GMT
Received-Date: Tue, 3 Jan 95 17:57:48 GMT
X-Queries-To: dcs@@hull.ac.uk (Department of Computer Science)
Received: from nsfnet-relay.ac.uk by gilbert.ucc.hull.ac.uk via JANET
with NIFTP (PP) id <22186-0@@gilbert.ucc.hull.ac.uk>;
Tue, 3 Jan 1995 17:59:51 +0000
Received: from newsgw.mentorg.com by sun3.nsfnet-relay.ac.uk
with Internet SMTP id <sg.15553-0@@sun3.nsfnet-relay.ac.uk>;
Tue, 3 Jan 1995 17:58:44 +0000
Received: from wv.wv.mentorg.com
by newsgw.mentorg.com (8.6.4/CF5.22R) id MAA08524;
Tue, 3 Jan 1995 12:57:26 -0500
Received: from em-wv03.wv.mentorg.com
by wv.wv.mentorg.com (8.6.8.1/CF5.22R) id JAA26858;
Tue, 3 Jan 1995 09:58:39 -0800
Received: from hptrails.MENTORG.COM
by em-wv03.wv.mentorg.com (8.6.8.1/CF5.23H) id JAA25338;
Tue, 3 Jan 1995 09:59:48 -0800
From: rikv@@COM.MENTORG.wv (Rik Vigeland)
Received: by hptrails.MENTORG.COM (1.37.109.4/CF3.4) id AA25349;
Tue, 3 Jan 95 09:58:38 -0800
Date: Tue, 3 Jan 95 09:58:38 -0800
Message-Id: <9501030958.ZM25347@@hptrails>
In-Reply-To: B.C.Tompsett@@computer-science.hull.ac.uk (Brian Tompsett) "Re: Arab Royalty > Spain > England" (Jan 3, 11:57am)
References: <9501031157.AA25104@@olympus.dcs.hull.ac.uk>
X-Mailer: Z-Mail (3.0.0 15dec93)
To: B.C.Tompsett@@uk.ac.hull.computer-science (Brian Tompsett)
Subject: Re: Arab Royalty > Spain > England
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=us-ascii
Mime-Version: 1.0
Sender: rikv@@COM.MENTORG.wv
Status: RO

Brian, I know what you mean about cross-link documentation. Wish I could get
some more & I suspect it's out there.

I have had suggested to me the following:

-- Mohammed
-- Rukaiya m. Caliph Uthman/Otman ben Affan
-- Aisha bint (d/o) Otman m. Merwan ben Hakim
-- ?? bint Merwan m. Muza ben Nuseir el-Bekra (660-718)
-- Abd-al-Aziz ibn Musa (d. 717) m. ??
There also is a claim that this fellow is a son, not grandson of
Merwan ben Hakim. (This is true in all charts I've seen -- RikV)
-- Aisha (?) m. Fortun Benqasim
-- Muza ben Fortun m. ??
-- Muza ben Muza m. ??
-- Oria Benqasi m. Fortun Garces le Borgne, King of Pamplona
(son of Garcia Iniguez)
-- Oneca Fortunez of Pamplona m. Aznar Sanchez of Larron
-- Toda m. Sancho I (865-925), King of Navarre
-- Garcia III (919-970), King of Navarre m. Andregoto, Cdsa de Aragon
-- Sancho II (935-994), King of Navarre m. Urraca, dau. of Cdr Fernando of
Castile
-- Garcia IV (964-999), King of Navarre m. Jimena Vermudez
-- Sancho III (990-1035), King of Navarre m. Munia, dau. of Sancho I of Leon


Two things you could check on for me, since I can't find my notes on Fortun &
family: Do you have any reference to Fortun's wife? He was actually a Basque
convert, but went to Damascus. Apparently (according to this data) he must
have married there. His family (Banu) was Qasi, hence Banuqasi. I also show
that Musa Ibn Musa (Musa son of Musa) married his step sister Assona Iniguez,
daughter of Jimeno of Pamplona. Jimeno married Musa Ibn Fortun's widow (not
named) and from this marriage come the early kings of Pamplona/Navarre. Any
references you have on Fortun and the two Musa's

Second: Mohammed the Prophet had a daughter Rukaiyya, and her marriage to
Othman is known, but are there documented descendants?

We may need to start a special interest group!

blauensteiner@@edvz.tuwien.ac.at (Albert Blauensteiner, Vienna)
camfield@@olympus.net (Tom Camfield, Port Townsend, Washington, USA)

Tom also has a correspondent in Norway; also one of the guys who responded
to the original Arab post, but I guess he's pretty busy on his doctorate.

Rik.

.From @@nsfnet-relay.ac.uk:rikv@@COM.MENTORG.wv Tue Jan 3 17:57:49 1995
Return-Path: <@@nsfnet-relay.ac.uk:rikv@@COM.MENTORG.wv>
Received: from gilbert.ucc.hull.ac.uk by olympus.dcs.hull.ac.uk
(4.1/1.34/indent-1.0) id AA27820; Tue, 3 Jan 95 17:57:48 GMT
Received-Date: Tue, 3 Jan 95 17:57:48 GMT
X-Queries-To: dcs@@hull.ac.uk (Department of Computer Science)
Received: from nsfnet-relay.ac.uk by gilbert.ucc.hull.ac.uk via JANET
with NIFTP (PP) id <22186-0@@gilbert.ucc.hull.ac.uk>;
Tue, 3 Jan 1995 17:59:51 +0000
Received: from newsgw.mentorg.com by sun3.nsfnet-relay.ac.uk
with Internet SMTP id <sg.15553-0@@sun3.nsfnet-relay.ac.uk>;
Tue, 3 Jan 1995 17:58:44 +0000
Received: from wv.wv.mentorg.com
by newsgw.mentorg.com (8.6.4/CF5.22R) id MAA08524;
Tue, 3 Jan 1995 12:57:26 -0500
Received: from em-wv03.wv.mentorg.com
by wv.wv.mentorg.com (8.6.8.1/CF5.22R) id JAA26858;
Tue, 3 Jan 1995 09:58:39 -0800
Received: from hptrails.MENTORG.COM
by em-wv03.wv.mentorg.com (8.6.8.1/CF5.23H) id JAA25338;
Tue, 3 Jan 1995 09:59:48 -0800
From: rikv@@COM.MENTORG.wv (Rik Vigeland)
Received: by hptrails.MENTORG.COM (1.37.109.4/CF3.4) id AA25349;
Tue, 3 Jan 95 09:58:38 -0800
Date: Tue, 3 Jan 95 09:58:38 -0800
Message-Id: <9501030958.ZM25347@@hptrails>
In-Reply-To: B.C.Tompsett@@computer-science.hull.ac.uk (Brian Tompsett) "Re: Arab Royalty > Spain > England" (Jan 3, 11:57am)
References: <9501031157.AA25104@@olympus.dcs.hull.ac.uk>
X-Mailer: Z-Mail (3.0.0 15dec93)
To: B.C.Tompsett@@uk.ac.hull.computer-science (Brian Tompsett)
Subject: Re: Arab Royalty > Spain > England
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=us-ascii
Mime-Version: 1.0
Sender: rikv@@COM.MENTORG.wv
Status: RO

Brian, I know what you mean about cross-link documentation. Wish I could get
some more & I suspect it's out there.

I have had suggested to me the following:

-- Mohammed
-- Rukaiya m. Caliph Uthman/Otman ben Affan
-- Aisha bint (d/o) Otman m. Merwan ben Hakim
-- ?? bint Merwan m. Muza ben Nuseir el-Bekra (660-718)
-- Abd-al-Aziz ibn Musa (d. 717) m. ??
There also is a claim that this fellow is a son, not grandson of
Merwan ben Hakim. (This is true in all charts I've seen -- RikV)
-- Aisha (?) m. Fortun Benqasim
-- Muza ben Fortun m. ??
-- Muza ben Muza m. ??
-- Oria Benqasi m. Fortun Garces le Borgne, King of Pamplona
(son of Garcia Iniguez)
-- Oneca Fortunez of Pamplona m. Aznar Sanchez of Larron
-- Toda m. Sancho I (865-925), King of Navarre
-- Garcia III (919-970), King of Navarre m. Andregoto, Cdsa de Aragon
-- Sancho II (935-994), King of Navarre m. Urraca, dau. of Cdr Fernando of
Castile
-- Garcia IV (964-999), King of Navarre m. Jimena Vermudez
-- Sancho III (990-1035), King of Navarre m. Munia, dau. of Sancho I of Leon


Two things you could check on for me, since I can't find my notes on Fortun &
family: Do you have any reference to Fortun's wife? He was actually a Basque
convert, but went to Damascus. Apparently (according to this data) he must
have married there. His family (Banu) was Qasi, hence Banuqasi. I also show
that Musa Ibn Musa (Musa son of Musa) married his step sister Assona Iniguez,
daughter of Jimeno of Pamplona. Jimeno married Musa Ibn Fortun's widow (not
named) and from this marriage come the early kings of Pamplona/Navarre. Any
references you have on Fortun and the two Musa's

Second: Mohammed the Prophet had a daughter Rukaiyya, and her marriage to
Othman is known, but are there documented descendants?

We may need to start a special interest group!

blauensteiner@@edvz.tuwien.ac.at (Albert Blauensteiner, Vienna)
camfield@@olympus.net (Tom Camfield, Port Townsend, Washington, USA)

Tom also has a correspondent in Norway; also one of the guys who responded
to the original Arab post, but I guess he's pretty busy on his doctorate.

Rik.

.

Sancho I Garcés (d. 925), king of Pamplona (Navarre) from 905. He expanded his kingdom south of the Ebro River and maintained its independence in spite of the sack of his capital in 924 by the Umayyad caliph 'Abd ar-Rahman III of Córdoba.

He extended his kingdom south of the Ebro River and maintained its
independence despite the sacking of his capital in 924 by 'Abd ar-Rahman III.
This is the end of this line of Kings of Navarre.

He extended his kingdom south of the Ebro River and maintained its
independence despite the sacking of his capital in 924 by 'Abd ar-Rahman III.
This is the end of this line of Kings of Navarre.

-- MERGED NOTE ------------

Wikidata: https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q914160 | Geni: https://www.geni.com/people/6000000003795473559

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]