== Notes for [[Item:Q105551|Q105551]] ==

[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gamaliel_III '''Gamaliel III''' '''רבן גמליאל השלישי''']

'''First generation of Eretz Israel Amoraim'''

Gamaliel III (Hebrew: רבן גמליאל ברבי‎, read as Rabban Gamaliel beRabbi [Son of the Rabbi], as his father, Judah I was also known by the name Rebbi; 3d century CE) was the son of Rabbi Judah haNasi (Judah I), who appointed him his successor as Nasi. Little certain is known about his activities, but it is likely that the revision of the Mishnah was completed during his era.

The Mishna Pirkey Avoth records some of his sayings:
*Rabbis should be part of the (real) world: Beautiful is the study of Torah with the way of the world, for the toil of them both causes sin to be forgotten. Ultimately, all Torah study that is not accompanied with work is destined to cease and to cause sin.
*Moral duty towards public welfare: Those who work for the community should do so for the sake of Heaven; for then the merit of their ancestors shall aid them, and their righteousness shall endure forever.
*The selfishness of politicians: Be careful of those in authority, for they will let a person near to them only for their own purposes; they act like friends when it is to their advantage, and will not stand by someone in their hour of need".
*Submission to the will of God: Make that His will should be your will, so that He should make your will to be as His will. Nullify your will before His will, so that He should nullify the will of others before your will.

He was the father of Judah II and Hillel, son of Gamaliel III.

*Preceded by Yehuda HaNasi
*Sanhedrin President: 220 CE - 230 CE
*Succeeded by Judah II

The following were Nesi'im, that is to say presidents of the Sanhedrin.

* Hillel
* Rabban Shimon ben Hillel, about whom very little is known
* Rabban Gamaliel Hazaken (Gamaliel the Elder)
* Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel
* Rabban Yochanan ben Zakai
* Rabban Gamaliel of Yavne
* Rabbi Eleazar ben Azariah, who was Nasi for a short time after Rabban Gamliel was removed from his position
* Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel of Yavne
* Rabbi Judah haNasi (Judah the Nasi), known simply as "Rabbi", who compiled the Mishnah

*<nowiki>------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------</nowiki>

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000010970419863

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]