== Notes for [[Item:Q114705|Q114705]] ==

Justa Fernández de Cea

Wife of Flaín Muñoz and mother of Fernando Fláinez.


----

===Origins

< [https://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/SPANISH%20NOBILITY%20EARLY%20MEDIEVAL.htm#FernandoFlainezdiedafter1054A Medlands] describes the first wife of FLAÍN Muñoz (-[998/11 Mar 1003]) as m ([before 975]) his first cousin, JUSTA Fernández, daughter of conde FERNANDO Vermúdez de Cea [Leon] & his wife condesa Elvira Díaz (before [955]-).

Therefore, she was not the daughter of https://www.geni.com/people/Pelayo-Rodriguez-Conde/6000000010965549819?through=6000000013433224145 & https://www.geni.com/people/Gotina-Fernandez-De-Cea/6000000010965453013?through=6000000013433224145.

However, it seems unclear whether wife Justa “Pepiz” was a nickname, a first wife, or second wife; and Medlands shows their children under “first/second wife.”


===Genealogy
< [https://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/SPANISH%20NOBILITY%20EARLY%20MEDIEVAL.htm#FernandoFlainezdiedafter1054A Medlands] >

* MUNIO Flaínez, son of FLAÍN Díaz & his wife --- (-[31 Oct 961/19 Jun 962]). … m (before 13 Aug 947) FROILOBA Vermúdez, daughter of VERMUDO Núñez Conde en Cea & his first wife Argila --- . … Munio & his wife had [five] children:


** 2. '''FLAÍN Muñoz''' (-[998/11 Mar 1003]). … [m firstly ([before 975]) his first cousin, JUSTA Fernández, daughter of conde FERNANDO Vermúdez de Cea [Leon] & his wife condesa Elvira Díaz (before [955]-). … m [secondly] (before 1 May 987) JUSTA Pépiz, daughter of [983][PEPI Alfonso/PEPI Garvísiz & his wife ---] (-after 15 Jul 1009). … Conde Flaín & his [first/second] wife had five children: (oldest 3 children of Justa Fernández de Cea at “El linaje del Cid”)
***a) MUNIO Flaínez (-after 1015).
*** b) FERNANDO Flaínez (-after 1054). "Iusta Christi ancilla…cum filiis meis Monnio Flainez, Fredenando Flaginez, Petro Flaginez, Geluira et Marina" donated "Uilla Uaica…[subtu]s Penna Meane" to Sahagún, for the soul of "viro meo Flagino Monniz", by charter dated 11 Mar 1003[996]. - OSORIO.
***c) ELVIRA Flaínez (-after 15 Jul 1009). (Younger 2 children of Justa Pepiz at “El linaje del Cid”)
*** d) PEDRO Flaínez (-[1070/72]). … m ([before 1000]) BRONILDE ---, daughter of [1027][MUNIO Velásquez & his wife Goto ---]
*** e) MARINA Flaínez (-[11 Mar 1003/15 Jul 1009]).

----

===References
* Torres Sevilla-Quiñones de León, Margarita Cecilia, "El linaje del Cid", Annals of the University of Alicante. Medieval History. n.º 13 (2000-2002). ISSN 0212-2480, pp. 343-360. < [https://rua.ua.es/dspace/bitstream/10045/6786/1/HM_13_11.pdf PDF] >
**28. His mother, Justa Fernández de Cea, was the sister of Jimena, mother of Fernando I and his own wife Elvira Peláez, the magnate's cousin, had been born from the union between Count Pelayo Rodríguez, a rebel against Vermudo II, and Gotina Fernández de Cea, sister of the previously mentioned (M. TORRE, The Kingdom of León in the X century: the county of Cea, León, 1998, pp. 130-132).
**29. For more information about this magnate and his descendants, we refer to: M. TORRE, Lineajes nobiliarios, pp. 138-153.
* < [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fernando_Bermúdez_de_Cea Wikipedia] > '''Fernando Bermúdez''' (died c. 978), the second Count of Cea, was the son of Bermudo Núñez and his wife Argilo. . … He married Elvira Díaz, daughter of Diego Muñoz, count of Saldaña, and his wife Tregidia.[7][b] They were the parents of:[8] … '''Justa Fernández''', the first wife of Count Flaín Muñoz.[11]
** 8. Torres Sevilla-Quiñones de León, Margarita Cecilia (1999). Linajes nobiliarios de León y Castilla: Siglos IX-XIII (in Spanish). alamanca: Junta de Castilla y León, Consejería de educación y cultura. ISBN 84-7846-781-5. p. 127.
** Salazar y Acha, Jaime de (1985). Una Familia de la Alta Edad Media: Los Velas y su Realidad Histórica (en Estudios Genealógicos y Heráldicos) (in Spanish). Asociación Española de Estudios Genealógicos y Heráldicos. ISBN 84-398-3591-4. Page 37.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]