== Notes for [[Item:Q57889|Q57889]] ==

a. Alonso SOSA ALBORNOZ b. 1549, Xochitla, Mex, Mex, m. (1) abt 1565, Juana RAMIREZ ORTIZ, b. abt 1550, (daughter of Gabriel RAMIREZ and __________ ORTIZ) m. (2) 1585, Beatriz NAVARRO RODRIGUEZ, b. abt 1564, (daughter of Juan NAVARRO and Maria RODRIGUEZ SOSA). Alonso died abt 1601.
* (1) Francisco ALBORNOZ RAMIREZ
* (2) Andres ALBORNOZ RAMIREZ
* (3) Cresencia ALBORNOZ RAMIREZ
* (4) Juan ALBORNOZ RAMIREZ
* (5) Ana SOSA NAVARRO m. 1611, Alonso FARIAS TREVIÑO, b. 1580, (son of Juan DE-FARIAS and Maria TREVIÑO QUINTANILLA). http://www.vsalgs.org/stnemgenealogy/alonsoes.html

==============================================

Alonso de SOSA ALBORNOZ24,2982 was born about 1549 in Xochitla, Mexico, New Spain. He died about March 1602 at the age of 53 in San Gabriel, New Mexico.2980 He was one of the Captains in the expedition which discovered and conquered New Mexico. While in New Mexico, Alonso de Sosa Albornoz asked for and received permission from Juan de Oñate to return to Nueva Viscaya because he could not provide for the needs of his family, who had accompanied him to New Mexico. Before he could return, however, he was stabbed to death by Vicente de Zaldivar and several other men. This apparently was to keep other settlers from deciding to abandon the colony in New Mexico. Parents: Francisco de SOSA ALBORNOZ and Inez de TAPIA Sosa.

Spouse: Juana RAMIREZ. Juana RAMIREZ and Alonso de SOSA ALBORNOZ were married about 1565.

Spouse: Beatriz NAVARRO. Beatriz NAVARRO and Alonso de SOSA ALBORNOZ were married about 1585. Children were: Ana de SOSA ALBORNOZ.

http://www.raullongoria.net/Genealogy/FamilyTree/b214.html#P990

=========================

'''Alonso Albbornoz de Sosa'''

Murdered in New Mexico by Vicente de Saldivar by order of Juan de Oñate.

== Carl Duaine, WITH ALL ARMS, 1987 ==

=== p. 147 ===

One of the men (muster for the expedition to New Mexico) was the Capitan Alonso de SOSA ALBORNOZ, native of Mexico, son of Francisco de SOSA ALBORNOZ, also with servants, all arms, complete with arquebus and armor. Moreover he was married, with five children, and was taking the entire family along...

A declaration made on the 5th of December, 1597, states: "Statement of what I, Captain Alonso de SOSA ALBORNOZ, am taking on this expedition (ONATE, 1597) to New Mexico: First, two coats of mail, two cuisses, and two helmets, two sets of horse armor, two arquebuses, thirty-five horses; twenty colts, sixty-five oxen; thirty steer, eighty tame milk cows; seven carts, two iron bars, six wedges, five axes, two saws, two chisels, three augers, three adzes, eight hoes; one sledge hammer, one bell, thirty sickles, three jinete saddles, one estradiota saddle; one iron chain with eight collars, one sword and dagger, one halbert, five hundred sheep, eight goats, four padlocks; one strong leather jacket, six bridles, six pairs of spurs. This declaration does not include my silks, clothes, silver, or jewels, or those of my wife, Dona Beatriz de NAVARRO, because I do not wish to include them here. Besides the cattle and war materials that I am listing and which I possess now, an equal part have been used up, stolen, or lost because of the delay in the expedition. I swear by God in the due legal manner.“ Signed: Alonso de SOSA ALBORNOZ.

In addition the Captain declared four dozen pairs of shoes, four pairs of buskins, four pairs of Flemish boots, six pairs of those made here, and twenty-five quintals of flour.

=== p. 149 ===

One of the propertied men, Captain Alonso de SOSA ALBORNOZ, not only despaired of the new country supporting his herds but he took offense at certain intrusions into his home of the Captain Vicente SALDIVAR. Don Alonso was described earlier as near fifty, with greying hair, of dark complexion, and of medium size. He was married to a beautiful woman of good family, Dona Beatriz NAVARRO, and they had five children at the start of the expedition in 1597.

By the time Don Bernabe (de la CASAS) arrived with the reinforcements at the end of the year of 1600, Don Alonso had asked permission to return to Mexico with his possessions and family. This was refused at first and then under pressure, Onate granted the request. Shortly afterwards he had Don Alonso treacherously killed. ....

...Don Alonso de SOSA ALBORNOZ had relatives in the command. There was don Francisco de SOSA PENLOSA who at one time was second-in-command. He was either a brother of Don Alonso or a close relative. If Don Juan executed Don Alonso, as he had the technical right to do, he invited sure rebellion. On the other hand, if he allowed the Captain de SOSA ALBORNOZ to depart, it was likely to doom the expedition and place the lives of the entire army in jeopardy. It was a hard decision for don Juan ONATE to make.

He decided to have Don Alonso killed, but secretly, so he granted the Captain permission to leave but ordered a hunt to be made for some horses, and several men responded. In gratitude for the Governor’s permission to leave and as a good soldier, Don Alonso was one to volunteer. About six miles from the camp, Don Alonso was riding alone down a canyon looking for the horses. Several men ambushed him, killed him, and buried him on the spot.

But such a secret could not be kept. Soon it was whispered through the camp that the Captain de SOSA ALBORNOZ had been killed by an order from the Governor, Juan de ONATE, and at the hand of Vicente de SALDIVAR, his Master of the camp - a kind of executive officer.

This last made sense as Don Vicente was a first-class hatchet man. He had put down two Indian revolts bloodily and was a man of determination, with a lot at stake personally. Also one of the reasons given by Don Alonso de SOSA ALBORNOZ for desiring to leave to go back to Zacatecas was his complaint that Captain Vicente de SALDIVAR was seeking to seduce Dona Beatriz de NAVARRO, his wife. It certainly made an awkward situation whether due to a figment of jealous imagination or the real thing. Don Vicente was a nephew of the Governor and second-in-command. However, there seems some room for doubt as to the seriousness of the intrigue as Dona Maria de SOSA, a daughter of Don Alonso, later married Vicente SALDIVAR REZA, a close relative to the Vicente SALDIVAR of New Mexico. And Don Bernabe de las CASAS, later in Nuevo Leon, spoke very affectionately of this Vicente SALDIVAR REZA as his “nephew.”

=== p. 208 ===

Then there was the severe punishment of deserters and the murder of Captains Alonso de SOSA ALBORNOZ and Pablo AGUILAR. It was the murder-execution of Pablo AGUILAR that Don Alonso NUNEZ de HINOJOSA had protested at the time. As has been mentioned earlier, the Captain de SOSA was killed while out riding alone, and the responsibility had never been determined. Some of the Captains had been implicated in the death of de SOSA, but not HINOJOSA.

== Marc Simmons, ''THE LAST CONQUISTADOR - JUAN ONATE AND THE SETTLING OF THE FAR SOUTHWEST'', 1991 ==

=== p. 159 ===

He (Captain Velasco) is the only source as well for the details surrounding another slaying, at about the same time -- that of Captain Alonso de Sosa Albornoz, a man in his early fifties who had brought his wife (Beatriz Navarro Rodriguez) and five children to New Mexico. When he asked Onate for permission to return to Nueva Vizcaya, he stated as the reason that this kingdom on the Rio Grande was too poor to support his family. After the governor appeared to acquiesce and gave his consent, Captain Sosa began the process of packing up his cart. Before he could depart, however, he was sent into the countryside with other men to round up horses. Two leagues from camp, the captain was attacked by Vicente de Zaldivar (Onate’s nephew) and several accomplices who stabbed him to death and then hid the body under a pile of stones. “In view of this incident,” comments Velasco, “the relatives of Captain Sosa did not again ask for permission to leave.”

=== p. 188 ===

His (Onate) crimes included....executing Captains Pablo de Aguilar and Alonso de Sosa de Albornoz...

== Guillermo Garmendia Leal, ''DIEGO DE MONTEMAYOR, SUS DESCENDIENTES'', Monterrey,
N.L., July, 1993 ==

=== p. 21 ===

Garmendia's Descendancy Chart indicates that Alonso ALBORNOZ, first husband of Beatriz NAVARRO, was born in1550 and died in1601.

== Rodolfo Gonzalez de la Garza, ''MIL FAMILIAS DE TAM., N. LEON, COAH, Y TEXAS'', Tomo III, 1998 (translation) ==

=== p. 85 ===

Alonso SOSA TAPIA, born in 1549 in Xochil, Mexico, died in New Mexico. Dark complexion and gray hair. On expedition to New Mexico, he took his wife and five children, 35 horses, 67 oxen, 30 bulls, 80 cows, 500 sheep, 80 goats. Son of Francisco SOSA GUEVARA and Ines TAPIA SOSA. Married (1) Juana RAMIREZ ORTIZ, daughter of Gabriel RAMIREZ, (2) Beatriz NAVARRO RODRIGUEZ. Children by first wife: Andres, Francisco, Crescencia, Juan. Children by second wife: Ana de SOSA. (Archivo General de la Nacion R de M.C. Reales (Royal) Dup. V41 C., and Pobladores (Settlers), by Francisco FERNANDEZ CASTILLO).

=== p. 475 ===

Alonso SOSA TAPIA, born in 1549, son of Francisco SOSA GUEVARA. Grandson of ALONSO de SOSA ESTRADA. The latter was the son of Treasurer ALONSO DE ESTRADA. (See Linea de los Reyes en APPELLIDOS).

== Esquibel, Jose Antonio, “Tragedy Among Onate’s Colony: A Chronicle of the Sosa Albornoz Family,” Nuestra Raices, Genealogical Society of Hispanic America, Spring 1998, Vol. 10, No. 1 ==

=== p. 3 ===

The Sosa Albornoz y Tapia Family
The earliest known paternal ancestor of don Alonso de Sosa Albornoz was Capitan don Alonso de Sosa, a Knight of the Order of Calatrava, and Senor de Villa Borquelo in the region of Toledo, Spain, who served in the wars of Granada in the latter part of the fifteenth century. 1 He was remembered as being a descendant of Prince don Alfonso Dinis (Dionis) of Portugal, the trunk of the Sosa family. 2

Don Francisco and dona Inez became the parents of don Alonso de Sosa Albornoz, a native of Mexico City born circa 1550, who eventually joined Onate’s colonizing expedition. 5

== Jose Antonio Esquibel, “The Paternal Ancestry of Don Alonso de ESTRADA, Tesorero y Gobernador de Nueva Espana, and the revised genealogy of the SOSA ALBORNOZ family”, SHHAR GENEALOGICAL JOURNAL, Vol. 14, 1998 ==

=== p. 15 ===

Capitan don Alonso de SOSA ALBORNOZ was a native of Mexico City according to his account when he was recruited in early 1597 at La Puana in the jurisdiction of Nombre de Dios, Nueva Vizcaya, for the expedition to New Mexico. He was a son of don Francisco de SOSA ALBORNOZ and dona Inez de TAPIA. It has been erroneously concluded that the SOSA ALBORNOZ family was descended of don Alonso de ESTRADA, Tesorero de Nueva Espana, as follows:

=== p. 16 ===

4. Don Alonso de SOSA ALBORNOZ md. first to dona Juana RAMIREZ; married secondly to dona Beatriz NAVARRO.

=== p. 17 ===

And, that the said Alonso de SOSA, his father, was one of the captains named in the discovery and conquest of New Mexico, and he took his wife and children, taking carts with much supplies, arms, ammunition, and soldiers with arms and horses, all at his expense; and he constructed houses in the first settlement of San Juan de los Caballereos and in the second named San Pedro. For all of this he sold his estate, for which he obtained more than 60,000 pesos, all of which he expended, leaving his children poor when he died...

......that he [Andres] is the legitimate son of Captain Alonso de Sosa Albornoz and dona Juana Ramirez, and grandson, through the paternal side, of Francisco de Sosa Albornoz and of dona Ines de Tapia, his wife, and great-grandson of Esteban de Sosa and Dona Ana de Albornoz, and on his maternal side, a grandson of Gabriel Ramirez. The said dona Ines de Tapia, his grandmother, was a daughter of Andres de Tapia, Conquistador, pacificator, and settler of this Nueva Espana and City of Mexico, Teniente de Capitan General and Maestre de Campo in the said conquest; and who came here in the company of Hernando Cortes, first Marques del Valle. And, that the said Francisco de Sosa Albornoz, his grandfather, was one of the discoverers, conquistadors, and pacificators of the kingdoms of Nueva Galicia and Nueva Vizcaya, serving his majesty in the said provinces at his own cost, and was among the first Alcalde Mayores in the royal mines of Spain, San Martin, and Sombrerete, and he settled in the valley of Xuchil, the royal mines of Chalchiguites, and Villa de Nombre de Dios, in which he spent a considerable amount of his estate. And, the said Andres de SOSA assisted with his father in the said conquest and pacification of New Mexico Participating in all the entradas and affrays, and on many occasions that were offered, he carried out the orders that were given as a good soldier. And, the above said, and his antecedents, served His majesty and were notable persons, caballeros hijosdalgos, etc., old Christians without stain, nor Moorish blood, nor Jewish, nor of the newly converted to our Holy Catholic Faith, and as such noble persons they guarded and kept all the exemptions, liberties, and exceptions that the noble hijosdalgos enjoy, according to the law of Spain, in company of the said Captain Alonso de SOSA ALBORNOZ, his father. .....Mexico City, 23 May 1651.

=== p. 18 ===

Apparently, don Alonso de SOSA ALBORNOZ met and married dona Beatriz Navarro when he was in Nuevo Leon. Dona Beatriz became the stepmother to the children from don Alonso’s first marriage, and herself became the mother of dona Ana de SOSA ALBORNOZ. When don Alonso volunteered for the expedition to New Mexico in February 1597 he declared that “He is married, has five children, and is taking the entire family along.” Don Alonso had sold his estate in order to finance his family’s participation in the promising colonizing venture into New Mexico. Committed to this endeavor, the SOSA ALBORNOZ family settled in New Mexico, but after several years of insignificant discoveries and tolerating miserable living conditions, this family was ready to return to their former home. After being granted permission to leave New Mexico by don Juan de Onate, don Alonso was murdered in early 1601 by Onate’s order. Less than ten months later, his relatives, his children and his widow with her new husband, Captain Bernabe de la CASAS, were part of a large group of disgruntled colonizers who fled New Mexico while Onate was away from the settlement of San Gabriel. In later years, ONATE would be tried and found guilty in the murder of don Alonso de SOSA ALBORNOZ.

The older children of don Alonso appear to have settled in Mexico City. Dona Beatriz Navarro returned to the region of her origin, Saltillo, and settled with her second husband in the area of Monterrey.

In light of the above information, it is important for descendants of he Sosa Albornoz to correct the erroneous genealogy which connected this family with that of don Alonso de Estrada, Tesorero de Nueva Espana. Additional research can now be conducted on the Sosa Albornoz ancestors in the region of Toledo, Spain. Perhaps other researchers will be able to confirm whether or not this branch of the Sosa family was indeed descended of Infante don Alfonso Dionis of Portugal.

== Jose Antonio Esquibel, Website: Beyond Origins of New Mexico Families, Beyond ONMF Volume 7, 2001 ==

Sosa Albornoz
Capitan don Alonso de Sosa Albornoz enlisted as a soldier in the army of don Juan de Onate, passing muster on February 10, 1597, in the Valle de Pauna in the jurisdiction of Nombre de Dios. He declared he was a native of "Mexico" and a son of Francisco de Sosa Albornoz. In his company was his wife and five children (Hammond and Rey: 165).

Information recorded in 1635 (Mexico City) and 1651 (Mexico City) by a son of don Alonso de Sosa Albornoz combined with additional information recorded in 1667 by a grandson and the 1540 record of passage of don Franciso de Sosa Albornoz provides a valuable account of the lineage of the Sosa Albornoz family, which originated in the region of Toledo, Spain:

1. Capitan don Alonso de Sosa, Senor de Villa Borquelo in the region of Toledo, Caballero del Orden de Calatrava, served the Catholic Monarchs (Fernando y Isabel) as alferez in the wars of Granada. He was the father of Esteban de Sosa, who follows.

2. Don Esteban de Sosa married with dona Ana de Albornoz, residents of Santa Olalla (region of Toledo). They were the parents of Francisco de Sosa Albornoz, who follows, and Esteban de Sosa.

3. Don Francisco de Sosa Albornoz, native of Toledo, Spain, sought passage to the New World with his brother on April 7, 1540. In Mexico City, don Francisco married dona Ines de Tapia, daughter of don Andres de Tapia (conquistador de Mexico) and dona Isabel de Sosa. Their son was don Alonso de Sosa Albornoz, who follows.

4. Don Alonso de Sosa Albornoz (b.ca. 1550, Mexico City), first married with dona Juana Ramirez, daughter of don Gabriel Ramirez and dona Petra Ortiz de la Vega. One known son of this couple was don Andres de Tapia y Sosa.

[Note: Mexican genealogist Rodolfo Gonzalez de la Garza published an incorrect lineage that linked the Sosa Albornoz with the family of don Alonso de Estrada, Treasurer and Governor of New Spain. The above lineage is based on primary records for which source are provided below.]

Don Alonso de Sosa Albornoz was married a second time with dona Beatriz Navarro, daughter of Juan Navarro and Maria Rodriguez Castano de Sosa. This couple became the parents of dona Ana de Sosa Albornoz. In March 1602, don Alosno de Sosa Albornoz sought permission to leave New Mexico and return to his former estate in the south. Don Alonso was killed near San Gabriel and his widow, dona Beatriz Navarro, became the wife of Capitan don Bernabe de las Casas. Leaving New Mexico in October 1602, Casas and Navarro came to settle in the area of Saltillo-Monterrey where the family of dona Beatriz resided.

A marriage investigation record dated January 21, 1653, Monterrey (Nuevo Leon) confirms that don Alonso de Sosa Albornoz and dona Beatriz Navarro were married and identifies their daughter as dona Ana de Sosa. The record provides this lineage:

1. Capitan don Alosno de Sosa married with dona Beatriz Navarro, vecinos del Nuevo Mexico and the parents of dona Ana de Sosa, who follows.

2. Dona Ana de Sosa married with Alferez Alonso de Farias, son of Capitan Juan de Farias (vecino de Terreno y Minas de Mazapil) and dona Maria de Trevino y Quintanilla. Dona Ana de Sosa and don Alonso de Farias were the parents of dona Maria de Sosa, who follows.

3. Dona Maria de Sosa married Captain don Vicente de Zaldivar y Resa, son of don Juan Guerra de Resa and dona Magdalena de Mendoza (a niece of don Juan de Onate). Dona Maria de Sosa and don Vicente de Zaldivar y Resa were the parents of dona Margarita de Sosa y Zaldivar, who follows.

4. Dona Margarita de Sosa y Zaldivar married in 1653, Monterey, Nuevo Leon with don Diego de Ayala, vecino de Monterrey and an encomendero, son of Capitan don Jose de Trevino y Quintanilla and dona Leonor de Ayala.

==============================================

28. CAPTAIN ALONSO8 DE SOSA-ALBORNOZ (FRANCISCO7 DE SOSA-GUEVARA-Y-ALBORNOZ, ESTEBAN6 DE SOSA-GUEVARA, JUAN-ALONSO5 DE ESTRADA, ANA4 ESTRADA-DE-LA-CABALLERIA, ALONSO3 DE ESTRADA, FERDINAND II (THE2 CATHOLIC), JOHN II OF1 ARAGON) was born Abt. 1549 in Xochitle, Mexico F.D., Mexico, and died Abt. 1601 in Murdered at San Gabriel, New Mexico. He married (1) JUANA RAMIREZ-ORTIZ-DE-LA-VEGA, daughter of GABRIEL RAMIREZ. He married (2) MARIA-BEATRIZ NAVARRO-RODRIGUEZ-CASTANO-SOSA 1593 in Mexico City, D.F., Mexico, daughter of JUAN NAVARRO and MARIA RODRIGUEZ-DE-SOSA. She was born Abt. 1575, and died Dec 1674 in Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.
Notes for CAPTAIN ALONSO DE SOSA-ALBORNOZ: Murder of a Member of the 1598 New Mexico Expedition A native of New Spain, Captain Alonso Sosa Albornoz, one of the founders of the mines at San Martin, was born in 1550 at Xochitla, New Spain (Mexico). He was the son of Don Francisco de Sosa Albornoz and Dona Inés de Tapia and a descendent of the Royal Treasurer of New Spain, Don Alonso de Estrada, the Duke of Aragon. He was married twice. His first marriage occurred in 1565 to Dona Juana Ramirez, a native of New Spain, and born about 1550. After the death of his first wife, Captain Alonso married the Dona Beatris Navarro Rodriguez. This marriage took place on or about 1589 in Mexico City. Dona Beatris was much younger than her husband, having been born in 1564. She was the daughter of Don Juan Navarro and Dona Maria Rodriguez Captain Alonso is listed on the January 8, 1598 muster of the officials and soldiers who enlisted in the Valley of La Puana for Governor Don Juan de Onate's expedition into New Mexico. On the muster, his belongings included a servant, harquebus (a early type of portable gun supported on a hooked staff), and complete armor plate for himself and his horse. Also in this expedition was his wife Dona Beatriz and their five children. It is possable that his children from his previous marriage may have also accompanied him. By the time of this expedition these children would have been older than eighteen years and could have gone their separate ways. As one of New Mexico's first settlers, he would be executed for requesting to be transfer back to New Spain. This settlement was located in the far frontier of Spain's vast Empire. Finding itself removed from all civilization, this harsh land was rendering the settlers to extreme hardships. Not wanting to endure any further hardship, Captain Alonso asked for permission to return his family to New Spain. At first his request had granted, but apparently to prevent a mutiny, the governor had second thoughts. It is recorded that Governor Juan de Oñate ordered Don Alonso's killing and in 1601, under the command of Don Vicente de Zaldivar, Captain Alonso was ambushed and killed. After Don Alonso's death, and finding herself completely vulnerable in a hostile and remote environment, Dona Beatris would married a native of Tenerife, Canary Island, Spain, Captain Bernabe de las Casas. This marriage took place in New Mexico. This marriage provided her the security and protection for her and her five children. Her marriage to Bernabe would add five additional children. Captain Alonso Sosa Albornoz and Dona Beatris Navarro Rodriguez had the following child: Ana Sosa Albornoz was born in Mexico around 1590. She married Alonso Farias Treviño in Nuevo León. He was the son of Don Juan Farias and Dona Maria de Treviño Quintanilla. There are many descendants of Captain Alonso who are the progeny of his daughter, Ana Sosa Albornoz. A.K.A. Alonso Albornoz de Sosa and Alonso de Sosa Panalosa Source: Agapito Rey and George Hammond, Don Juan de Oñate Colonizer of New México 1595 - 1628 (Coronado Historical Series: The University of New México Press, 1953); New México Historical Review The Founding of New México. A History of New Mexico by Gaspar Perez de Villagra, Alcala - 1610, translated by Gilberto Espinosa. In the book, Mil Familias III, by Rodolfo Gonzalez de la Garza, he is listed as a descendent of the Don Alonso of Estrada, Duke of Aragon. Page 85. New Mexico's First Colonists, compiled and arranged by David H. Snow. Land of the Conquistador by Cleve Hallenbeck. Notes for MARIA-BEATRIZ NAVARRO-RODRIGUEZ-CASTANO-SOSA: A.K.A. Beatriz de Navarro. She was widowed with five children. Source:From the book, New Mexico's First Colonists, compiled and arranged by David H. Snow. Marriage Notes for ALONSO DE SOSA-ALBORNOZ and MARIA-BEATRIZ NAVARRO-RODRIGUEZ-CASTANO-SOSA: Marriage source from the book, Mil Familias III by Rodolfo Gonzalez de la Garza. Page 25. Children of ALONSO DE SOSA-ALBORNOZ and JUANA RAMIREZ-ORTIZ-DE-LA-VEGA are: 44. i. ANDRES9 DE SOSA-Y-TAPIA, d. Mexico City, F.D., Mexico. ii. FRANCISCO ALBORNOZ-RAMIREZ. iii. CRESENCIA ALBORNOZ-RAMIREZ. iv. JUAN ALBORNOZ-RAMIREZ. Child of ALONSO DE SOSA-ALBORNOZ and MARIA-BEATRIZ NAVARRO-RODRIGUEZ-CASTANO-SOSA is: 45. v. MARIA-ANA9 DE SOSA-ALBORNOZ-NAVARRO, b. 1594; d. near Santa Fe, New Mexico

http://www.somosprimos.com/inclan/estrada.htm

--------------------

Children of Alonso Albornes Estrada and Beatriz Navarro Rodriguez are:
* +Ana De Sosa Albornoz, b. 1570, Asturias, Espana1, 1, d. date unknown, Nuevo Leon1, 1.

Children of Alonso Albornes Estrada are:
* Ana De Sosa Rodriguez, d. date unknown.
* Alonso Albornoz Sosa, b. 15801, d. date unknown.
* Ana De Sosa Navarro, b. 1590, Nuevo Leon1, d. date unknown.

Children of Alonso Albornes Estrada and Juana Ortiz Ramirez are:
* Cresencia Ramirez Sosa, d. date unknown.
* Andres Ramirez Sosa, d. date unknown.
* Francisco Ramirez Sosa, d. date unknown.
* Juan Ramirez Sosa, d. date unknown .
http://familytreemaker.genealogy.com/users/m/a/r/Andres-J-Martnez-faras/WEBSITE-0001/UHP-1685.html

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]