== Notes for Q971 ==

<b>Cryophantos</b>
<p>("Cryo" for ice, representing the icy environments associated with Grylloblattodea, and "Phantos" for a phantom or warrior spirit, reflecting the gladiatorial prowess of Mantophasmatodea and the mystical stealth of the other clades.)<b>Myth of Cryophantos:</b>
<p>In the age when the <b>Primordial Arthroplane</b> was a realm of extremes, where icy winds clashed with scorching deserts and lush forests thrived beside barren wastelands, the first <b>Cryophantos</b> was born. A being of remarkable adaptability, Cryophantos was neither wholly insect nor beast, but a creature blessed by the <b>Elemental Sixfold</b>, the ancient spirits of Ice, War, Shadow, Craft, Deceit, and Community.<b>The Legend of the Six Trials:</b>
<p>The spirits of the <b>Elemental Sixfold</b> decreed that Cryophantos would prove their worth as the <b>Ancestor of Many Forms</b> through six great trials, each representing one of the elemental virtues that would shape their descendants:
<p>1.</p>
<p><b>Trial of Ice (Grylloblattodea):</b></p>
<p>Cryophantos ventured to the frozen peaks of <b>Eternus Glacier</b>, where they survived the harshest cold, proving their endurance. From their resilience, the <b>Ice Crawlers</b> emerged, thriving in the chill of forgotten realms.
<p>2.</p>
<p><b>Trial of War (Mantophasmatodea):</b></p>
<p>In the <b>Crimson Colosseum</b>, Cryophantos faced the Gladiator Spirits, mastering the art of combat and cunning. Their ferocity birthed the <b>Gladiators</b>, a lineage of warriors who embodied strength and strategy.
<p>3.</p>
<p><b>Trial of Shadow (Phasmatodea):</b></p>
<p>Cryophantos was sent into the <b>Twilight Grove</b>, where they became invisible among the trees and shadows, blending seamlessly to avoid predation. Thus were born the <b>Stick Insects</b>, masters of camouflage and survival.
<p>4.</p>
<p><b>Trial of Craft (Embioptera):</b></p>
<p>To pass the test of Craft, Cryophantos wove a palace of silk strong enough to house the winds of a storm. The <b>Webspinners</b> arose from their ingenuity, becoming architects of the finest threads.
<p>5.</p>
<p><b>Trial of Deceit (Mantodea):</b></p>
<p>In the <b>Garden of Deception</b>, Cryophantos learned to mimic and deceive, feigning piety to trick the spirit of Deceit. This gave rise to the <b>Mantises</b>, masters of ambush and predatory deception.
<p>6.</p>
<p><b>Trial of Community (Blattodea):</b></p>
<p>Finally, in the <b>Cavern of Endless Halls</b>, Cryophantos united disparate creatures into a harmonious colony to survive an overwhelming threat. The spirits saw their success, and from this act came the <b>Cockroaches and Termites</b>, rulers of communal strength and cooperation.<b>The Legacy of Cryophantos:</b>
<p>At the culmination of the trials, Cryophantos was said to have dissolved into the elements, their essence scattered across the world to infuse their descendants with their virtues. The clades of Cryophantos are diverse, each embodying a fragment of their ancestor’s spirit:
<p>• <b>Grylloblattodea</b> inherited endurance through ice.</p>
<p>• <b>Mantophasmatodea</b> carried the spirit of warriors.</p>
<p>• <b>Phasmatodea</b> became phantoms of the forest.</p>
<p>• <b>Embioptera</b> spun the webs of ingenuity.</p>
<p>• <b>Mantodea</b> mastered ambush and precision.</p>
<p>• <b>Blattodea</b> built empires of unity.</p>
<p>To this day, Cryophantos is honored in myths as the unifying ancestor of both strength and subtlety, whose trials defined the survival and adaptability of their many children.


[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]