== Notes for [[Item:Q87640|Q87640]] ==

King of Pontus, in modern-day northern Turkey. From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
* [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_kings_of_Pontus '''List of Kings of Pontus''']
* [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mithridates_VI_of_Pontus '''Mithridates VI of Pontus''']
* [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mithridatism '''Mithridatism''']

Mithridates VI or Mithradates VI ([pronunciation?]; Greek: Μιθραδάτης, Μιθριδάτης),[2] from Old Persian Miθradāta, "gift of Mithra"; 135–63 BC, also known as Mithradates the Great (Megas) and Eupator Dionysius, was king of Pontus and Armenia Minor in northern Anatolia (now Turkey) from about 120–63 BC. Mithridates is remembered as one of the Roman Republic’s most formidable and successful enemies, who engaged three of the prominent generals from the late Roman Republic in the Mithridatic Wars: Lucius Cornelius Sulla, Lucius Licinius Lucullus and Gnaeus Pompey Magnus. He is often considered the greatest ruler of the Kingdom of Pontus.[3]
--------------------
'''
=Mithridates VI of Pontus=
'''

Mithridates VI or Mithradates VI ; Greek: Μιθραδάτης, Μιθριδάτης), from Old Persian Miθradāta, "gift of Mithra"; 135–63 BC, also known as Mithradates the Great (Megas) and Eupator Dionysius, was king of Pontus and Armenia Minor in northern Anatolia (now Turkey) from about 120–63 BC. Mithridates is remembered as one of the Roman Republic’s most formidable and successful enemies, who engaged three of the prominent generals from the late Roman Republic in the Mithridatic Wars: Lucius Cornelius Sulla, Lucius Licinius Lucullus and Gnaeus Pompey Magnus. He is often considered the greatest ruler of the Kingdom of Pontus.

'''Ancestry, family and early life'''

Mithridates VI was a prince of Persian and Greek ancestry. He claimed descent from Cyrus the Great, the family of Darius the Great, the Regent Antipater, the generals of Alexander the Great as well as the later kings Antigonus I Monophthalmus and Seleucus I Nicator.

Mithridates was born in the Pontic city of Sinope, and was raised in the Kingdom of Pontus. He was the first son among the children born to Laodice VI and Mithridates V of Pontus (reigned 150–120 BC). His father, Mithridates V, was a prince and the son of the former Pontic Monarchs Pharnaces I of Pontus and his wife-cousin Nysa. His mother, Laodice VI, was a Seleucid Princess and the daughter of the Seleucid Monarchs Antiochus IV Epiphanes and his wife-sister Laodice IV.

Mithridates V was assassinated in about 120 BC in Sinope, poisoned by unknown persons at a lavish banquet which he held. He left the kingdom to the joint rule of Mithridates' mother, Laodice VI, Mithridates, and his younger brother, Mithridates Chrestus. Neither Mithridates nor his younger brother were of age, and their mother retained all power as regent for the time being. Laodice VI’s regency over Pontus was from 120 BC to 116 BC (even perhaps up to 113 BC) and favored Mithridates Chrestus over Mithridates. During his mother’s regency, he escaped from his mother's plots against him, and went into hiding.

Mithridates emerged from hiding, returning to Pontus between 116 BC and 113 BC and was hailed as king. He removed his mother and brother from the throne, imprisoning both, becoming the sole ruler of Pontus. Laodice VI died in prison, ostensibly of natural causes. Mithridates Chrestus may have died in prison also, or may have been tried for treason and executed. Mithridates gave both royal funerals. Mithridates first married his younger sister Laodice, aged 16. His goal was to preserve the purity of their bloodline, solidify his claim to the throne, to co-rule over Pontus, and to ensure the succession to his legitimate children.

'''Early reign'''

Mithridates entertained ambitions of making his state the dominant power in the Black Sea and Anatolia. He first subjugated Colchis, a region east of the Black Sea, and prior to 164 BC, an independent kingdom. He then clashed for supremacy on the Pontic steppe with the Scythian King Palacus. The most important centres of Crimea, Tauric Chersonesus and the Bosporan Kingdom readily surrendered their independence in return for Mithridates' promises to protect them against the Scythians, their ancient enemies. After several abortive attempts to invade the Crimea, the Scythians and the allied Rhoxolanoi suffered heavy losses at the hands of the Pontic general Diophantus and accepted Mithridates as their overlord. The young king then turned his attention to Anatolia, where Roman power was on the rise. He contrived to partition Paphlagonia and Galatia with King Nicomedes III of Bithynia. It soon became clear to Mithridates that Nicomedes was steering his country into an anti-Pontic alliance with the expanding Roman Republic. When Mithridates fell out with Nicomedes over control of Cappadocia, and defeated him in a series of battles, the latter was constrained to openly enlist the assistance of Rome. The Romans twice interfered in the conflict on behalf of Nicomedes (95–92 BC), leaving Mithridates, should he wish to continue the expansion of his kingdom, with little choice other than to engage in a future Roman-Pontic war.

'''Mithridatic Wars'''

The next ruler of Bithynia, Nicomedes IV of Bithynia, was a figurehead manipulated by the Romans. Mithridates plotted to overthrow him, but his attempts failed and Nicomedes IV, instigated by his Roman advisors, declared war on Pontus. Rome itself was involved in the Social War, a civil war with its Italian allies. Thus, in all of Roman Asia Province there were only two legions present in Macedonia. These legions combined with Nicomedes IV's army to invade Mithridates' kingdom of Pontus in 89 BC. Mithridates, however, won a decisive victory, scattering the Roman-led forces. His victorious forces were welcomed throughout Anatolia. The following year, 88 BC, Mithridates orchestrated a massacre of Roman and Italian settlers remaining in several Anatolian cities, essentially wiping out the Roman presence in the region. This episode is known as the Asiatic Vespers. The Kingdom of Pontus comprised a mixed population in its Ionian Greek and Anatolian cities. The royal family moved the capital from Amasya to the Greek city of Sinope. Its rulers tried to fully assimilate the potential of their subjects by showing a Greek face to the Greek world and an Iranian/Anatolian face to the Eastern world. Whenever the gap between the rulers and their Anatolian subjects became greater, they would put emphasis on their Persian origins. In this manner, the royal propaganda claimed heritage both from Persian and Greek rulers, including Cyrus the Great, Darius I of Persia, Alexander the Great and Seleucus I Nicator. Mithridates too posed as the champion of Hellenism, but this was mainly to further his political ambitions; it is no proof that he felt a mission to promote its extension within his domains. Whatever his true intentions, the Greek cities (including Athens) defected to the side of Mithridates and welcomed his armies in mainland Greece, while his fleet besieged the Romans at Rhodes. Neighboring King of Armenia Tigranes the Great, established an alliance with Mithridates and married one of Mithridates’ daughters, Cleopatra of Pontus. They would support each other in the coming conflict with Rome.

The Romans responded by organising a large invasion force to defeat him and remove him from power.The First Mithridatic War, fought between 88 BC and 84 BC, saw Lucius Cornelius Sulla force Mithridates VI out of Greece proper. After victory in several battles, Sulla received news of trouble back in Rome posed by his enemy Gaius Marius and hurriedly concluded peace talks with Mithridates. As Sulla returned to Italy Lucius Licinius Murena was left in charge of Roman forces in Anatolia. The lenient peace treaty, which was never ratified by the Senate, allowed Mithridates VI to recoup his forces. Murena attacked Mithridates in 83 BC, provoking the Second Mithridatic War from 83 BC to 81 BC. Mithridates scored a victory over Murena's green forces before peace was again declared by treaty.

When Rome attempted to annex Bithynia (bequested to Rome by its last king) nearly a decade later, Mithridates VI attacked with an even larger army, leading to the Third Mithridatic War from 73 BC to 63 BC. First Lucullus and then Pompey were sent against Mithridates VI, who surged back to retake his kingdom of Pontus, but was at last defeated by Pompey. After Pompey defeated him in Pontus in 66 BC, Mithridates VI fled with a small army to Colchis (modern Georgia) and then over the Caucasus Mountains to Crimea and made plans to raise yet another army to take on the Romans. His eldest living son, Machares, viceroy of Cimmerian Bosporus, was unwilling to aid his father. Mithridates had Machares killed, and Mithridates took the throne of the Bosporan Kingdom. Mithridates then ordered the conscriptions and preparations for war. In 63 BC, Pharnaces II of Pontus, one of his sons, led a rebellion against his father, joined by Roman exiles in the core of Mithridates' Pontic army. Mithridates withdrew to the citadel in Panticapaeum, where he committed suicide. Pompey buried Mithridates in the rock-cut tombs of his ancestors in Amasya, the old capital of Pontus.

'''Assassination conspiracy'''

During the time of the First Mithridatic War, a group of Mithridates' friends plotted to kill him. These were Mynnio and Philotimus of Smyrna, and Cleisthenes and Asclepiodotus of Lesbos. Asclepiodotus changed his mind and became an informant. He arranged to have Mithridates hide under a couch to hear the plot against him. The other conspirators were tortured and executed. However, this was not enough for Mithridates, who also killed all of the plotters' families and friends.

'''Propaganda'''

Where his ancestors pursued philhellenism as a means of attaining respectability and prestige among the Hellenistic kingdoms, Mithridates VI made use of Hellenism as a political tool. As protector of Greek cities on the Black Sea and in Asia against barbarism, Mithridates VI logically became protector of Greece and Greek culture, and would use this stance in his clashes with Rome. Strabo mentions that Chersonesus buckled under the pressure of the barbarians and asked Mithridates VI to become its protector (7.4.3. c.308). The most impressive symbol of Mithridates VI's approbation with Greece (Athens in particular) appears at Delos: a heroon dedicated to the Pontic king in 102/1 by the Athenian Helianax, a priest of Poseidon Aisios. A dedication at Delos, by Dicaeus, a priest of Sarapis, was made in 94/93 BC on behalf of the Athenians, Romans, and "King Mithridates Eupator Dionysus." Greek styles mixed with Persian elements also abound on official Pontic coins – Perseus was favored as an intermediary between both worlds, East and West. Certainly influenced by Alexander the Great, Mithridates VI extended his propaganda from "defender" of Greece to the "great liberator" of the Greek world as war with Roman Republic became inevitable. The Romans were easily translated into "barbarians", in the same sense as the Persian Empire during the war with Persia in the first half of the 5th century BC and during Alexander's campaign. How many Greeks genuinely bought into this claim will never be known. It served its purpose, however. At least partially because of it, Mithridates VI was able to fight the First War with Rome on Greek soil, and maintain the allegiance of Greece. His campaign for the allegiance of the Greeks was aided in no small part by his enemy Sulla, who allowed his troops to sack the city of Delphi and plunder many of the city's most famous treasures to help finance his military expenses.

'''Death'''

After Pompey defeated him in Pontus, Mithridates VI fled to the lands north of the Black Sea in the winter of 66 BCE in the hope that he could raise a new army and carry on the war. However, his preparations proved to be too harsh on the local nobles and populace, and they rebelled against his rule. He allegedly attempted suicide by poison; this attempt failed, however, because of his immunity to the poison. According to Appian's Roman History, he then requested his Gaulish bodyguard and friend, Bituitus, to kill him by the sword:

''Mithridates then took out some poison that he always carried next to his sword, and mixed it. There two of his daughters, who were still girls growing up together, named Mithridates and Nysa, who had been betrothed to the kings of [Ptolemaic] Egypt and of Cyprus, asked him to let them have some of the poison first, and insisted strenuously and prevented him from drinking it until they had taken some and swallowed it. The drug took effect on them at once; but upon Mithridates, although he walked around rapidly to hasten its action, it had no effect, because he had accustomed himself to other drugs by continually trying them as a means of protection against poisoners. These are still called the Mithridatic drugs.''

''Seeing a certain Bituitus there, an officer of the Gauls, he said to him, "I have profited much from your right arm against my enemies. I shall profit from it most of all if you will kill me, and save from the danger of being led in a Roman triumph one who has been an autocrat so many years, and the ruler of so great a kingdom, but who is now unable to die by poison because, like a fool, he has fortified himself against the poison of others. Although I have kept watch and ward against all the poisons that one takes with his food, I have not provided against that domestic poison, always the most dangerous to kings, the treachery of army, children, and friends." Bituitus, thus appealed to, rendered the king the service that he desired.''

Cassius Dio Roman History, on the other hand, records a different account:

''Mithridates had tried to make away with himself, and after first removing his wives and remaining children by poison, he had swallowed all that was left; yet neither by that means nor by the sword was he able to perish by his own hands. For the poison, although deadly, did not prevail over him, since he had inured his constitution to it, taking precautionary antidotes in large doses every day; and the force of the sword blow was lessened on account of the weakness of his hand, caused by his age and present misfortunes, and as a result of taking the poison, whatever it was. When, therefore, he failed to take his life through his own efforts and seemed to linger beyond the proper time, those whom he had sent against his son fell upon him and hastened his end with their swords and spears. Thus Mithridates, who had experienced the most varied and remarkable fortune, had not even an ordinary end to his life. For he desired to die, albeit unwillingly, and though eager to kill himself was unable to do so; but partly by poison and partly by the sword he was at once self-slain and murdered by his foes.''

At the behest of Pompey, Mithridates' body was later buried alongside his ancestors (in either Sinope or Amaseia). Mount Mithridat in the central Kerch and the town of Yevpatoria in Crimea commemorate his name.

'''Mithridates' antidote'''

In his youth, after the assassination of his father Mithridates V in 120 BC, Mithridates is said to have lived in the wilderness for seven years, inuring himself to hardship. While there, and after his accession, he cultivated an immunity to poisons by regularly ingesting sub-lethal doses of the same. He invented a complex "universal antidote" against poisoning; several versions are described in the literature. Aulus Cornelius Celsus gives one in his De Medicina and names it Antidotum Mithridaticum, whence English mithridate. Pliny the Elder's version comprised 54 ingredients to be placed in a flask and matured for at least two months. After Mithridates' death in 63 BC, many imperial Roman physicians claimed to possess and improve on the original formula, which they touted as Mithradatium. In keeping with most medical practices of his era, Mithridates' anti-poison routines included a religious component; they were supervised by the Agari, a group of Scythian shamans who never left him. Mithridates was reportedly guarded in his sleep by a horse, a bull, and a stag, which would whinny, bellow, and bleat whenever anyone approached the royal bed.

'''Mithridates as polyglot'''

In Pliny the Elder's account of famous polyglots, Mithridates could speak the languages of all the twenty-two nations he governed. This reputation led to the use of Mithridates' name as title in some later works on comparative linguistics, such as Conrad Gessner's Mithridates de differentis linguis, (1555), and Adelung and Vater's Mithridates oder allgemeine Sprachenkunde (1806–1817).

'''Wives, mistresses and children'''

Mithridates VI had wives and mistresses, by whom he had various children. The names he gave his children are a representation of his Persian, Greek heritage and of his ancestry.

First wife, his sister Laodice. They were married from 115/113 BC till about 90 BC. Mithridates with Laodice had various children:
* Sons: Mithridates, Arcathius, Machares and Pharnaces II of Pontus
* Daughters: Cleopatra of Pontus (sometimes called Cleopatra the Elder to distinguish her from her sister of the same name) and Drypetina (a diminutive form of "Drypetis"). Drypetina was Mithridates VI’s most devoted daughter. Her baby teeth never fell out, so she had a double set of teeth.

Second wife, the Greek Macedonian Noblewoman, Monime. They were married from about 89/88 BC till 72/71 BC. By whom, he had:
* Daughter: Athenais, who married King Ariobarzanes II of Cappadocia

Third wife, Greek woman Berenice of Chios, married from 86–72/71 BC

Fourth wife, Greek woman Stratonice of Pontus, married from after 86–63 BC
* Son: Xiphares

Fifth wife, unknown

Sixth wife, Caucasian woman Hypsicratea, married from an unknown date to 63 BC

One of his mistresses was the Galatian Celtic Princess Adobogiona the Elder. By Adobogiona, Mithridates had two children: a son called Mithridates I of the Bosporus and a daughter called Adobogiona the Younger.

His sons born from his concubine were Cyrus, Xerxes, Darius, Ariarathes IX of Cappadocia, Artaphernes, Oxathres, Phoenix (Mithridates’ son by a mistress of Syrian descent) and Exipodras, named after kings of the Persian Empire, which he claimed ancestry from. His daughters born from his concubine were Nysa, Eupatra, Cleopatra the Younger, Mithridates and Orsabaris. Nysa and Mithridates, were engaged to the Egyptian Greek Pharaohs Ptolemy XII Auletes and his brother Ptolemy of Cyprus.

In 63 BC, when the Kingdom of Pontus was annexed by the Roman general Pompey the remaining sisters, wives, mistresses and children of Mithridates VI in Pontus were put to death. Plutarch writing in his lives (Pompey v.45) states that Mithridates' sister and five of his children took part in Pompey's triumphal procession on this return to Rome in 61 BC.

The Cappadocian Greek nobleman and high priest of the temple-state of Comana, Cappadocia Archelaus had descended from Mithridates VI. He claimed to be a son of Mithridates VI, however chronologically Archelaus may have been a maternal grandson of the Pontic King, who his father was Mithridates VI’s favorite general may have married one of the daughters of Mithridates VI.

'''Literature'''

The poet A. E. Housman alludes to Mithridates' antidote, also known as mithridatism, in the final stanza of his poem "Terence, This Is Stupid Stuff" in A Shropshire Lad:

''There was a king reigned in the East: There, when kings will sit to feast, They get their fill before they think With poisoned meat and poisoned drink. He gathered all that springs to birth From the many-venomed earth; First a little, thence to more, He sampled all her killing store; And easy, smiling, seasoned sound, Sate the king when healths went round. They put arsenic in his meat And stared aghast to watch him eat; They poured strychnine in his cup And shook to see him drink it up: They shook, they stared as white’s their shirt: Them it was their poison hurt. –I tell the tale that I heard told. Mithridates, he died old.''

Ralph Waldo Emerson included his "Mithridates" in his 1847 "Poems". The legend also appears in Alexandre Dumas's novel The Count of Monte Cristo. The demise of Mithridates VI is detailed in the 1673 play Mithridate written by Jean Racine. This play is the basis for several 18th century operas including one of Mozart's earliest, known most commonly by its Italian name, Mitridate, re di Ponto (1770). He is the subject of the opera Mitridate Eupatore (1707) by Alessandro Scarlatti. In The Grass Crown, the second in the Masters of Rome series, Colleen McCullough, the Australian writer, describes in detail the various aspects of his life – the murder of Laodice (sister-wife of Mithridates VI of Pontus), and the Roman Consul who, quite alone and surrounded by the Pontic army, ordered Mithridates to leave Cappadocia immediately and go back to Pontus – which he did.

Wordsworth, amidst casting about for poetic themes in The Prelude (Bk i vv 186 ff):

''Sometimes, more sternly moved, I would relate How vanquished Mithridates northward passed, And, hidden in the cloud of years, became Odin, the Father of a race by whom Perished the Roman Empire.''

Likewise, Edna St. Vincent Millay alludes indirectly to Mithridates' protection against poison in her sonnet "Thou art not lovelier than lilacs" (from Renascence and Other Poems, 1917):

''Like him who day by day unto his draught Of delicate poison adds him one drop more Till he may drink unharmed the death of ten, Even so, inured to beauty, who have quaffed Each hour more deeply than the hour before, I drink--and live--what has destroyed some men.''

In Dorothy L. Sayers' Detective Novel "Strong Poison", from 1929, the protagonist, Lord Peter Wimsey, refers to Mithridates' measures to survive poisoning; as well as Albert Einstein's theory of Special Relativity, when the protagonist warns not to trust someone who looks straight in your eye, as they're trying to distract you from seeing something, "..even the path light travels is bent".

James Joyce alludes to Mithridates' immunity to poison in his love poem Though I Thy Mithridates Were.

The Last King is an historical novel by Michael Curtis Ford about the King and his exploits against the Roman Republic. Mithridates is a major character in Poul Anderson's novel The Golden Slave. Mithridates of Pontus is mentioned by E. E. "Doc" Smith in Triplanetary, the first novel of the famous Lensman science fiction series. In the story, Mithridates was supposed to be one of the humans possessed by a member of an evil alien race bent on remaking human civilization into its own image.

In the novel Mithridates is Dead (Spanish: Mitrídates ha muerto), Ignasi Ribó traces parallels between the historical figures of Mithridates and Osama Bin Laden. Within a postmodern narrative of the making and unmaking of history, Ribó suggests that the September 11 attacks on the United States closely paralleled the massacre of Roman citizens in 88 B.C. and prompted similar consequences, namely the imperialist overstretch of the American and Roman republics respectively. Furthermore, he suggests that the ensuing Mithridatic Wars were one of the key factors in the demise of Rome's republican regime, as well as in the spread of the Christian faith in Asia Minor and eventually throughout the whole Roman Empire. The novel implies that the current events in the world might have similar unforeseen consequences.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mithridates_VI_of_Pontus

Mithradates VI (Mithradates Eupator) (mthrkd´tz) (KEY) , c.131 B.C.-63B.C., king of Pontus, sometimes called Mithradates the Great. He extendedhis empire until, in addition to Pontus, he held Cappadocia, Paphlagonia,and the Black Sea coast beyond the Caucasus. The increasing importance ofRome in Asia Minor brought Mithradates and the republic into openconflict. The First Mithradatic War (88 B.C.-84 B.C.) was the result.Mithradates conquered the whole of Asia Minor (except for a few cities)in 88 B.C. In 85 B.C. the Roman general Fimbria attacked him in AsiaMinor, and he was defeated simultaneously with the destruction of hisarmy in Greece. In the resultant treaty Mithradates paid an indemnity andgave up all but Pontus and a few colonies. The Second Mithradatic War (83B.C.-81 B.C.) was begun by Sulla’s lieutenant Lucius Murena, who desiredglory. Murena was repelled by Mithradates and was superseded by AulusGabinius, who made peace with the king of Pontus. The Third MithradaticWar (74 B.C.-63 B.C.) began when Mithradates resolved to prevent Romefrom annexing Bithynia, which had been left to Rome by a royal will.Lucullus was sent against Mithradates, who was finally forced to flee toArmenia. In 68 B.C. the Romans invaded Armenia, but were forced toretreat. Mithradates returned to Pontus, and Lucullus was replaced (66B.C.) by Pompey. Pompey soon drove Mithradates eastward, and the kingfled to the Crimea, the last of his provinces. He had a slave kill him.His fall is the subject of Racine’s Mithridate. Pharnaces II was his sonand Tigranes, his son-in-law. The name is also spelled Mithridates.

The Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition. Copyright © 2002 ColumbiaUniversity Press
-------------------
Mithridates

Mithridates while still a child developed a reputation that includedmatricide and a paranoid fear of being poisoned.

--I tell the tale that I heard told.
Mithridates, he died old.
From A.E. Housman "Terence, this is stupid stuff"

Review and summary:
Both Sulla and Marius wanted the honor of disposing of the greatestchallenge to Roman supremacy since Hannibal Barca -- the long-livedMithridates VI of Pontus (132-63 B.C.) who was a thorn in Rome's side forforty years. The rivalry of the two generals led to loss of Roman blood-- at home (although Sulla also confronted Mithridates).

Despite competence that matched the rival generals' confidence in theirability to check the Eastern despot, it was Pompey the Great who disposedof the Mithridatic problem.

The mountainous district of Pontus lay on the eastern side of the BlackSea, beyond the province of Asia and Bithynia, north of Galatia andCappadocia, west of Armenia, and south of Colchis. In the Third PunicWar, King Mithridates Euergetes (who claimed descent from the PersianKing Darius) of Pontus helped Rome. Phrygia Maior was given him ingratitude. By the time Rome had annexed Pergamum to create the provinceof Asia (129 B.C.), Pontus was ruled from its capital in Sinope.

Mithridates - Youth and Poison

In 120, while still a child, Mithridates Eupator (132-83 B.C.) becameking. His mother (said to have assassinated her husband Mithridates V)ruled in her young son's stead. Afraid his mother would try to kill him,Mithridates went into hiding, at which time he started ingesting smalldoses of various poisons in order to develop an immunity. WhenMithridates returned (c. 115-111), he took command, had his motherimprisoned (and, possibly, executed), and set about extending hisdominion. After he acquired Greek towns in Colchis and what's now theCrimea, Mithridates established a strong fleet to hold his territories.Since the Greeks provided revenue, officers, and mercenary soldiers, heset out to extend his Greek resources.

In 108/07 Mithridates and Nicomedes II of Bithynia marched intoPaphlagonia. A Roman emisssary tried to force Nicomedes and Mithridatesto restore its king, Astreodon. Instead, Mithridates annexed a piece ofGalatia which his father was supposed to have inherited from earlierrulers, while Nicomedes, far from restoring Paphlagonia to Astreodon, puthis son on the throne as puppet. The unsuccessful Roman embassy went home.

In 102 Mithridates waged war on Cappadocia and installed hiseight-year-old son as king under the regency of a man named Gordius.Mithridates tried to bribe the Roman senators to accept this arrangement,his presence in Paphlagonia and Galatia, and to counter Nicomedes' claimto Cappadocia. At the same time, Nicomedes appealed to Rome on behalf ofhis own pretender. Instead of taking a clear side, Rome orderedMithridates to get out of Cappadocia and Nicomedes to leave Paphlagonia.Mithridates obliged and, as he claimed in 89 B.C., he also leftPaphlagonia.

Left to their own devices, the Cappadocian nobility selected Ariobarzanesfor their king. Sulla helped Ariobarzanes assume power.

By allying himself with the neighboring kingdom through marriage,Mithridates hoped to expand his empire. The Armenians would do theinvading and reap the spoils while Pontus would gain the territory. Inthis way, Mithridates himself would not antagonize the Romans.
In 96/5 Tigranes I inherited the throne of Armenia and marriedMithridates' daughter Cleopatra. In 94, Nicomedes of Bithynia died. By91, Rome was embroiled in its own Social War, leaving Mithridates anopportunity to expand his empire. He easily persuaded his son-in-law totake Cappadocia, offering to divide the spoils. Next, Mithridates wentafter Nicomedes' successor in Bithynia, Nicomedes III.

The ousted rulers appealed to Rome which ruled that they should berestored. M. Aquilius and Manlius Maltinus were ordered to deal with themonarchs of Pontus and Armenia

Greedy Aquilius suggested a course of action that led to the FirstMithridatic War and his own ironic execution. Aquilius suggested thatsince the Roman proteges in Bithynia and Cappadocia were unable to paytheir debt to Rome, they should invade Mithridates' kingdom. To oblige,Nicomedes invaded Pontic territory and closed off the Bithynian Black Seaexit to Pontic ships.

Mithridates' response was to turn to the Romans for help, but he wasrebuffed, so he sent his son Ariarathus into Cappadocia to driveAriobazares out. Mithridates then sent an envoy to the Romancommissioners. The Romans accused the envoy of threatening war, and sobegan the first Mithridatic War -- without the ratification of the Senateand the Roman people.

Mithridates fought back. Since the Roman troops were not prepared,Mithridates saw that he could push into the Roman province of Asia. Hedid so, won, killed Aquilius (see below), and ordered the massacre of all(80,000 or, according to Plutarch, 150,000) Italians throughout the area.It is suggested that this was to insure loyalty, because all thoseinvolved in the massacre would have had much to dread from Romanvengeance.

Mithridates' reputation for cruelty may not have been deserved. He couldalso be merciful and generous with the people he conquered.

Some cities that surrendered to Mithridates were rewarded with taxrelief. Amnesty was offered those who handed over the Roman generals.Aquilius had fled to the island of Lesbos, but its citizens wantingamnesty, handed him over. Unlike the leniency with which Mithridates hadtreated another Roman general, Oppius, whom he set free, Aquilius wasridiculed and then forced to endure an ironic death. Since it was hisgreed that had set the war in motion, Mithridates had molten gold pouredinto Aquilius' mouth.

Mithridates then attempted to add Greece to his territory. He encounteredlittle resistance from Greeks tired of the tax-farming Roman equites. Bythe spring of 87, Mithridates controlled almost all of Asia Minor,Greece, Thrace, part of Macedon, and dominated the Black Sea and Aegean,with the help of his general, Archelaus.

Finally free from pressing business at Rome Sulla left for Greece andAsia Minor where he easily stopped Mithridates' aggression.

It was at the beginning of 87 that Sulla was able to leave Italy, onceagain, for Greece, where he began a string of successful campaigns. For awhile the Greeks remained loyal to the Pontic king, but when it becameclear the Romans might be able to restore the old order, the Greekschanged sides, preferring usurious Roman tax-collectors to an Orientaldespot.

According to The Treaty of Dardanus at the conclusion of the FirstMithridatic War, Mithridates was still a friend of Rome.

After the Romans captured Mithridates' headquarters in Pergamum,Mithridates was ready to make peace. Since Sulla wished to return to Rometo deal with his opponents there, the terms of the treaty (Treaty ofDardanus, 85/4 B.C.) were not as terrible for Mithridates as they wouldhave been otherwise. Mithridates retained Pontus, the rest of histerritories, his status as ally of Rome, but had to abandon his part ofPaphlagonia and Asia, restore Bithynia to Nicomedes and Cappadocia toAriobarzanes, return his prisoners, and pay 2-3000 talents as warindemnity and provide Sulla with 70-80 fully equipped ships.

83-63 B.C.
When Mithridates failed to live up to his agreement to leave Cappadocia,a second Mithridatic War broke out in 83. Propraetor Murena invadedPontus but was forced to withdraw. In 81, peace was declared followingthe terms of the treaty of Dardanus.

At the time of the rebellion of Spartacus, Rome sent in Lucius LiciniusLucullus and Aurelius Cotta to deal with Mithridates. Lucullus' troopswere in no shape to fight.

In 75 or 74 Nicomedes III of Bithynia died, bestowing his kingdom uponRome. Threatened by the power of Rome in such proximity, Mithridates tookhis largest force into the neighboring kingdom, occupied Bithynia, andsent smaller forces against Asia, Cappadocia and Phrygia. In return, torepel Mithridates from Asia, the Roman senate sent Lucius LiciniusLucullus. Marcus Aurelius Cotta was sent with a fleet to occupy Bithynia.When Lucullus arrived he found troops in need of discipline. Trainingthem kept him from helping Cotta, making it easy for Mithridates todefeat Cotta at Chalcedon and then beseige Cyzicus.

Finally equipped with barely disciplined troops, Lucullus severedMithridates' land communication, while the citizens of Cyzicus held outagainst the seige long enough for Mithridates to change his mind andwithdraw.

According to The Treaty of Dardanus at the conclusion of the FirstMithridatic War, Mithridates was still a friend of Rome.

After the Romans captured Mithridates' headquarters in Pergamum,Mithridates was ready to make peace. Since Sulla wished to return to Rometo deal with his opponents there, the terms of the treaty (Treaty ofDardanus, 85/4 B.C.) were not as terrible for Mithridates as they wouldhave been otherwise. Mithridates retained Pontus, the rest of histerritories, his status as ally of Rome, but had to abandon his part ofPaphlagonia and Asia, restore Bithynia to Nicomedes and Cappadocia toAriobarzanes, return his prisoners, and pay 2-3000 talents as warindemnity and provide Sulla with 70-80 fully equipped ships.

Mithridates tended to retreat when the Romans showed force. When Lucullusdrove into Mithridates' kingdom of Pontus, Mithridates fled to Armenia.

Once again, Mithridates decided to retreat. Lucullus did not immediatelypursue him, but instead gathered a fleet from the cities in Asia. Then,in 73, with his new fleet he almost destoyed Mithridates. Lucullus wentinto Pontus to fight Mithridates at Cabira. Routed, Mithridates fled toArmenia looking for help from his son-in-law Tigranes. The Armenian kingwas not willing to provide military aid, but only shelter.

Tigranes may not have been anxious to fight the Romans, but he wasn'tabout to surrender his father-in-law, Mithridates.

Meanwhile, unopposed, Lucullus captured almost the entire kingdom ofPontus. He then ordered Tigranes to surrender Mithridates. When Tigranesrefused, Lucullus attacked Armenia.

Lucullus' main obstacles, at this time, were his own soldiers who refusedfurther campaigns. This mutiny gave Mithridates the chance to take backsome of the territory he had lost. Realizing they needed another leader,the Romans sent Pompey to Asia.

When properly equipped with disciplined troops and a competent general,there was no contest between Rome and Pontus.

Pompey began invading Pontus in 66 B.C. Mithridates tried unsuccessfullyto enlist the support of Tigranes, but his brother-in-law had troubles ofhis own. Tigranes's son, backed by Rome, was seeking his father's throne.Without his ally, Mithridates fled to his possessions in the Crimea.

It is said that when Mithridates saw that the people of the Crimeasupported his son over him, Mithridates endeavored to take his own life,but failed because of the resistance he'd built up to poison. He had toask one of his mercenary soldiers to kill him.

Pompey (named Magnus, the Great, for his victory over Mithridates) hadMithridates' corpse buried honorably in the royal tomb at Sinope.

Sources
H. H. Scullard's revised version of F.B. Marsh's Roman World 146-30 B.C.
Cambridge Ancient History Vol. IX, 1994.
http://ancienthistory.about.com/library/weekly/aa053000a.htm

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per00521.htm#0

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Pontus 120- 63 BCE

SOURCE NOTES:
FW18; http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per00556.htm#

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Armenia 331-317 BCE

King of Pontus
He committed suicide when his forces, with which he hoped to renew an attack
on Rome, deserted him, and his son, Pharnaces II, rose up against him
declaring himself King. Mithridates commanded his personal bodyguard to accept
hisKin son as their king, and retired to a castle where he had himself killed.
King of Pontus, as Mithradates VI , in northeastern Anatolia, Asia Minor
0121-0063 f Kr. King of the Bosphorus 0107-0063 B.C

Levde 132 - 069 f.Kr.

OR "MITHRENES""MITHRINES"; SATRAP OF ARMENIA FOR ALEXANDER THE GREAT
331BC-bef.317 BC; KING OF ARMENIA

"EUPATOR""DIONYSUS"; KNOWN AS "THE GREAT"; KING OF PONTUS 120-63 BC; ANNEXED THE
KINGDOM OF THE BOSPORUS AND BECAME KING ca. 100 BC; ULTIMATELY DEFEATED IN THE
THREE MITHRADATIC WARS (88-84, 83-81, 74-63) BY LUCIUS CORNELIUS SULLA, LUCIUS
LUCINIUS MURENA, AND LICIUS LUCINIUS LUCULLUS WITH POMPEY THE GREAT
RESPECTIVELY; FLEEING TO CRIMEA TO AVOID CAPTURE, HE ORDERED A SOLDIER TO KILL
HIM; HAD MANY WIVES AND CONCUBINES

ALIA: /Mithradates the Great, King of Pontus/
Birth: in 131 BC, Sinope, Pontus [Turkey] 1
Death: in 63 BC, Panticapaeum [Ukraine] 2
Burial: Royal Sepulchre, Sinope, Pontus [Turkey] 2
Event: Ancestor M
Event: Ruled 120 - 63 BC, King of Pontus 3 2
Note:
Mithradates VI EUPATOR, byname MITHRADATES THE GREAT (d. 63 BC, Panticapaeum [now in Ukraine]), king of Pontus in northern Anatolia (120-63BC). Under his energetic leadership, Pontus expanded to absorb several of its small neighbours and, briefly, contested Rome's hegemony in Asia Minor.
Life.
Mithradates the Great was the sixth--and last--Pontic ruler by that name. Mithradates (often misspelled Mithridates and meaning "gift of [the god] Mithra") was a common name among Anatolian rulers of the age. When Mithradates VI succeeded his father, Mithradates Euergetes, in 120 BC, he was then only 11 years of age, and for a few years his mother ruled in his place. About 115 BC, she was deposed and thrown into prison by her son, who thereafter ruled alone. Mithradates began his long career of conquest by dispatching successful expeditions to the Crimea and to Colchis (on the eastern shore of the Black Sea). Both districts were added to the Pontic kingdom. To the Greeks of the Tauric Chersonese and the Cimmerian Bosporus (Crimea and Straits of Kerch), Mithradates was a deliverer from their Scythian enemies, and they gladly surrendered their independence in return for the protection given to them by his armies. In Anatolia, however, the royal dominions had been considerably diminished after the death of Mithradates V: Paphlagonia had freed itself, and Phrygia (c. 116 BC) had been linked to the Roman province of Asia. Mithradates' first move there was to partition Paphlagonia and Galatia between himself and Nicomedes III of Bithynia, but next he quarreled with Nicomedes over Cappadocia. Successful at first on two occasions, he was on both deprived of his advantage by Roman intervention (c. 95 and 92). While appearing to acquiesce, he resolved to expel the Romans from Asia. A first attempt to depose Nicomedes IV of Bithynia, who was completely subservient to the Romans, was frustrated (c. 90). Then Nicomedes, instigated by Rome, attacked Pontic territory, and Mithradates, after protesting in vain to the Romans, finallydeclared war (88).
Nicomedes and the Roman armies were defeated and flung back to the coasts of the Propontis and the Aegean. The Roman province of Asia was occupied, and most of the Greek cities in western Asia Minor allied themselves with Mithradates, though a few held out against him, such as Rhodes, which he besieged unsuccessfully. He also sent large armies into Greece, where Athens and other cities took his side. But the Roman generals, Sulla in Greece and Fimbria in Asia, defeated his forces in several battles during 86 and 85. In 88 he had arranged a general massacre of the Roman and Italian residents in Asia (80,000 are said to have perished), in order that the Greek cities, as his accessories in the crime, should feel irrevocably committed to the struggle against Rome. As the war turned against him, his former leniency toward the Greeks changed to severity; every kind of intimidation was resorted to--deportations, murders, freeing of slaves. But this reign of terror couldnot prevent the cities from deserting to the victorious side. In 85, when the war was clearly lost, he made peace with Sulla in the Treaty of Dardanus, abandoning his conquests, surrendering his fleet, and paying a large fine.
In what is called the Second Mithradatic War, the Roman general Lucius Licinius Murena invaded Pontus without provocation in 83 but was defeated in 82. Hostilities were suspended, but disputes constantly occurred, and in 74 a general war broke out. Mithradates defeated Marius Aurelius Cotta, the Roman consul, at Chalcedon, but Lucullus worsted him outside Cyzicus (73) and drove him, in 72, to take refuge in Armenia with his son-in-law Tigranes. After scoring two great victories at Tigranocerta (69) and Artaxata (68), Lucullus was disconcerted by the defeat of his lieutenants and by mutiny among his troops. In 66 Lucullus was superseded by Pompey, who completely defeated both Mithradates and Tigranes.
Mithradates then established himself in 64 at Panticapaeum (Kerch) onthe Cimmerian Bosporus and was planning an invasion of Italy by way of the Danube when his own troops, led by his son Pharnaces II, revolted against him. After failing in an attempt to poison himself, Mithradates ordered a Gallic mercenary to kill him. His body was sent to Pompey, who buried it in the royal sepulchre at Sinope, the Pontic capital.
Assessment.
Mithradates was a man of great stature and physical strength, a bravefighter, and a keen hunter. He also had some of the worst traits often associated with the Oriental despot--cruelty and sensuality, in particular. But it cannot be denied that Mithradates was a ruler of astonishing energy and determination, or that he possessed political skill of a high order. That he was one of the few men to offer a serious challenge to the Roman Republic is sufficient testimony to his ability. He organized the forces at his disposal very effectively, and he had agood grasp of strategy. He was unlucky in having to face three exceptionally brilliant Roman generals; unlucky, too, in coming to power ata time when the Hellenistic world was in the final stage of its collapse. It is quite conceivable that had he been born a century earlier he could have constructed an enduring Greco-Asiatic empire. A cunning,brutal tyrant, he concerned himself solely with maintaining and strengthening his own power. He posed as the champion of Hellenism, but this was mainly to further his political ambitions; it is no proof that he was deeply imbued with Greek culture or that he felt a mission to promote its extension within his domains. Hellenism made advances in Pontus during his reign, as it had under his predecessors, but this wasa natural process. He treated all alike; Greek, Roman, and Asiatic were welcome at his court provided that they could be of use to him (hismilitary subordinates were mostly Greeks, though in later years he employed several Roman renegades), but he trusted no one. Just as it is impossible to speak of his favouring one religion or culture above another, so it is impossible to believe that he had any notion of bringing Greeks and Asiatics closer together in a new kind of political and social system. His posing as a liberator of the Greeks from Roman oppression and, later, his encouragement of social revolution in the Greekcities of the province of Asia can only be interpreted, in both cases, as the actions of an opportunist seeking immediate political advantages. [Encyclopædia Britannica CD '97, MITHRADATES VI EUPATOR]
----------
Mithradates (Mithridates) VI Eupator of Pontus (c. 132-63 BC) was still a minor in 120--the year that his father was murdered--when he was named joint ruler with his mother and brother. For some years he was arefugee from his mother's power. Then, in a sudden sally, he secured the throne, imprisoned his mother, killed his brother, and married hissister. Pontus, sprawling along the southern coast of the Black Sea, included Greek colonies and a native population; the largest section of the people, including the rulers, were Iranian. Mithradates was able, cunning, and ambitious. He secured money and men by expanding to the north and then turned to Anatolia, the Aegean islands, and even Greece, where the financial oppression of the Romans made him appear a liberator. The Romans defeated him time and again, but he showed a subtle resilience until his final defeat by Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus (106-48BC). In 67 Pompey made his greatest contribution to peaceful trade and development by his systematic destruction of the pirates. He put anend to the danger from Mithradates, who was driven from his kingdom and committed suicide in 63.

ALIA: /Mithradates the Great, King of Pontus/
Birth: in 131 BC, Sinope, Pontus [Turkey] 1
Death: in 63 BC, Panticapaeum [Ukraine] 2
Burial: Royal Sepulchre, Sinope, Pontus [Turkey] 2
Event: Ancestor M
Event: Ruled 120 - 63 BC, King of Pontus 3 2
Note:
Mithradates VI EUPATOR, byname MITHRADATES THE GREAT (d. 63 BC, Panticapaeum [now in Ukraine]), king of Pontus in northern Anatolia (120-63BC). Under his energetic leadership, Pontus expanded to absorb several of its small neighbours and, briefly, contested Rome's hegemony in Asia Minor.
Life.
Mithradates the Great was the sixth--and last--Pontic ruler by that name. Mithradates (often misspelled Mithridates and meaning "gift of [the god] Mithra") was a common name among Anatolian rulers of the age. When Mithradates VI succeeded his father, Mithradates Euergetes, in 120 BC, he was then only 11 years of age, and for a few years his mother ruled in his place. About 115 BC, she was deposed and thrown into prison by her son, who thereafter ruled alone. Mithradates began his long career of conquest by dispatching successful expeditions to the Crimea and to Colchis (on the eastern shore of the Black Sea). Both districts were added to the Pontic kingdom. To the Greeks of the Tauric Chersonese and the Cimmerian Bosporus (Crimea and Straits of Kerch), Mithradates was a deliverer from their Scythian enemies, and they gladly surrendered their independence in return for the protection given to them by his armies. In Anatolia, however, the royal dominions had been considerably diminished after the death of Mithradates V: Paphlagonia had freed itself, and Phrygia (c. 116 BC) had been linked to the Roman province of Asia. Mithradates' first move there was to partition Paphlagonia and Galatia between himself and Nicomedes III of Bithynia, but next he quarreled with Nicomedes over Cappadocia. Successful at first on two occasions, he was on both deprived of his advantage by Roman intervention (c. 95 and 92). While appearing to acquiesce, he resolved to expel the Romans from Asia. A first attempt to depose Nicomedes IV of Bithynia, who was completely subservient to the Romans, was frustrated (c. 90). Then Nicomedes, instigated by Rome, attacked Pontic territory, and Mithradates, after protesting in vain to the Romans, finallydeclared war (88).
Nicomedes and the Roman armies were defeated and flung back to the coasts of the Propontis and the Aegean. The Roman province of Asia was occupied, and most of the Greek cities in western Asia Minor allied themselves with Mithradates, though a few held out against him, such as Rhodes, which he besieged unsuccessfully. He also sent large armies into Greece, where Athens and other cities took his side. But the Roman generals, Sulla in Greece and Fimbria in Asia, defeated his forces in several battles during 86 and 85. In 88 he had arranged a general massacre of the Roman and Italian residents in Asia (80,000 are said to have perished), in order that the Greek cities, as his accessories in the crime, should feel irrevocably committed to the struggle against Rome. As the war turned against him, his former leniency toward the Greeks changed to severity; every kind of intimidation was resorted to--deportations, murders, freeing of slaves. But this reign of terror couldnot prevent the cities from deserting to the victorious side. In 85, when the war was clearly lost, he made peace with Sulla in the Treaty of Dardanus, abandoning his conquests, surrendering his fleet, and paying a large fine.
In what is called the Second Mithradatic War, the Roman general Lucius Licinius Murena invaded Pontus without provocation in 83 but was defeated in 82. Hostilities were suspended, but disputes constantly occurred, and in 74 a general war broke out. Mithradates defeated Marius Aurelius Cotta, the Roman consul, at Chalcedon, but Lucullus worsted him outside Cyzicus (73) and drove him, in 72, to take refuge in Armenia with his son-in-law Tigranes. After scoring two great victories at Tigranocerta (69) and Artaxata (68), Lucullus was disconcerted by the defeat of his lieutenants and by mutiny among his troops. In 66 Lucullus was superseded by Pompey, who completely defeated both Mithradates and Tigranes.
Mithradates then established himself in 64 at Panticapaeum (Kerch) onthe Cimmerian Bosporus and was planning an invasion of Italy by way of the Danube when his own troops, led by his son Pharnaces II, revolted against him. After failing in an attempt to poison himself, Mithradates ordered a Gallic mercenary to kill him. His body was sent to Pompey, who buried it in the royal sepulchre at Sinope, the Pontic capital.
Assessment.
Mithradates was a man of great stature and physical strength, a bravefighter, and a keen hunter. He also had some of the worst traits often associated with the Oriental despot--cruelty and sensuality, in particular. But it cannot be denied that Mithradates was a ruler of astonishing energy and determination, or that he possessed political skill of a high order. That he was one of the few men to offer a serious challenge to the Roman Republic is sufficient testimony to his ability. He organized the forces at his disposal very effectively, and he had agood grasp of strategy. He was unlucky in having to face three exceptionally brilliant Roman generals; unlucky, too, in coming to power ata time when the Hellenistic world was in the final stage of its collapse. It is quite conceivable that had he been born a century earlier he could have constructed an enduring Greco-Asiatic empire. A cunning,brutal tyrant, he concerned himself solely with maintaining and strengthening his own power. He posed as the champion of Hellenism, but this was mainly to further his political ambitions; it is no proof that he was deeply imbued with Greek culture or that he felt a mission to promote its extension within his domains. Hellenism made advances in Pontus during his reign, as it had under his predecessors, but this wasa natural process. He treated all alike; Greek, Roman, and Asiatic were welcome at his court provided that they could be of use to him (hismilitary subordinates were mostly Greeks, though in later years he employed several Roman renegades), but he trusted no one. Just as it is impossible to speak of his favouring one religion or culture above another, so it is impossible to believe that he had any notion of bringing Greeks and Asiatics closer together in a new kind of political and social system. His posing as a liberator of the Greeks from Roman oppression and, later, his encouragement of social revolution in the Greekcities of the province of Asia can only be interpreted, in both cases, as the actions of an opportunist seeking immediate political advantages. [Encyclopædia Britannica CD '97, MITHRADATES VI EUPATOR]
----------
Mithradates (Mithridates) VI Eupator of Pontus (c. 132-63 BC) was still a minor in 120--the year that his father was murdered--when he was named joint ruler with his mother and brother. For some years he was arefugee from his mother's power. Then, in a sudden sally, he secured the throne, imprisoned his mother, killed his brother, and married hissister. Pontus, sprawling along the southern coast of the Black Sea, included Greek colonies and a native population; the largest section of the people, including the rulers, were Iranian. Mithradates was able, cunning, and ambitious. He secured money and men by expanding to the north and then turned to Anatolia, the Aegean islands, and even Greece, where the financial oppression of the Romans made him appear a liberator. The Romans defeated him time and again, but he showed a subtle resilience until his final defeat by Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus (106-48BC). In 67 Pompey made his greatest contribution to peaceful trade and development by his systematic destruction of the pirates. He put anend to the danger from Mithradates, who was driven from his kingdom and committed suicide in 63.

Name Prefix:<NPFX> King Name Suffix:<NSFX> I, Of Armenia "Ctistis"

Name Prefix:<NPFX> King Name Suffix:<NSFX> I, Of Armenia "Ctistis"

Mithridates VI of Pontus
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Mithridates VI, (in Greek ?????d?t??, 132 BC – 63 BC), called Eupator Dionysius, also known as Mithridates the Great, was the King of Pontus from 120 BC to 63 BC in Asia Minor and one of Rome's most formidable and successful enemies, meeting and engaging three of the most successful generals of the late Republic.
Contents
[hide]

* 1 History
* 2 Culture
* 3 See also
* 4 References
* 5 External links

[edit]

History

Mithridates VI was the son of Mithridates V of Pontus (150 BC – 120 BC), called Euergetes. Mithridates VI spent much of his early career as a fugitive. To clear his path to the throne of the kingdom of Pontus, he killed off many of his brothers but not his sister, Laodice, whom he married. He was ambitious and sought to invade a number of neighbours, including Bithynia, which brought him into conflict with the expanding Roman Republic during its later years.

After conquering western Anatolia in 88 BC, Mithridates VI ordered the killing of all Romans living there. The massacre of 80,000 Roman men, women and children brought matters to a head. During the First Mithridatic War fought between 88 BC and 84 BC, Lucius Cornelius Sulla forced Mithridates VI out of Greece proper but then had to return to Italy to answer the threat posed by Marius; subsequently, Mithridates VI was defeated but not beaten. A peace was made between Rome and Pontus, but this proved a mere temporary setback. Mithridates VI recouped his forces, and when Rome attempted to annex Bithynia, Mithridates VI attacked with an even larger army, leading to the Second Mithridatic War from 83 BC to 81 BC. First Lucullus and then Pompey the Great were sent against Mithridates VI, who was at last defeated by Pompey in the Third Mithridatic War of 75 BC to 65 BC. After his final defeat in 65 BC, Mithridates VI fled and attempted to raise yet another army to take on the Romans but failed to do so. In 63, he fled to the citadel in Panticapaeum. Later he marched north with a small amount of men. At Colchis he commandeered a fleet and went to his eldest son, Manchares's kingdom of Bosporus. However, when he arrived he found his son had betrayed him. Manchares committed suicide and Mithridates Eupator VI took the throne of Bosporus. Mithridates ordered the conscription of many Scythians in order to regain his kingdom. Pharnaces II, his younger son led a Scythian rebellion against his father. This rebellion was caused by Roman exiles that Mithridates kept as the core of his Pontic army. Mithridates attempted suicide but was unsuccessful because of his immunity to poison. He later asked his cheif bodygaurd, Bitiutus to kill him. Thus the last king of Pontus disappeared off the face of the earth. [1][2]
[edit]

Culture

Two curious legends are told of Mithridates VI of Pontus. First, he was supposed to have had a prodigious memory. Pliny the Elder and other historians report that Mithridates could speak the languages of all the twenty-two nations he governed. [1]

From this legend, several books that published samples of many languages were entitled Mithridates.

The second legend is that Mithridates VI sought to harden himself against poisoning by taking increasing sub-lethal doses of the poisons he knew of until he was able to tolerate lethal doses. A. E. Housman alludes to this practice, also known as mithridatism, in the poem Terence, this is stupid stuff in A Shropshire Lad. The legend also appears in the novel, The Count of Monte Cristo. Out of fear of being poisoned by one of his many enemies, Mithridates VI fashioned a universal antidote, Antidotum Mithridaticum, consisting of several ingredients. Among the ingredients were opium and honey; the antidote was put in a closed flask in which it was to stay for at least two months. Every day Mithridates VI took this medicine to counteract possible attempts to poison him. When Mithridates VI was at last defeated by Pompey and in danger of capture by Rome, he is alleged to have attempted suicide by poison; this attempt failed, however, because of the immunity from the antidote. He made one of his servants kill him by the sword. Antidotum Mithridaticum was used for about 1900 years after this and is called Theriac. The most famous sort is called Theriacum Andromachi after the physician of Nero.

The demise of Mithridates VI is detailed in the 1673 play Mithridates made by Jean Racine. This play is the basis for many 18th century operas including one of Mozart's earliest, known most commonly by its Italian name, Mitridate, re di Ponto (1770). The Last King is a historical novel by Michael Curtis Ford about the King and his exploits against the Roman Republic.

In The Grass Crown the second in the Masters of Rome series, Colleen McCullough, the Australian writer, describes in detail the various aspects - the murder of his sister/wife Laodice, his experiments with poison, and his fear and hatred of Rome - of his life. The aging Gaius Marius meets Mithridates in the palace of Ariarathus in Eusebeia Mazaca, a city in Cappadocia, and the former Roman Consul, quite alone and surrounded by the Pontic army, orders Mithridates to leave Cappadocia immediately and go back to Pontus - which he does.

A town in Crimea, Ukraine, Eupatoria is presently named after Mithridates VI.


Preceded by:
Mithridates V King of Pontus
120 BC – 63 BC Succeeded by:
Pharnaces II
[edit]

See also

* Mithridatization
* Mithridatic Wars

[edit]

References

1. ^ A History of Rome, LeGlay, et al 100
2. ^ The Last King, Michael Curtis-Ford (2005) ISBN 031293615X

ALIA: /Mithradates the Great, King of Pontus/
Birth: in 131 BC, Sinope, Pontus [Turkey] 1
Death: in 63 BC, Panticapaeum [Ukraine] 2
Burial: Royal Sepulchre, Sinope, Pontus [Turkey] 2
Event: Ancestor M
Event: Ruled 120 - 63 BC, King of Pontus 3 2
Note:
Mithradates VI EUPATOR, byname MITHRADATES THE GREAT (d. 63 BC, Panticapaeum [now in Ukraine]), king of Pontus in northern Anatolia (120-63BC). Under his energetic leadership, Pontus expanded to absorb several of its small neighbours and, briefly, contested Rome's hegemony in Asia Minor.
Life.
Mithradates the Great was the sixth--and last--Pontic ruler by that name. Mithradates (often misspelled Mithridates and meaning "gift of [the god] Mithra") was a common name among Anatolian rulers of the age. When Mithradates VI succeeded his father, Mithradates Euergetes, in 120 BC, he was then only 11 years of age, and for a few years his mother ruled in his place. About 115 BC, she was deposed and thrown into prison by her son, who thereafter ruled alone. Mithradates began his long career of conquest by dispatching successful expeditions to the Crimea and to Colchis (on the eastern shore of the Black Sea). Both districts were added to the Pontic kingdom. To the Greeks of the Tauric Chersonese and the Cimmerian Bosporus (Crimea and Straits of Kerch), Mithradates was a deliverer from their Scythian enemies, and they gladly surrendered their independence in return for the protection given to them by his armies. In Anatolia, however, the royal dominions had been considerably diminished after the death of Mithradates V: Paphlagonia had freed itself, and Phrygia (c. 116 BC) had been linked to the Roman province of Asia. Mithradates' first move there was to partition Paphlagonia and Galatia between himself and Nicomedes III of Bithynia, but next he quarreled with Nicomedes over Cappadocia. Successful at first on two occasions, he was on both deprived of his advantage by Roman intervention (c. 95 and 92). While appearing to acquiesce, he resolved to expel the Romans from Asia. A first attempt to depose Nicomedes IV of Bithynia, who was completely subservient to the Romans, was frustrated (c. 90). Then Nicomedes, instigated by Rome, attacked Pontic territory, and Mithradates, after protesting in vain to the Romans, finallydeclared war (88).
Nicomedes and the Roman armies were defeated and flung back to the coasts of the Propontis and the Aegean. The Roman province of Asia was occupied, and most of the Greek cities in western Asia Minor allied themselves with Mithradates, though a few held out against him, such as Rhodes, which he besieged unsuccessfully. He also sent large armies into Greece, where Athens and other cities took his side. But the Roman generals, Sulla in Greece and Fimbria in Asia, defeated his forces in several battles during 86 and 85. In 88 he had arranged a general massacre of the Roman and Italian residents in Asia (80,000 are said to have perished), in order that the Greek cities, as his accessories in the crime, should feel irrevocably committed to the struggle against Rome. As the war turned against him, his former leniency toward the Greeks changed to severity; every kind of intimidation was resorted to--deportations, murders, freeing of slaves. But this reign of terror couldnot prevent the cities from deserting to the victorious side. In 85, when the war was clearly lost, he made peace with Sulla in the Treaty of Dardanus, abandoning his conquests, surrendering his fleet, and paying a large fine.
In what is called the Second Mithradatic War, the Roman general Lucius Licinius Murena invaded Pontus without provocation in 83 but was defeated in 82. Hostilities were suspended, but disputes constantly occurred, and in 74 a general war broke out. Mithradates defeated Marius Aurelius Cotta, the Roman consul, at Chalcedon, but Lucullus worsted him outside Cyzicus (73) and drove him, in 72, to take refuge in Armenia with his son-in-law Tigranes. After scoring two great victories at Tigranocerta (69) and Artaxata (68), Lucullus was disconcerted by the defeat of his lieutenants and by mutiny among his troops. In 66 Lucullus was superseded by Pompey, who completely defeated both Mithradates and Tigranes.
Mithradates then established himself in 64 at Panticapaeum (Kerch) onthe Cimmerian Bosporus and was planning an invasion of Italy by way of the Danube when his own troops, led by his son Pharnaces II, revolted against him. After failing in an attempt to poison himself, Mithradates ordered a Gallic mercenary to kill him. His body was sent to Pompey, who buried it in the royal sepulchre at Sinope, the Pontic capital.
Assessment.
Mithradates was a man of great stature and physical strength, a bravefighter, and a keen hunter. He also had some of the worst traits often associated with the Oriental despot--cruelty and sensuality, in particular. But it cannot be denied that Mithradates was a ruler of astonishing energy and determination, or that he possessed political skill of a high order. That he was one of the few men to offer a serious challenge to the Roman Republic is sufficient testimony to his ability. He organized the forces at his disposal very effectively, and he had agood grasp of strategy. He was unlucky in having to face three exceptionally brilliant Roman generals; unlucky, too, in coming to power ata time when the Hellenistic world was in the final stage of its collapse. It is quite conceivable that had he been born a century earlier he could have constructed an enduring Greco-Asiatic empire. A cunning,brutal tyrant, he concerned himself solely with maintaining and strengthening his own power. He posed as the champion of Hellenism, but this was mainly to further his political ambitions; it is no proof that he was deeply imbued with Greek culture or that he felt a mission to promote its extension within his domains. Hellenism made advances in Pontus during his reign, as it had under his predecessors, but this wasa natural process. He treated all alike; Greek, Roman, and Asiatic were welcome at his court provided that they could be of use to him (hismilitary subordinates were mostly Greeks, though in later years he employed several Roman renegades), but he trusted no one. Just as it is impossible to speak of his favouring one religion or culture above another, so it is impossible to believe that he had any notion of bringing Greeks and Asiatics closer together in a new kind of political and social system. His posing as a liberator of the Greeks from Roman oppression and, later, his encouragement of social revolution in the Greekcities of the province of Asia can only be interpreted, in both cases, as the actions of an opportunist seeking immediate political advantages. [Encyclopædia Britannica CD '97, MITHRADATES VI EUPATOR]
----------
Mithradates (Mithridates) VI Eupator of Pontus (c. 132-63 BC) was still a minor in 120--the year that his father was murdered--when he was named joint ruler with his mother and brother. For some years he was arefugee from his mother's power. Then, in a sudden sally, he secured the throne, imprisoned his mother, killed his brother, and married hissister. Pontus, sprawling along the southern coast of the Black Sea, included Greek colonies and a native population; the largest section of the people, including the rulers, were Iranian. Mithradates was able, cunning, and ambitious. He secured money and men by expanding to the north and then turned to Anatolia, the Aegean islands, and even Greece, where the financial oppression of the Romans made him appear a liberator. The Romans defeated him time and again, but he showed a subtle resilience until his final defeat by Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus (106-48BC). In 67 Pompey made his greatest contribution to peaceful trade and development by his systematic destruction of the pirates. He put anend to the danger from Mithradates, who was driven from his kingdom and committed suicide in 63.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]