== Notes for [[Item:Q105052|Q105052]] ==

Cavazos Garza, Israel. ''CATALOGO Y SINTESIS DE LOS PROTOCOLOS DEL ARCHIVO MUNICIPAL DE MONTERREY 1599-1700''. Instituto Tecnológico y de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico, 1966, page 49. … [#171; II, fol. 111, no. 68] … " '''Testamento de Jusepe de Tremiño (o Treviño)''', vecino de esta ciudad, natural de Guadiana, pueblo de la Nueva Vizcaya, hijo legítimo de Marcos Alonso Garza y del Arcón, natural del pueblo de Lepe, de los Reinos de Castilla, y de Juana de Treviño, natural de la ciudad de México. Declara ser '''casado con María Navarro, hija legítima de Martín Navarro, naturales de la villa del Saltillo'''. Declara por '''su hijo legítimo a Juan de Tremiño'''; y haber tenido tres hijos bastardos: Jusepe, Diego y Santiago de Tremiño, “siendo yo soltero y asímesmo las madres de los dichos mis hijos no ser casadas”. Ante Blas de la Garza, justicio mayor y capitán a guerra, y Juan de la Garza, secretario nombrado. Testigos el capitán Gregorio Fernández y el alférez Lázaro de la Garza. Se agregan los inventarios y diligencias hechos por el justicia mayor, en once fojas. Puesto de San Francisco, jurisdicción de Monterrey, 13 de septiembre de 1646."

__________________________________________________________

Jose Trevino was born in 1599 in Guadiana, Durango, Mexico. He died on Nov 12, 1646 in Hacienda de San Francisco (Apodaca N.L.). Commander Jose de Trevino had three sons outside of marriage:
*1. Jose,
*2. Diego and
*3. Santiago.

In his will the commander states "Moreover, I declare having three bastard, natural sons (so it says), I being a bachelor and the same, the mothers of my said sons not being married"

He was born in the town of Guadiana, today the city of Durango (Mexico), around the years 1597-1599 and died in Hacienda de San Francisco (Apodaca, Nuevo Leon) November 12 or 13, 1646. (71) Homonym of his uncle the captain, married to Leonor de Ayala, to whom we shall later refer. Commander Jose' de Trevino was assistant mayor of Monterrey in 1637.

He contracted marriage with Maria Navarro, who adopted her maternal surname, since she was the legitimate daughter of Captain Martin Ochoa de Elejalde and of another Maria Navarro, originally from the town of Santiago del Saltillo, in the province of Coahuila. From the matrimony only one son remained:
*1. Royal-Ensign Juan de Trevino, whom they also called Alderman Juan de Trevirio.

Commander Jose de Trevirfo had, furthermore, three natural sons out of wedlock:
*1. Jose',
*2. Diego, and
*3. Santiago de Trevino, with whom we shall occupy ourselves further along.(72)

When Commander Jose'de Trevino died, his widow, Marfa Navarro, contracted a second matrimony with the Portuguese Sebastian Garcia, old resident of Nuevo Reino de Leon.

Commander Jose DE TREVINO and Maria NAVARRO were married in 1628 in Monterrey NL Mexico.

'''_________________________________________________'''

From the Spanish ''Wikipedia'' page regarding '''Apodaca, Nuevo Leon''':

*1610 '''José de Treviño Quintanilla''', firmante como '''Josephe de Trebiño''', compra la hacienda el 24 de septiembre en cuatro mil pesos: la transacción de las tierras incluía a 4 caciques naturales (Namecunala, Panalequi, Cayaguama Francisco y Alaguapiame) con su gente, mujeres e hijos.
*1626 los apellidos “de la Garza” y '''“de Treviño”''' son los manifestados el 13 de octubre en planillas como poseedores de fierros para herrar ganado. Hay que hacer notar que por diversas razones, los apellidos portados por los individuos en esas épocas, no son forzosamente los directos de sus líneas paternas.

--------------------
=== GEDCOM Note ===
Origin of the Surnames Garza and Trevino in Nuevo Leon by TomasMendirichaga Cueva.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000012148479817

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]]
[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]][[Category:Pages]]