== Notes for [[Item:Q87465|Q87465]] ==

[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Servilia_gens Servilia gens]

[https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/1911_Encyclop%C3%A6dia_Britannica/Caepio,_Quintus_Servilius 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica - Caepio, Quintus Servilius]

https://www.google.com/books/edition/The_Interpretation_of_Dreams_Portents_in/tLMLeoWdXXsC?hl=en&gbpv=1&dq=Quintus+Servilius+Caepio+(consul+106+BC)&pg=PA122&printsec=frontcover

[https://archive.org/details/dictionaryofgre01smituoft/page/534/mode/1up?view=theater Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology]

Potter, David. ''The Origin of Empire: Rome from the Republic to Hadrian''. Harvard University Press, 2019. [https://www.google.com/books/edition/The_Origin_of_Empire/9AyfDwAAQBAJ?hl=en&gbpv=1&dq=Quintus+Servilius+Caepio+(consul+106+BC)&pg=PA164&printsec=frontcover p.164]

'''Bodin, Jean. ''Colloquium of the Seven about Secrets of the Sublime'''''. Translated by Marion Leathers Kuntz, Pennsylvania State University Press, 2008. [https://www.google.com/books/edition/Colloquium_of_the_Seven_about_Secrets_of/fpkvrr-qyoMC?hl=en&gbpv=1&dq=Quintus+Servilius+Caepio+(consul+106+BC)&pg=PA161&printsec=frontcover p. 161].

Cicero, Marcus Tullius. Tusculan Disputations. Translated by Quintus Curtius, Fortress of the Mind Publications, 2021. [https://www.google.com/books/edition/Tusculan_Disputations/N4I_EAAAQBAJ?hl=en&gbpv=1&dq=Quintus+Servilius+Caepio+(consul+106+BC)&pg=PA39&printsec=frontcover pp. 39, 231.]

'''Fields, Nic. ''Warlords of Republican Rome: Caesar versus Pompey.''''' Casemate, 2010. [https://www.google.com/books/edition/Warlords_of_Republican_Rome/dVtuQidyB0sC?hl=en&gbpv=1&bsq=Quintus%20Servilius%20Caepio p. 36]

[https://www.google.com/books/edition/Insomnium/R456LNThnNwC?hl=en&gbpv=1&dq=Quintus+Servilius+Caepio+(consul+106+BC)&pg=PA289&printsec=frontcover ''Insomnium'' by James Goldfarb]

Orosius, Paulus. ''The Seven Books of History Against the Pagans: The Fathers of the Church''. Edited by Hermigild Dressler et al., Translated by Roy J. Defarrari, Catholic University of America Press, 2001. [https://www.google.com/books/edition/The_Seven_Books_of_History_Against_the_P/O3tJ9mFnwpQC?hl=en&gbpv=1&bsq=Quintus%20Servilius%20Caepio p. 201]

'''''Historiarum Philippicarum in Epitomen Redacti A'' M. Iuniano Iustino''' [https://thelatinlibrary.com/valmax4.html Liber XXXII]
''III. Occiso Demetrio sublatoque aemulo non neglegentior tantum Perseus in patrem, verum etiam contumacior erat, nec heredem regni, sed regem gerebat. 2 His rebus offensus Philippus inpatientius in dies mortem Demetrii dolebat, tunc et insidiis circumventum suspicari, testes indicesque torquere. 3 Atque ita cognita fraude non minus scelere Persei quam innoxia Demetrii morte cruciabatur, peregissetque ultionem, nisi morte praeventus fuisset. 4 Nam brevi post tempore morbo ex aegritudine contracto decessit, relicto magno belli apparatu adversus Romanos, quo postea Perseus usus est. 5 Nam et Gallos Scordiscos ad belli societatem perpulerat, fecissetque Romanis grave bellum, nisi decessisset. 6 Namque Galli bello adversus Delphos infeliciter gesto, in quo maiorem vim numinis quam hostium senserant, amisso Brenno duce pars in Asiam, pars in Thraciam extorres fugerant. 7 Inde per eadem vestigia, qua venerant, antiquam patriam repetivere. 8 F,x his manus quaedam in confluente Danuvii et Savi consedit Scordiscosque se appellari voluit. 9 Tectosagi autem, cum in antiquam patriam Tolosam venissent conprehensique pestifera lue essent, non prius sanitatem recuperavere quam aruspicum responsis moniti aurum argentumque bellis sacrilegiisque quaesitum in Tolosensem lacum mergerent, 10 quod omne magno post tempore '''Caepio''', Romanus consul, abstulit. Fuere autem argenti pondo centum decem milia, auri pondo quinquies decies centum milia. l Quod sacrilegium causa excidii Caepioni exercituique eius postea fuit. Romanos quoque Cimbrici belli tumultus velut ultor sacrae pecuniae insecutus est. 12 Ex gente Tectosagorum non mediocris populus praedae dulcedine Illyricum repetivit spoliatisque Histris in Pannonia consedit. 13 Histrorum gentem fama est originem a Colchis ducere, missis ab Aeeta rege ad Argonautas, raptores filiae, persequendos; 14 qui ut a Ponto intraverunt Histrum, alveo Savi fluminis penitus invecti vestigia Argonautarum insequentes naves suas umeris per iuga montium usque ad litus Adriatici maris transtulerunt, cognito quod Argonautae idem prop ter magnitudinem navis priores fecissent; 15 quo ut avectos Colchi non reppererunt, sive metu regis sive taedio longae navigationis iuxta Aquileiam con sedere Histrique ex vocabulo amnis, quo a mari concesserant, appellati. 16 Daci quoque suboles Getarum sunt, qui cum Orole rege adversus Bastarnas male pugnassent, ad ultionem segnitiae capturi somnum capita loco pedum ponere iussu regis cogebantur ministeriaque uxoribus, quae ipsis ante fieri solebant, facere. Neque haec ante mutata sunt quam ignominiam bello acceptam virtute delerent.''

III. When Demetrius was slain, and his rival beheaded, Perseus was not only more careless towards his father, but also a more insolent man, and behaved not as an heir to the kingdom, but as a king. 2 Philip, being offended by these things, was daily grieving the death of Demetrius more impatiently; 3 And thus, on being discovered by the fraud, he was tortured no less by the crime of Perseus than by the innocent death of Demetrius; 4 For a short time after, having contracted an illness of sickness, he died, leaving behind a great preparation for war against the Romans, which Perseus afterwards employed. for he had induced the Scordisci Gauls also to make an alliance with the war, and had made a heavy war on the Romans, unless he should depart. 6 For the Gauls, having waged an unsuccessful war against Delphi, in which they had perceived a greater influence of the deity than of the enemy, after the loss of the general of Brennus some had fled into Asia, and the other into exile from Thrace. Thence they made their way back to their ancient country by the same footsteps by which they had come. 8 To them a certain band of men settled at the confluence of the Danube, and wished to be called Savi and Scordisci. 9 But the Tectosagi, when they had come into their ancient country to Tolosa, and were seized with a contagious infection, did not recover their health before the soothsayers, admonished by the answers of the gold and silver acquired by wars and sacrilegious acts, would sink into the lake of Tolosa; There were also five hundred and ten thousand pounds of silver, and five million pounds of gold. l That the sacrilege was the cause of the destruction of '''Caepio''' and his army afterwards. The Romans also pursued the tumult of the Cimbrian war, as an avenger of sacred money. 12 From the tribe of the Tectosagi, no ordinary people returned to Illyricum with the charm of plunder, and, having spoiled the Istrians, encamped in Pannonia. It is rumored that the nation of the tribes originated from the Colchis, after being sent by king Aeeta to the Argonauts, in pursuit of their daughter's abductors; 14 who, when they had entered from the Black Sea, charging into the channel of the Savio river, and following in the footsteps of the Argonauts, carried their ships on their shoulders through the ridges of the mountains as far as the shore of the Adriatic Sea; 15 when the Colchis did not find it conveyed, either for fear of the king, or for the weariness of a long voyage, to sit near Aquileia and the Histrique, from the name of the river by which they had yielded to the sea. 16 The Dacians also are the offspring of the Getae, who had fought badly against King Orole against the Bastarnas, and, in order to avenge their inaction, before taking a sleep, they were compelled by the king's order to lay their heads upon their feet, and to do the services as their wives had been accustomed to do before them. Nor were these things changed before they destroyed by valor the disgrace received by war.

[https://www.google.com/books/edition/The_Interpretation_of_Dreams_Portents_in/tLMLeoWdXXsC?hl=en&gbpv=1&dq=Quintus+Servilius+Caepio+(consul+106+BC)&pg=PA122&printsec=frontcover Consuls: Quintus Servilius Caepio and Gaius Atilius Sarranus (106 B.C.)]
At Amiternum, as a slave girl was being delivered of a baby boy, it is said “Good morning.” In the region of Perusia and in a few places at Rome, it rained milk. Among the many things struck by lightning at Atella, four fingers of a man’s hand ere sliced off as if with a knife. Silver coins were melted by a flash of lightning. In the region of Trebula, a woman married to a Roman citizen was struck by lightning but did not die. A rumbling was heard in the heavens and javelins were seems to fall from the sky. It rained blood. At Rome in the daytime, a flaming torch as ween flying high up in the sky. In the temple of the Lares, a flame shot from the pediment to the rooftop but did no damage. The lawcourts were divided by consul Caepio between the senatorial and equestrian orders. For the rest, there was peace.

'''Tacitus, Cornelius. ''Agricola and Germany''.''' Oxford Paperbacks, 1999. [https://www.google.com/books/edition/Agricola_and_Germany/ENwFjRIyq_UC?hl=en&gbpv=1&bsq=Quintus%20Servilius%20Caepio p. 123]

'''Notes to Pages 56-57'''
''Sevilius Caepio'': Quintus Servilius Caepio had been consul in 106 BC. As proconsul, he failed to cooperate with the consul Mallius.

''Maximus Mallius'': His normal style was Gnaeus Mallius Maximus, cf.above on Scaurus ''Aurelius''. The quarrel between Caepio and Mallius contributed to the disaster of 105 BC at the battle of Arausio (Orange) against the Cimbri, at which the legate Scaurus (above) was killed. Caepio was later convicted and sent into exile for stealing the Gallic treasure from Tolosa (Toulouse) the previous year.

''Five consular armies'': Although the five generals had all been consul, only three were consuls commanding consular armies when they were defeated; Caepio was proconsul, Scaurus only a legate.


'''''The Interpretation of Dreams and Portents in Antiquity'' by Naphtali Lewis''' [https://www.google.com/books/edition/The_Interpretation_of_Dreams_Portents_in/tLMLeoWdXXsC?hl=en&gbpv=1&dq=Quintus+Servilius+Caepio+(consul+106+BC)&pg=PA122&printsec=frontcover Consuls: Quintus Servilius Caepio and Gaius Atilius Sarranus (106 B.C.)]

"At Amiternum, as a slave girl was being delivered of a baby boy, it is said “Good morning.” In the region of Perusia and in a few places at Rome, it rained milk. Among the many things struck by lightning at Atella, four fingers of a man’s hand ere sliced off as if with a knife. Silver coins were melted by a flash of lightning. In the region of Trebula, a woman married to a Roman citizen was struck by lightning but did not die. A rumbling was heard in the heavens and javelins were seems to fall from the sky. It rained blood. At Rome in the daytime, a flaming torch as ween flying high up in the sky. In the temple of the Lares, a flame shot from the pediment to the rooftop but did no damage. The lawcourts were divided by consul Caepio between the senatorial and equestrian orders. For the rest, there was peace."d

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]