== Notes for [[Item:Q100458|Q100458]] ==

I identify him with '''''Benedictus le Puncteur''''', an English Jew mentioned as contributing at Oxford to a ''donum'' to 'Richard I' in 1194. Members of ''Wissenschaft den Judentums'' place him about 1260 in Provence; I narrow that to Narbonne specifically.

Berechiah was also the author of an ethical treatise entitled ''Sefer Matzref''. The treatise is divided into thirteen chapters. In it he quotes Rabbi Abraham ibn Daud (died about 1180) without the formula for the dead, so that it is quite probable that the book ''Sefer Matzref'' was composed before 1180.

Berechiah is known chiefly as the author of a set of over a hundred fables called Mishle Shualim (Fox Fables), some of his own invention and some reworked from Aesop's Fables, the Talmud, and Oriental sources. Berechiah's work adds a layer of Biblical quotations and allusions to Aesop's tales, adapting them as a way to teach Jewish ethics. Manuscripts exist at the Bodleian and Munich (written before 1268). The first published edition appeared in Mantua, in 1557; another with a Latin version by M. Hanel followed from Prague in 1661. An English translation titled Fables of a Jewish Aesop appeared in 1967 and has since been republished. in the preface to his fables, Berechiah refers to the "turning of the wheels of fate to the island of the sea [= England] for one to die and the other to live" ("Jewish Quart. Rev." ii. 522), suspected by members of ''Wissenschaft den Judentums'' to be reference to the English massacre of 1190.

The fables give in rhymed prose many animal tales passing under the name of Aesop during the Middle Ages; but in addition to these, the collection also contains fables conveying the same plots and morals as those of Marie de France, whose date has been placed approximately toward the end of the 12th century.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD85DE2E1EFBBFA9822EF79916C41FF
geni:6000000035156321455

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]