== Notes for [[Item:Q89236|Q89236]] ==

Hermesinda Gatónez, patrona del monasterio de Santa María de Loio,​ contrajo matrimonio con el conde Hermenegildo Gutiérrez, magnate gallego, dux de Galicia, conquistador de Coimbra y mayordomo mayor del rey Alfonso el Magno.

De este matrimonio nacieron, entre otros, Elvira Menéndez, esposa de Ordoño II de León, el conde Gutierre Menéndez, padre de san Rosendo, y Adosinda Gutiérrez, probablemente la madre de la reina Velasquita de León.

https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gat%C3%B3n_del_Bierzo

---------

-https://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/ASTURIAS,%20LEON.htm#ErmesindaGatoniz

iii) ''' ERMESINDA Gatónez'''. The primary source which confirms her parentage and marriage has not yet been identified. A charter dated 23 Dec 927 records donations by “Gutier Menendiz comes…cum coniuge sua domna Ylduara” to the monastery of Santa María de Loyo and specifies that he was son of “domne Ermesende comitisse”[176].

'''m ''' ( [865] ) conde HERMENEGILDO Gutiérrez, son of GUTIERRE --- & his wife Elvira --- (-after 912). A charter dated 6 Jun 878 records judgment in the court of “domini...Adephonsi principis...vel judicum Gatoni et Hermigildi” confirmed the possession of “villa Vimineta”, populated by “comite Gaton” during the reign of “domni Ordonii”[177].

----------
Hermesinda Gatónez

b. circa 850

Father Gatón, conde del Bierzo b. circa 820, d. 866

Mother Egilo (?) b. circa 825

Hermesinda Gatónez was born circa 850. She was the daughter of Gatón, conde del Bierzo and Egilo (?). Hermesinda Gatónez married conde Hermenegildo Gutiérrez, son of Gutiar of Galicia and Elvira (?), circa 865.1

Family

conde Hermenegildo Gutiérrez b. after 850, d. circa 943

Children

Munia Elvira Menéndez+ b. c 878, d. bt Sep 921 - Oct 921

Ildonca Menéndez+ b. c 880, d. 942

Gutierra Menéndez+ b. c 8852

Citations

[S1342] Casas Reales, online http://www.abcgenealogia.com/Familias3.html, Casa Real de Asturias y León.

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 277-36.

--------------------
FUENTES:

-http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.com/~pinofiel/haro_osorio.htm
--------------------
Tía de San Rosendo

FUENTES:

-http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.com/~pinofiel/haro_osorio.htm
--------------------
Ildonca Menéndez1

b. circa 880, d. 942

Father conde Hermenegildo Gutiérrez b. after 850, d. circa 943

Mother Hermesenda Gatónez b. circa 850

Ildonca Menéndez was born circa 880. She was the daughter of conde Hermenegildo Gutiérrez and Hermesenda Gatónez. Ildonca Menéndez married Gutierre Osoriz of Galicia, son of Osorio Gutiérrez, before 902. Ildonca Menéndez died in 942.

Family

Gutierre Osoriz of Galicia b. circa 877, d. circa 941

Child

Adosinda Gutiérrez+ b. c 902

Citations

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 21-37.
--------------------
Vide perfil do filho: Hermenegildo Guterres

Condesa

SOURCE NOTES:
www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal10931

SOURCE NOTES:
www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal11007

Chayton, H.J.
History of Aragon and Catalonia.
London: Methuen, 1933

1 NAME Hermesinda /Gatonez/ 1 BIRT 2 DATE ABT. 845

Chayton, H.J.
History of Aragon and Catalonia.
London: Methuen, 1933

Aldonza, aka, Ildonicia and Osorio Gutierres
Made a donation to Rosendo and the monastary of Celanova the Villa Furamontaos and of Villares Couelho and Pacini, (TC, F20v-21r, Celenova 65)

In the year of 0946 and 0941 per document Ildonicia married her cousin, Gutierre Ozores.
In another document dated 9.1.0941 The couple donated properties to Rosendo and the Monastary of Celanova. The Villa of Faramontaos and Uillares of Couello and Pacini.
TC f20v-21r. Celanova 65

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]