== Notes for [[Item:Q114634|Q114634]] ==

Raymond I (died 865) was the Count of Limoges (from 841), Rouergue and Quercy (from 849), and Toulouse and Albi (from 852). He was the younger son of Fulcoald of Rouergue and Senegund, niece of William of Gellone through his sister Alda.

In 852, on the death of his brother Fredelon, he, already count of Limoges, Quercy, and Rouergue, received Toulouse and Albi. In 862, he was attacked by Humfrid, Count of Barcelona, and forced to abdicate Limoges. In 863, he was likewise forced to abdicate Rouergue and Toulouse. He died in 865 while fighting for his possessions against the new count Sunifred I.

Raymond married Bertha and had five children:

Bernard II, count at one time or another of Toulouse, Rouergue, Quercy, Albi, and Nîmes

Fulgaud, viscount of Limoges

Odo, count at one time or another of Toulouse, Rouergue, and Quercy and duke of Septimania

Aribert, abbot of Vabres

a daughter who married Lupo I of Bigorre

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raymond_I_of_Toulouse

--------------------

RAYMOND ([815/20]-before 17 Apr 865). "Raymundus…comes et marchio et uxor mea Berteyz" founded the abbey of Vabres for the souls of "genitoris nostri Fulgualdi et…genetrice mea Senegundi et…germano meo Fredolone quondam" by charter dated 3 Nov 862, which names "Bernardum filium nostrum…Fulgualdus filius noster…Odo filius noster" (all three of whom also subscribed the document), subscribed by "…Begonis vicecomitis…"[191]. He was appointed Comte de Rouergue et Comte de Quercy in 849 by Charles “le Chauve” King of France, in recognition for his help in fighting Pippin II King of Italy. He succeeded in 855 as RAYMOND I Comte et Marquis de Toulouse. He founded the abbey of Vabres in 862 (see charter quoted above). The Annales Bertiniani record that "Hunfridus Gothiæ marchio" expelled "Tolosam Reimundo" in 863[192]. m BERTHE [Bertheis], daughter of REMY [Remigius] & his wife Arsinde --- (-after 6 Apr 883). "Raymundus…comes et marchio et uxor mea Berteyz" founded the abbey of Vabres by charter dated 3 Nov 862[193]. "Berteiz comitissa et filius meus Bernardus comes et marchio Tolosensis" donated property "in pago Ruthenico…in Tarnesca" to Vabres, constructed by "genitor noster Raymundus marchio quondam Tolosensis…cum genetrice mea Berteiz iam dicta", by charter dated 17 Apr 865, subscribed by "…Begoni vicecomiti…"[194]. "Bertheiz sagaci" donated property to Vabres, for the souls of "genitoris mei Remigii hac genetricis meæ Arsinda" and for "iugale meo Raimundo et filio meo Bernardo qui fuerunt quondam, seu et filio meo Odone et Benedicto", by charter dated 6 Apr 883[195]. Comte Raymond I & his wife had [six] children:

a) BERNARD (-[Aug/Dec] 874). His parentage is confirmed by the charter dated 3 Nov 862 under which "Raymundus…comes et marchio et uxor mea Berteyz" founded the abbey of Vabres, naming "Bernardum filium nostrum…Fulgualdus filius noster…Odo filius noster" (all three of whom also subscribed the document)[196]. He succeeded his father as BERNARD I Comte et Marquis de Toulouse. "Berteiz comitissa et filius meus Bernardus comes et marchio Tolosensis" donated property "in pago Ruthenico…in Tarnesca" to Vabres, constructed by "genitor noster Raymundus marchio quondam Tolosensis…cum genetrice mea Berteiz iam dicta", by charter dated 17 Apr 865, subscribed by "…Begoni vicecomiti…"[197]. The Annales Bertiniani name "rex markiones Bernardum scilicet Tolosæ et iterum Bernardum Gothiæ, itemque Bernardum alium" in 868[198]. Charles II "le Chauve" King of the West Franks confirmed the foundation of "mon. Vabrensi…in pago Ruthenico" by "Bernardus Tolosanus Marchio…pater eius Ragemundus", after the death of "Benedicto filio Ragemundi fratri suo", by charter dated 21 Jun 870[199]. A charter dated Aug 870 records a judgment given by "Bernardum comitem"[200]. He assumed the title Comte de Carcassonne et de Rodez in 871. He was probably murdered on the orders of Bernard “Plantevelue” Comte d’Auvergne. "Bertheiz sagaci" donated property to Vabres, for the souls of "genitoris mei Remigii hac genetricis meæ Arsinda" and for "iugale meo Raimundo et filio meo Bernardo qui fuerunt quondam, seu et filio meo Odone et Benedicto", by charter dated 6 Apr 883[201]. "Frotarius…Biturigensis ecclesiæ archiepiscopus" confirmed privileges to "villa Orbaciaco" for the souls of "Regimundi filiorumque eius Bernardi et Oddonis atque Arberti" by charter dated Aug 887[202].

b) FOUCAUD [Fulqualdus] (-after [6 Apr 883]). His parentage is confirmed by the charter dated 3 Nov 862 under which "Raymundus…comes et marchio et uxor mea Berteyz" founded the abbey of Vabres, naming "Bernardum filium nostrum…Fulgualdus filius noster…Odo filius noster" (all three of whom also subscribed the document)[203]. "Bertheis" donated property for the souls of "genitoris mei Remigii hac genetricis meæ Arsinda" and for "iugale meo Raimundo et filio meo Bernardo qui fuerunt quondam seu et filio meo Odone et Benedicto" by charter dated 6 Apr 883, subscribed by "Fulquoaldus"[204].

c) ODON [Odonus/Eudes] (-after 16 Jun 918). His parentage is confirmed by the charter dated 3 Nov 862 under which "Raymundus…comes et marchio et uxor mea Berteyz" founded the abbey of Vabres, naming "Bernardum filium nostrum…Fulgualdus filius noster…Odo filius noster" (all three of whom also subscribed the document)[205]. He succeeded as ODON Comte de Toulouse.

- see below.

d) BENEDICT (-[before 3 Nov 862]). Charles II "le Chauve" King of the West Franks confirmed the foundation of "mon. Vabrensi…in pago Ruthenico" by "Bernardus Tolosanus Marchio…pater eius Ragemundus", after the death of "Benedicto filio Ragemundi fratri suo", by charter dated 21 Jun 870[206].

e) HERIBERT [Arbertus]. His parentage is confirmed by the charter dated Aug 867 under which "Oddo comes, uxorque mea Garsindis" sold property "in comitatu Lemovicino…villa…Orbaciacus", with the consent of "fratre nostro Airberto" and subscribed by "Garsis comitis, Willelmi comitis…"[207]. "Bertheiz sagaci" donated property to Vabres, for the souls of "genitoris mei Remigii hac genetricis meæ Arsinda" and for "iugale meo Raimundo et filio meo Bernardo qui fuerunt quondam, seu et filio meo Odone et Benedicto", by charter dated 6 Apr 883[208]. The identity of "filio meo…Benedicto" in this document presents an interesting problem. As can be seen above, the monastery of Vabres was founded in 862 after the death of Benedict, son of Berthe, as confirmed by the charter of Charles II "le Chauve" King of the West Franks dated 21 Jun 870. However, the wording of Berthe´s charter of 883 suggests that both her sons Odon and "Benedicto" were alive at that date. An answer appears to be provided by the subscriptions of the 883 charter, which include "…Airiberto, qui vocatus fuit Benedictus, qui hoc consensit". This subscription does not state the relationship between the donor and this subscriber. He is the only subscriber (out of sixteen) who is described as having consented to the donation. This suggests a close relationship with the donor, except that his name is listed eighth in the list so appears not to be given any particular precedence. Nevertheless, this subscription raises the possibility that "filio meo…Benedicto" was the same person as Berthe´s son who is named "Airberto" in other documents. "Oddo…comes uxorque mea Garsindis" exchanged property with Frotaire Archbishop of Bourges by charter dated to [886] witnessed by "Airberti fratris eius, Garsiæ scriptoris comitis, Willelmi comitis…"[209]. "Frotarius…Biturigensis ecclesiæ archiepiscopus" confirmed privileges to "villa Orbaciaco" for the souls of "Regimundi filiorumque eius Bernardi et Oddonis atque Arberti" by charter dated Aug 887, although the charter of the same date shows that Oddon and Heribert were alive at that time[210].

f) daughter . Hincmar Archbishop of Reims addressed a letter to bishops in France dated 860 relating to the marriage of "Stephanum" and "Regimundis comitis…filiam" relating that the latter complained of non-consummation of the marriage dated "7 Kal Jun Indictione XIII"[211]. m ETIENNE [Stephanus] Comte [d'Auvergne], son of HUGUES --- (-killed Auvergne 864).

g) [REGILINDIS ([860/65]-). An 11th century history of Angoulême names "Bernardo, nepote Odonis"[212], referring to Bernard de Périgueux. Settipani point out the uncertainty about the identity of "Odo", but suggests that it refers to Eudes Comte de Toulouse than Eudes King of France[213]. She is named in an act at Angoulême dated [907/908][214]. m ([892]) GUILLAUME I Comte de Périgueux et d’Agen, son of VULGRINUS Comte d'Angoulême & his wife Regelindis d'Autun (-[918]).]

FOUNDATION FOR MEDIEVAL GENEALOGY
--------------------
Comte de Toulouse de Quercy
--------------------
http://genealogiequebec.info/testphp/info.php?no=24052

Comte de Toulouse Comte de Limoges Comte de Rouergue

Ancestral File Number:<AFN> 9HMK-81See Europäisch Stammtafeln Bund IItafel 41.
[Custer February 1, 2002 Family Tree.FTW]

[merge G675.FTW]

See Europäisch Stammtafeln Bund II tafel 41.

887183376. Grev Raimund I FULGAVALDSON av Toulouse +(21186) was a Greve in 852 in Quierzy.(21187) (21188) idet han etterfulgte sin bror Fredelon i grevskapet Toulouse og Rouegue. He was a Greve in 865 in Limoges. (21189) He died.(21190) Han grunnla klostret Vabres i Rouegue. I 863 ble han drevet ut av Toulouse av Hunfred, markgreva av Gothien. Fra Raimund I stammer det grevehus som kalles dynastiet Raimund. Markgrevskapet i Toulouse ble redusertr nesten bare til Toulousin og ble, etter å ha hatt flere herrer, særlig Karl den Skallede, forent med kongeriket, da Ludvig den Stammende tiltråte regjeringen i 877. He was married to Grevinne Berta (Berthiez) N.NSDTR

!Name is; Raimond I, Count of /TOULOUSE/

[large-G675.FTW]

See Europäisch Stammtafeln Bund II tafel 41.

SOURCE NOTES:
www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal07783

RESEARCH NOTES:
Count of Toulouse (852-855)

37th great grandfather

Data From Lynn Jeffrey Bernhard, 2445 W 450 South #4, Springville UT 84663-4950
email - bernhardengineer@@netscape.net

Name Prefix:<NPFX> Count Name Suffix:<NSFX> I, of Toulouse

Name Prefix:<NPFX> Count Name Suffix:<NSFX> I, of Toulouse

Greve av Toulouse 852 - 864.
Raimond var greve av Limoges og greve av Quierzy allerede i 852, idet han etterfulgte
sin bror Fredelon i grevskapet Toulouse og Rouergue. Fra ham stammer det grevehus som
kalles dynastiet ?Raimund?.
Han grunnla klosteret Vabres i Rouergue.
I 863 ble han drevet ut av Toulouse av Hunfred som var markgrave av Gothien.
Markgrevskapet Toulouse ble redusert til nesten kun å omfatte Toulousin. Det ble etter å ha
hatt flere herrer, spesielt Karl ?den Skallede?, forenet med kongeriket da Ludvig ?den
Stammende? tiltrådte regjeringen.
Toulouseslekten var grever av Toulouse fra 852 til 1271. Grevskapet lå i nåværende
Frankrike. Raimond IV grunnla grevskapet Tripoli i Libanon etter det første korstoget.

Raymond I of Toulouse
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Raymond I (died 865) was the Count of Limoges (from 841), Rouergue and Quercy (from 849), and Toulouse and Albi (from 852). He was the younger son of Fulcoald of Rouergue and Senegund, niece of William of Gellone through his sister Alda.

In 852, on the death of his brother Fredelon, he, alread count of Limoges, Quercy, and Rouergue, received Toulouse and Albi. In 862, he was attacked by Humfrid, Count of Barcelona, and forced to abdicate Limoges. In 863, he was likewise forced to abdicate Rouergue and Toulouse. He died in 865 while fighting for his possessions against the new count Sunifred I.

Raymond married Bertha and had five children:

* Bernard II, count at one time or another of Toulouse, Rouergue, Quercy, Albi, and Nîmes
* Fulgaud, viscount of Limoges
* Odo, count at one time or another of Toulouse, Rouergue, and Quercy and duke of Septimania
* Aribert, abbot of Vabres
* a daughter who married Lupo I of Bigorre

Rootsweb Feldman
URL: http://worldconnect.genealogy.rootsweb.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=:3044567&id=I19011
# ID: I19011
# Name: Raimond I DE TOULOUSE 1 2 3 4 5
# Sex: M
# Title: Count of Toulouse
# Birth: ABT 843 in Toulouse, France 1 2 3 4 5
# Death: ABT 864 in Toulouse, France 1 2 3 4 5
# Ancestral File #: 9HMK-81
# Change Date: 15 JAN 2004 5
# Change Date: 23 OCT 2001 2 3 4 5
# Note:

[Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED]

2 SOUR S332582
3 DATA
4 TEXT Date of Import: 14 Jan 2004

[daveanthes.FTW]

OCCU Count of Toulouse ...
SOUR HAWKINS.GED says ABT 797;www.public.asu.edu/bgertz/family/d0000 says ABT 843;
misc.traveller.com/genealogy/gedhtml/kmilburn says 843;
gendex.com/users/daver/rigney/D0001 says ABT 843;
SOUR COMYN4.TAF (Compuserve);
HAWKINS.GED says BEF 865;
Royalty for Commoners, Roderick W. Stuart, p. 232 says 863
Count of Querci, Count of Rouergue - COMYNI.GED (Compuserve), #1155;
Count of Rouergue and Toulouse having succeeded his brother Fredelon, c852; a
kinsman of Archbishop Hincmer of Rheims - Royalty for Commoners, Roderick W.
Stuart, p. 232; Count of Quercy, Toulouse, Rouerge, & Limousin. The source
estimates the date of marriage as About 862 - al7fl.abt
s.net/green-page/greenged.html;

GIVN Raimonde I of
SURN Toulouse
TITL Royalty for Commoners: The Complete Known Lineage of John of Gaunt, Son of Edward III, King of England, and Queen Philip
AUTH Roderick W. Stuart
PUBL 3rd ed., 1998, Genealogical Publishing Co., Inc., Baltimore, MD
ABBR Royalty for Commoners
STAT LIVE
Dead
!Royal Ancestors of Some American Families by M Call 11627 #1
TITL Royalty for Commoners: The Complete Known Lineage of John of Gaunt, Son of Edward III, King of England, and Queen Philip
AUTH Roderick W. Stuart
PUBL 3rd ed., 1998, Genealogical Publishing Co., Inc., Baltimore, MD
ABBR Royalty for Commoners
DATE 13 NOV 1999
TIME 13:22:42

NSFX et Toulouse
TYPE Book
AUTH Stuart, Roderick W.
PERI Royalty for Commoners
EDTN 3d
PUBL Genealogical Publishing co., Inc, Baltimore, MD (1998)
ISB 0-8063-1561-X
TEXT (286-39); 329-38...succeeded his brother Fredelon, ca 852; a kinsman of Archbishop Hincmer of Rheims
TYPE Book
AUTH Stuart, Roderick W.
PERI Royalty for Commoners
EDTN 3d
PUBL Genealogical Publishing co., Inc, Baltimore, MD (1998)
ISB 0-8063-1561-X
DATE 31 MAY 2000

Father: Fulgaud Foucaud Count of ROUERGUE b: ABT 780 in France
Mother: Senegonde DE ROUERGUE b: ABT 785 in Toulouse, France

Marriage 1 Berta DE TOULOUSE b: BEF 834 in France

* Married: ABT 862 1 2 3 4 5

Children

1. Has No Children Fulk DE LIMOGES
2. Has Children Daughter De Raymond TOULOUSE b: ABT 842 in Toulouse, France
3. Has Children Odo DE TOULOUSE b: ABT 869 in Toulouse, France


Sources:

1. Title: daveanthes.FTW
Note: ABBR daveanthes.FTW
Note: Source Media Type: Other
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Book
Text: Date of Import: 14 Jan 2004
2. Title: daveanthes.FTW
Note: ABBR daveanthes.FTW
Note: Source Media Type: Other
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Book
Text: Date of Import: Jan 13, 2004
3. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Jan 18, 2004
4. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: 21 Jan 2004
5. Title: Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Feb 6, 2004

Genty, Roger. Les Comtes de Toulouse: Histoire et Traditions. Ferri‚res: Editions de Poliphile, 1987. The first identifiable rulers of Toulouse and the surrounding countryside on the Frankish marches were Visigoths in the early 5th century. A hundred years later, Clovis conquered the region for the French. Then came the armies of Islam, and the hereditary counts of Toulouse became a bulwark of Christian Europe, with all the international political leverage that entailed. By the beginning of the 13th century, Toulouse, now virtually independent, also controlled Armagnac, Foix, Carcassonne, Narbonne, and much of Provence, and its rulers had become ancestors of both the kings of France and the Angevin kings of England. Heavily chronological in organization, this well-written volume outlines the successive rulers of Toulouse down to 1271, when Raymond VII's lack of male progeny and the death of his only daughter allowed Philip III to annex the wealthy county to the French crown. Genty provides numerous details for each individual profiled, which is especially useful in the early medieval period. It helps to be able to read some French, but basic data can be extracted without that facility. Descent charts are peculiarly French in style but are easy enough to use, and a brief bibliography will lead the reader to more in-depth histories and biographies (in French, of course).

!Name is; Raimond I, Count of /TOULOUSE/

!Name is; Raimond I, Count of /TOULOUSE/

!Name is; Raimond I, Count of /TOULOUSE/

#Générale##Générale#Profession : Comte de Quercy & de Limoges, de Rouergue & deToulouse.

#Générale##Générale#s:G Lhopital ; MC Bauche

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]