== Notes for [[Item:Q106159|Q106159]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shammar_Yahri'sh

Shamir Yuhar'esh II Tubba' began his rule sometime before 275 CE. He was the first ruler of the revived Himyarite Kingdom. His newfound position of power was due to two factors: first, marriage to a noble family widely respected in the region and second, the influx of wealthy merchant from Palmyra.

The line of Herod / Hasmoneans had all but disappeared by the end of the 3rd century. Aristobolus had tried to revolt in Nabatea, only to be pursued by Rome and flee to Himyar. His descendant, a daughter who claimed the title "princes of Chalcis" married Shamir Yuhar'esh II. This would give Shamir's descendants claim to the House of Herod, Hasmonean, Tobiad and through Toviah on the maternal line to King David.

Some of this history became conflated with the story of the Queen on Sheba, who was given the name Bilqis, perhaps derived from the name "Chalcis". The Himyar kings were fond of titles, but this title carried little substance. One thing that stuck however, was the sense that the Himyar kings were now the defender of the faith, the faith of Judaism as they understood it.

Shortly after or perhaps concurrent with, this marriage was another fortuitous event. In 270 CE, the Roman legion crushed the independent state of Palmyra. The numerous refugees flooded Medina and Mecca. They brought with them numerous skills in trading, taxation, and the logistics of transporting merchandise. With these newfound skills, Himyar began to prosper. Five years later, Shamir Tubba' led his troops to victory over Nadjran, Mareb and Hadhramaut. He succeeded in uniting much of Yemen, assuming the new title "King of Saba and Dhu Raydan and Hadhramaut and Yamnat" Yamnat is generally understood to be the Southern part of Yemen.

His marriage to nobility, brought him the title "Tubba' " claiming the rights and privileges of the renowned Tobiad dynasty. This title would have been quickly recognized by the Palmyrenes refugees. It was used by all the Himyarite kings after him.

The Tubba' kings were amply praised for their courage and leadership in Yemeni prophecy/poetry. Shamir Tubba's was able to gain decisive control of the sea routes for trade and commerce. According to Tabari, Shamir Tubba' was important enough to negotiate on equal terms with the king of the Parthian empire.

Shamir Tubba' founded a second Himyarite dynasty that within a hundred years would completely conquere and absorb it’s the old Sabean state. The rival kingdom with Mareb as the capital would cease to exist. The Axumites, who had become a strong power and had occupied the Tihama and part of the highlands more than once, would be driven back to Ethiopia.

The refugees from Palmyra brought with them other things as well: idolatry and the worship of Baal, which they called Hubal. According to Islamic historians the first person to erect idols inside and round the Holy Ka'bah was 'Amr Ibn Luhayy al-Khuzaje, who brought Hubal from Ardh al-Jezira in aI-Sham (Syria), and put it over the pit which was used as the coffer of the Ka'bah, where the remains of the Temple treasures were buried). He was the first to call for the worship of idols in grounds kept holy by the desendants of Onias for hundreds of years.

Requests to Shamir Tubba' to remove this abomination went unheeded. The "Jews" of Palmyra argued, apparently successfully, that Oniad sanctuaries, including Solomon's Temple in Jerusalem never had gates or guards to prevent all those who wished to come and worship at the holy place. Alcimus, the Tobiad high priest had pulled down the low wall of Ezra that divided the court of the Gentiles from that of the Israelites.

The powerful king liked this vision of cosmopolitanism. He liked the riches it brought. The old Oniad priesthood retreated to Khaybar. Even the monotheists who had lived for generations in Medinah, found themselves outnumbered by the polytheistic "nasaara" Jews. Tension between the Nasaara Polytheists and the Yahud Monotheists was strong. Memories of Odenathus' taxation were not yet forgotten and the usurpation of the altar of Onias in Mecca only added insensity to the conflict.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000014818217079

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]