== Notes for [[Item:Q112145|Q112145]] ==

Construyó el Castillo de Lara en 902.

--------------------

GONZALO Fernández de Lara (-after [932], bur Cereso de Río Tirón). His letter dated 912 to the town of Brañosera confirmed the rights granted by his paternal grandparents whom he names[94]. Referred to as "comes in Burgos" in 899[95]. He built the castle of Lara in 902[96]. The Annales Complutense record that “Gunzalvo Fernandez” populated “Cozca et Clunia et S. Stephanum” in 912[97]. He is last mentioned in Castile in 916[98]. He may have been banished to Navarre from 920 to 930, a "Gundisalvus comes" witnessing royal Navarrese documents during this period[99], although if this is correct it is surprising that his wife did not accompany him, established as she was in the castle of Lara during that time. A "Gundisalvus Fredinandiz comes" witnessed a 932 donation, signing immediately after King Ramiro II and before "Fredenandus comes" (presumed to be Fernando González), Pérez de Urbel suggesting that this is the same person as Gonzalo Fernández de Lara[100]. m (before 912) MUNIADOMNA, daughter of --- (-after 5 Aug [935/38], bur Santa María de Lara). "Momadonna cometessa" donated property to the monastery of Santa María de Lara, confirmed by her sons "Fredinando Gundisalviz, Ramiro Gundisalviz", by charter dated 28 Jan 929[101]. The origin of Muniadomna is unknown. Pérez de Urbel suggests that she was Muniadomna, daughter of Ramiro de Asturias titular King of León & his wife Urraca ---, based on her supposed mother being present in the castle of Lara, which belonged to Muniadomna, when she witnessed two charters in 927. He also points out the apparent corroboration from the naming of her second son after his supposed maternal grandfather. Muniadomna is referred to as "comitissima", and her descendants referred to in Arab sources as the "Banu Muma" as a tribute to her exceptional character, which may also suggest an illustrious ancestry[102]. "Momadonna cometessa" donated property in Valzalamio to the monastery of Cardeñas with her son "Fredinando Gundisalviz", her son's wife "Sancia" and their sons "Gundesalvuz Fernandez, Sanzio Fernandez" by charter dated 5 Aug [935/38][103]. Gonzalo & his wife had two children:

i) FERNANDO González de Castilla ([910]-Jun 970, bur Monastery of Arlanza). "Momadonna cometessa" donated property to the monastery of Santa María de Lara, confirmed by her sons "Fredinando Gundisalviz, Ramiro Gundisalviz", by charter dated 28 Jan 929[104]. His parentage is confirmed by the charter of his grandson Sancho García Conde de Castilla in which the latter names his paternal ancestors as far back as Munio Núñez & his wife Argila[105]. Conde de Lara in 929. He was installed in 932 as Conde de Castilla.

- see below.

ii) RAMIRO González de Castilla (-after 28 Jan [929]). "Momadonna cometessa" donated property to the monastery of Santa María de Lara, confirmed by her sons "Fredinando Gundisalviz, Ramiro Gundisalviz", by charter dated 28 Jan 929[106]. He has not been identified in later documents, which suggests that he may have died soon after. -------------------- Wikipedia -
* [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gonzalo_Fern%C3%A1ndez_de_Burgos about - '''Gonzola Fernádez of Castile, 895-905'''] Gonzalo Fernández of Castile

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

(Redirected from Gonzalo Fernández de Burgos)

Jump to:navigation, search

This article does not cite any references or sources.

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2009)

Gonzalo Fernández, Count of Burgos (ca. 899-915) and of Castile (c. 909-915).

Recorded for the first time in 899 as Count of Burgos, soon the region expanded to the eastern mountain valleys enabling Gonzalo to make his fort base in Lara, thus stretching his rule from the foot of the Cantabrian Mountains around Espinosa de los Monteros to the river Arlanza, which therefore became the border with the neighbouring Muslim territories. In order to stretch his territory this far, he first had to displace the Muslim forces based at the stronghold of Carazo that dominated the area and access. This was achieved after a long and well contested struggle.

The valley of Lara was then the rallying point of the family that - years later - achieved through his son, Fernan Gonzalez the quasi-independence of Castile, securing the area for five generations with the family until it became a kingdom under Fernando I of Castile of the Jimenez dynasty.

His name appears for the first time in charter of the Monastery of San Pedro de Cardeña (899), one of the most influential monastic houses later in Castile together with the Monastery of Santo Domingo de Silos. He was also the founder of the other Monastic House of San Pedro de Arlanza (912).

In 912, he took main part in the Castilian offensive to the river Duero, settling the old villeages of Haza, Clunia and San Esteban de Gormaz.

Gonzalo Fernández appears as Count of Castile for the first time in a document of January 8, 914 and again in January 1, 915. He appears witnessing royal documents among other magnates and nobles at the Leonese Court main Assemblies until the defeat of the Leonese in the battle of Valdejunquera (920), after which he was considered dead. Modern scholars suspect that he must have been in disgrace at Court for some unrecorded mistake or other major offense typically resulting in exile, as somebody with his name and the seldom given then rank of Count - Gundisalvus comes - appears signing royal documents at the Court of Navarre between the years 924 and 930, the year that his son was given the authority of Count alone. Previously, his wife Munia Donna (or Muniadona) appears holding the patrimony estates and county regency during the minority of their son Fernan Gonzalez.

His remains were laid to rest in a vault at San Pedro de Arlanza, as Friar Antonio de Yepes registers in his "General Chronicle".

http://dbe.rah.es/biografias/72091/gonzalo-fernandez

Updated place of burial from Cereso de Río Tirón, Spain

Conde de Castilla

Conde de Castilla

"DE LARA"; COUNT OF CASTILE

221795472. Gonzalo FERNANDEZ (12288). Han er etter nyere undersøkelser far til Fernan G. Han forekommer i forskjellige diplomer og skrifter fra 899 til 919. Han stammet fra dommeren Nunio Rasura.

SOURCE NOTES:
www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal11068

1 NAME Gonzalo Fernandez, Conde de /Burgos/
2 GIVN Gonzalo Fernandez, Conde de
2 SURN Burgos

Gonzalo Fernandéz forekommer i forskjellige diplomer og skrifter fra 899 til 919. Han
nedstammer fra dommeren Nuño Rasura.
Gonzalo Fernandéz var, etter nyere undersøkelser, far til Fernan Gonzalez.

-- MERGED NOTE ------------

Wikidata: https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q653617 | Geni: https://www.geni.com/people/6000000014013164881

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]