== Notes for [[Item:Q91291|Q91291]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Appius_Claudius_Pulcher_(consul_143_BC)

He allied with Tiberius Gracchus who married his daughter Claudia.

He died shortly after Tiberius Gracchus,[13] probably in 130

He married Antistia.

---

http://hu.wikipedia.org/wiki/Appius_Claudius_Pulcher_(Kr._e._143)

A néppártiak főellenségével, Publius Cornelius Scipio Aemilianus Africanusszal személyes ellenségeskedésben állt. Röviddel Tiberius Kr. e. 133-ban bekövetkezett halálát követően hunyt el. '''Appius nevű fia''' szintén ifjabb Scipio ellenfele volt.

Translation (with Wikipedia from Hungarian to English)

With ''főellenségével, capital enemy'' The People's Party Publius Cornelius Scipio Aemilianus Africanus was personal hostility. Shortly after death of Tiberius in 133 BC he died. '''Appius, a younger son''' also had his opponent Scipio.
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Claudia_(gens)#Claudii_Pulchri

Appius Claudius Ap. f. Ap. n. Pulcher, son of the consul of 143 BC, in 107 he participated in the discussions respecting the agrarian law of Spurius Thorius.[50]


----

'''
=Appius Claudius Pulcher=
'''

Appius Claudius Pulcher (Latin: APP•CLAVDIVS•C•F•APP•N•PVLCHER) was a Roman politician of the 2nd century BC.

'''Life'''

Son of Gaius Claudius Pulcher (who was consul in 177 BC), he was appointed consul in 143 BC, and, to obtain a pretext for a triumph, attacked the Salassi, an Alpine tribe. He was at first defeated, but afterwards, following the directions of the Sibylline Books, gained a victory. On his return the celebration of the triumph was refused; but he triumphed at his own expense, and when one of the tribunes attempted to drag him from his car, his daughter Claudia, one of the Vestal Virgins, walked by his side up to the capital. Next year he was an unsuccessful candidate for the censorship, though he afterwards held that office with Quintus Fulvius Nobilior, probably in 136 BC. He allied with Tiberius Gracchus who married his daughter Claudia. Appius backed Tiberius' land reform bill and in 133 BC with Tiberius and Tiberius' brother, Gaius Gracchus, was chosen commissioner for the division of the lands. Their post allowed them to survey the ager publicus, publicly owned land that Tiberius wanted to distribute among veterans of the Punic War. Another faction in the Senate opposed them and Tiberius was assassinated in 132 BC. Appius lived at enmity with Publius Scipio Aemilianus. He died shortly after Tiberius Gracchus, probably in 130 BC. He was one of the Salii, an augur, and princeps senatus. Cicero, says, that his style of speaking was fluent and vehement. He married Antistia.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Appius_Claudius_Pulcher_%28consul_143_BC%29

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]