== Notes for [[Item:Q99704|Q99704]] ==

Pirqoy ben Baboy

Pirqoy ben Baboy is known only as the author of a fairly short polemical treatise (Heb. iggeret, epistle), much of which has been preserved in a number of fragmentary manuscripts discovered in the Cairo Geniza, while other portions appear to be irretrievably lost. Pirqoy introduces himself at the beginning of this work as “the student of Rava, and Rava [was] the student of Rav Yehuday Gaon,” so that his floruit was approximately two generations later than that of the famous gaon Yehuday ben Naḥman, who died in 760 according to the Epistle of Sherira Gaon. We may therefore assume that Pirqoy wrote about the turn of the ninth century.

'''Pirqoy’s treatise takes the form of an open letter in Hebrew addressed to the Jewish communities of Spain and North Africa. Its aim is to convince the people of these communities, who have been exposed to Jewish traditions current both in Palestine and in Babylonia, that only the Babylonian version of rabbinic Judaism is authentic, and that it therefore behooves them to follow Babylonian tradition in all its particulars'''. The text is divided into two parts: a quasi-historical introduction and a series of critical discussions of certain Palestinian practices. Both sections display Pirqoy’s very considerable publicistic and rhetorical talents.

The introduction presents a highly tendentious version of the histories of the ancient Jewish centers of Palestine and Babylonia. According to Pirqoy, the Babylonian center was established before the destruction of the First Temple in the sixth century B.C.E. by distinguished members of the Palestinian community who had been sent into exile as an act of divine grace in order to preserve the continuity of Jewish tradition (citing 2 Kings 24:14 according to its midrashic interpretation). The Jews of Babylonia had enjoyed uninterrupted tranquility since that time, as a result of which they were able to preserve the ancient tradition in its pristine form. The Jews of Palestine, on the other hand, had been subjected to repeated persecutions, most crucially under the Byzantine Empire in the fourth century. As a result, '''according to Pirqoy, the chain of Palestinian tradition had been snapped, so that contemporary Palestinian practice represented not a genuine, living tradition but an attempt made after the Muslim conquest to reconstruct ancient Palestinian practice on the basis of fragmentary written sources.'''

Pirqoy’s critiques of a dozen or so Palestinian practices have been preserved in whole or in part. These range from central elements of Palestinian rabbinic culture (such as the recitation of the liturgical poems known as piyyuṭim) to seemingly trivial ones (such as holding an infant to be circumcised over a bowl of sand rather than a bowl of water, as was customary in Babylonia). In each case the practice in question is vehemently condemned, and its shortcomings from a Babylonian perspective are spelled out. '''According to Pirqoy, other Babylonian Jews before him had attempted to impose Babylonian practices in Palestine, but even the great Yehuday Gaon had met with very limited success. Pirqoy’s treatise provides crucial evidence of the ongoing struggle between the two ancient centers of rabbinic Judaism for hegemony over the Jewish world of the eighth and ninth centuries, as well as the details and history of various customs.'''

Robert Brody

Bibliography

Brody, Robert. Pirqoy ben Baboy and the History of Internal Polemics in Judaism (Tel Aviv: Tel Aviv University, 2003) [Hebrew].

Danzig, Neil. "Between Eretz-Yisrael and Bavel: New Leaves from Pirqoi ben Baboi," Shalem 8 (2008), pp. 1-32 [Hebrew].

Ginzberg, Louis. Genizah Studies in Memory of Dr. Solomon Schechter, vol. 2 (New York:

Jewish Theological Seminary, 1929), pp. 139–147, 504–573 [Hebrew].

Lewin, B. M. “Geniza Fragments, I. Chapiters [sic] of Ben Baboj,” Tarbiz 2 (1931): 383–405 [Hebrew].

Spiegel, Shalom. “Le-Parashat ha-Polemos shel Pirqoy ben Baboy,” in Harry Austryn Wolfson Jubilee Volume (Jerusalem: American Academy for Jewish Research, 1965), Hebrew vol., pp. 243–274.

Citation Robert Brody. " Pirqoy ben Baboy." Encyclopedia of Jews in the Islamic World. Executive Editor Norman A. Stillman. Brill Online , 2013. Reference. Jim Harlow. 24 January 2013 <http://referenceworks.brillonline.com/entries/encyclopedia-of-jews-in-the-islamic-world/pirqoy-ben-baboy-SIM_0017670>

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD7F79BB1EFBBFA9822EF79916C633D
geni:6000000019163160040

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]