== Notes for [[Item:Q112105|Q112105]] ==

From Wikipedia.com

Toda Aznárez (Basque: Tota Aznar; 876 – 15 October 958), known as Toda of Pamplona, was Queen-Consort of Pamplona by her marriage with Sancho I of Pamplona. She was daughter of the Count Aznar Sánchez of Larraun and Onneca Fortúnez, and sister of Sancha Aznárez who was married to Jimeno Garcés of Pamplona. Toda was the granddaughter of King Fortún Garcés of Pamplona.

Biography She was the daughter of Aznar Sánchez Lord of Larraun the paternal grandson of King García Íñiguez of Pamplona, while her mother Queen-Consort Onneca Fortúnez was a daughter of King Fortún Garcés. Thus, Toda's children were also descendants of the Arista dynasty of Navarrese monarchs. She was sister of Sancha Aznárez, wife of King Jimeno Garcés (her husband's brother and later successor), while Toda and Sancha were also aunts of the Caliph Abd-ar-Rahman III through their mother's first marriage to ‘Abdullah ibn Muhammad.

With the death of her brother-in-law Jimeno in 931, she became regent and guardian for her young son, García Sánchez I. In 934 Toda signed a treaty pledging allegiance to her nephew Abd-ar-Rahman III, and released hostages of the Banu Di n-Nun clan, the caliph confirming the rule of her son García (this has sometimes been interpreted as an act of the Caliph to liberate García from his mother's direct control). This led to the rebellion in Falces by a count Fortún Garcés, an "irascible man who hated Muslims", the uprising being suppressed with Cordoban arms. Toda violated her treaty in 937, forcing a punitive campaign.

During several stretches she appears in the royal charters of the kingdom to the exclusion of her daughter-in-law, the queen, from 947 to 955, and again in 959. In 958 she was ruling her own sub-kingdom, in the area of Degio and Lizarra, towns not otherwise identified.[1]

The same year, she took an interest in the health of her Leonese grandson Sancho I, whose obesity was largely responsible for his dethronement.[2][3] Toda requested the assistance of Abd-ar-Rahman III, the Caliphate of Córdoba, being renowned for its physicians. The caliph sent her his Jewish physician Hasdai ibn Shaprut, who promised to cure Sancho on condition that Toda visit the city of Córdoba.[4] Therefore, Toda, her son García Sánchez I of Pamplona and grandson Sancho I of León, nobles and clergymen arrived in Córdoba, where they were received with full honors and amid much pomp.[5][6][7] The arrival of this Catholic queen in the capital of an Islamic caliphate enhanced Abd-ar-Rahman III's prestige among his subjects,[8] and is considered a landmark in the history of medieval diplomacy.[9] Sancho's medical treatment was successful, and he was "relieved from his excessive corpulence."[10][11]

She had been an energetic diplomat, arranging political marriages for her daughters among the competing royalty and nobility of Catholic Iberia. She died in 958

Marriage and children Toda was married to Sancho I of Pamplona, with whom she had the following children:

1) García Sánchez I, King of Pamplona from 925 until 970, married first to Andregoto Galíndez, daughter of the Count of Aragon Galindo Aznárez II and later to Teresa Ramírez, daughter of Ramiro II of León. 2) Urraca Sánchez, Queen of León from 931 until 951 after marrying Ramiro II of León. 3) Oneca Sánchez, Queen of León from 926 until 931 after marrying Alfonso IV of León. 4) Sancha Sánchez, Countess of Castile after marrying Fernán González, first Count of Castile. 5) Velasquita Sánchez, married first to Munio Vélaz, Count of Álava, second to Galindo of Ribagorza and third to Fortún Galindez. 6) Munia Sánchez 7) Orbita Sánchez

----

La segunda foto es la inscripción junto al sepulcro de la reina Toda.

Toda Aznárez (2 de enero de 876-15 de octubre de 958) fue reina de Pamplona por su matrimonio con Sancho Garcés I de Pamplona. Era hija del conde Aznar Sánchez de Larraún y Onneca Fortúnez, que eran primos hermanos, hermana de Sancha Aznárez, casada con Jimeno Garcés, y nieta de Fortún Garcés, rey de Pamplona.

https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Toda_de_Pamplona

-- MERGED NOTE ------------

Wikidata: https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q2288810 | Geni: https://www.geni.com/people/6000000013503946568

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]