== Notes for [[Item:Q88671|Q88671]] ==

Quora Answer HistoryTopic

Paul Barends·amateur historian 4h ago amateur historian Who was the first laughing stock in history?

The story of Candaules, King of Lydia, (c. 700 BC) as passed on by historian Herodotus, certainly made him look foolish.

The Greeks were comfortable with nudity, but the Lydians were notorious prudes.

“Now, for the Lydians and for most non-Greeks,” comments Herodotus, “even for a man to be seen naked is a matter of great shame.”

Candaules was so proud of his wife that he just had to show her off to someone. He asked his bodyguard Gyges to take a peek while she undressed. The queen however noticed him, and was infuriated. She offered Gyges two options. Either he kills Candaules, and marries her; or she will have her soldiers kill him.

Gyges chose to become the new king. The people didn’t accept this at first, but when the Delphi Oracle was consulted, and gave the green light, it all ended happily.

Except for Candaules of course.

Candaules, King of Lydia, Shews his Wife by Stealth to Gyges, One of his Ministers, as She Goes to Bed by William Etty.

Added by Janet Milburn 10/23/20

Candaules (died c.687 BC; Greek: Κανδαύλης, Kandaulēs), also known as Myrsilos (Μυρσίλος),[1] was a king of the ancient Kingdom of Lydia in the early years of the 7th century BC. According to Herodotus, he succeeded his father Meles as the 22nd and last king of Lydia's Heraclid dynasty. He was assassinated and succeeded by Gyges.[1][2]

Based on an ambiguous line in the work of the Greek poet Hipponax, it was traditionally assumed that the name of Candaules meant "hound-choker" among the Lydians.[3] J. B. Bury and Russell Meiggs (1975) say that Candaules is a Maeonian name meaning "hound-choker" and that Aryan conquerors (the Heraclids in Greek tradition) had occupied the Lydian throne for centuries.[2] More recently, however, it has been suggested that the name or title Kandaules is cognate with the Luwian hantawatt(i)– ("king") and probably has Carian origin.[4] The name or title Candaules is the origin of the term candaulism, for a sexual practice attributed to him by legend.[5]

Several stories of how the Heraclid dynasty of Candaules ended and the Mermnad dynasty of Gyges began have been related by different authors throughout history, mostly in a mythical sense. In Plato's Republic, Gyges used a magical ring to become invisible and usurp the throne, a plot device which reappeared in numerous myths and works of fiction throughout history.[6] The earliest story, related by Herodotus in the 5th century BC, has Candaules betrayed and executed by his wife, Nyssia, in a cautionary tale against pride and possession.[7]

Contents 1 Herodotus' tale of Candaules, Gyges and the naked queen 1.1Modern view of the story 2 See also 3 Notes 4 Sources 5 External links Herodotus' tale of Candaules, Gyges and the naked queen

Jacob Jordaens. Candaules showing Gyges his wife Nyssia. This image illustrates Herodotus' tale of Candaules and Gyges. According to Herodotus in The Histories, Candaules believed his wife to be the most beautiful woman on Earth.[7] Herodotus does not name the queen but later artists and writers have called her Nyssia.[8]

Candaules often told his favourite bodyguard, Gyges, how beautiful the queen was and, thinking Gyges did not believe him, urged Gyges to contrive to see her naked. Gyges initially refused as he did not wish to dishonor the queen. Nevertheless, Candaules was insistent and Gyges had no option but to obey his king. So Gyges hid in Candaules' bedroom and, when the queen entered, watched her undress. As she was getting into bed, he quietly left the room, but the queen saw him and realised what had happened.[9] Herodotus commented: "For with the Lydians, as with most barbarian (i.e., non-Greek) races, it is thought highly indecent even for a man to be seen naked".[10]

The queen silently swore revenge for her shame. Next day, she summoned Gyges to her chamber. Gyges thought it was a routine request, but she confronted him immediately and presented him with two choices. One was to kill Candaules and seize the throne with Nyssia as his wife. The second was to be executed immediately by her trusted servants. Gyges pleaded with her to relent but she would not. He decided to take the first course of action and assassinate the king. The plan was that he should hide in the royal bedroom as before but this time from the king. After Candaules fell asleep, Gyges crept forward and stabbed him to death.[10]

Gyges married the queen as she had insisted but many Lydians did not at first accept him as their ruler. In order to prevent a civil war, Gyges offered to have his position confirmed or refused by the Delphic Oracle. He agreed that he would restore the throne to the Heracleidae if the Oracle declared against him. The Oracle supported him and his dynasty was established. The Priestess of the Shrine did add, however, that the Heraclids would have their revenge on Gyges in the fifth generation of the Mermnadae.[11]

Modern view of the story The story is rejected by Bury and Meiggs, who assert that the family of Candaules, although descended from Heracles himself, had become degenerate. As a result, Candaules was assassinated c. 687 BC by Gyges, who ushered in a new era for Lydia ruled by his own Mermnadae clan.[2]

https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gyges_of_Lydia

SOURCE NOTES:

http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per00631.htm#0

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Lydia 687-652 BCE

He ruled from 717 to 679 b.c.

He ruled from 717 to 679 b.c.

Gyges of Lydia
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Gyges was the founder of the third or Mermnad dynasty of Lydian kings and reigned from 687 BC to 652 BC (some claim 690 BC-657 BC). He was succeeded by his son Ardys II.

Authors throughout history have told differing stories of Gyges rise to power. Gyges was the son of Dascylus. Dascylus was recalled from banishment in Cappadocia by the Lydian king Sadyates, called Candaules, or "the Dog-strangler" by the Greeks, and sent his son back to Lydia instead of himself.

According to Nicolaus of Damascus, Gyges soon became a favourite of Sadyates and was dispatched by him to fetch Tudo, the daughter of Arnossus of Mysia, whom the Lydian king wished to make his queen. On the way Gyges fell in love with Tudo, who complained to Sadyates of his conduct. Forewarned that the king intended to punish him with death, Gyges assassinated Sadyates in the night and seized the throne.

According to Plutarch, Gyges seized power with the help of Arselis of Mylasa, the captain of the Carian bodyguard, whom he had won over to his cause.

In the account of Herodotus, which may be traced to the poet Archilochus of Paros, Candaules insisted upon showing Gyges his wife when unrobed, which so enraged her that she gave Gyges the choice of murdering her husband and making himself king, or of being put to death himself.

Finally, in the more allegorical account of Plato, Gyges was a shepherd, who discovered a magic ring by means of which he murdered the King and won the affection of the Queen.

In all cases, civil war ensued on the death of the King, which was only ended when Gyges sought to justify his ascendence to the throne by petitioning for the approval of the Oracle at Delphi.

According to Herodotus, he plied the Oracle with numerous gifts, notably six mixing bowls minted of gold extracted from the Pactolus river weighing thirty talents— an amount which would fetch over US$13 million at 2006 prices. The Oracle confirmed Gyges as the rightful Lydian King, gave moral support to the Lydians over the Asian Greeks, and also claimed that the dynasty of Gyges would be powerful, but due to his usurpation of the throne would fall in the fifth generation. This claim was later proven true, though perhaps by the machination of the Oracle's successor. Gyges 4th descendant, Croesus, lost the kingdom after misunderstanding a prophecy of the later Oracle, and fatefully attacking the Persian armies of Cyrus the Great.

Once established on the throne, Gyges devoted himself to consolidating his kingdom and making it a military power. The Troad was conquered, Colophon captured from the Greeks, Smyrna besieged and alliances entered into with Ephesus and Miletus.

The armies of Gyges beat back the Cimmerii, who had ravaged Asia Minor. An embassy was sent to Assur-bani-pal at Nineveh circa 650 BC in the hope of obtaining his help against the barbarians. The Assyrians were otherwise engaged, and Gyges turned to Egypt, sending his faithful Carian troops along with Ionian mercenaries to assist Psammetichus in shaking off the Assyrian yoke circa 660 BC.

Gyges later fell in battle against the Cimmerii under Dugdamme (called Lygdamis by Strabo i. 3. 21), who took the lower town of Sardis. Gyges was succeeded by his son Ardys.

Many Bible scholars believe that Gyges of Lydia was the Biblical figure of Gog, ruler of Magog, who is mentioned in the Book of Ezekiel and the Book of Revelation.

[edit]
References
This article incorporates text from the Encyclopædia Britannica Eleventh Edition, a publication now in the public domain.
"Croesus, Between Legend and History" by Carlos Parada
"Gyges of Lydia" by Jona Lendering at www.livius.org
" GYGES AND HOMER" by Livio C. Stecchini
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gyges_of_Lydia"

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]