== Notes for [[Item:Q82539|Q82539]] ==

Anteckningar från http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Titus_Aurelius_Fulvus

Titus Aurelius fulvus

Från Wikipedia, den fria encyklopedin

Titus Aurelius fulvus från " Promptuarii Iconum Insigniorum " I 1: a -talet fanns två män med namnet Titus Aurelius fulvus . Den ena var farfar och de andra far till den romerske kejsaren Antoninus Pius .

Den äldre Titus Aurelius fulvus var av galliska härkomst. Detta fulvus var dubbelt konsul och tjänstgjorde som en stad prefekten. Familjen till den äldre fulvus invandrat till Rom från Nemausus , Gallien (nuvarande Nîmes , Frankrike). I februari 69 , som befälhavare för Legio III Gallica , besegrade han 9000 Rhoxolani ryttare på den romerska sidan av Donau. Förmodligen under 70-talet var han konsul suffectus och 85 konsul.

Den yngre Titus Aurelius fulvus var konsul i 89 . Detta fulvus har beskrivits av Augustan historia som en ? sträng och rättrådig man? . Den yngre fulvus gift Arria Fadilla , en dotter till konsul och vän till Historikern Plinius den yngre, Gnaeus Arrius Antoninus .

Deras enda barn var Titus Aurelius fulvus Boionius Arrius Antoninus Pius föddes i Lanuvium ( modern Lanuvio , Italien) den 19 september 86 . Hans son uppfostrades av sin svärfar .
--------------------
'''
=Titus Aurelius Fulvus=
'''

In the 1st century there were two men with the name Titus Aurelius Fulvus. One was the paternal grandfather and the other the father to the Roman Emperor Antoninus Pius.

The elder Titus Aurelius Fulvus was of Gallic descent. This Fulvus was twice consul and served as a city prefect. The family of the elder Fulvus migrated to Rome from Nemausus, Gaul (modern Nîmes, France). In February 69, being commander of Legio III Gallica, he defeated 9,000 Rhoxolani horseman on the Roman side of the Danube. Probably during the 70s he was consul suffectus and in 85 consul.

The younger Titus Aurelius Fulvus was consul in 89. This Fulvus has been described by Augustan History as a ‘stern and upright man’. The younger Fulvus married Arria Fadilla, a daughter to consul and friend to Historian Pliny the Younger, Gnaeus Arrius Antoninus.

Their only child was Titus Aurelius Fulvus Boionius Arrius Antoninus Pius was born in Lanuvium (modern Lanuvio, Italy) on 19 September 86. His son was raised by his father-in-law.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Titus_Aurelius_Fulvus

CAUZWL27
http://trees.ancestry.com/rd?f=image&guid=6c686238-bbb8-4a8f-95d6-ffb7e330bc07&tid=10145763&pid=-393486412

CAUZWL27
http://trees.ancestry.com/rd?f=image&guid=6c686238-bbb8-4a8f-95d6-ffb7e330bc07&tid=10145763&pid=-393486412

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]