== Notes for [[Item:Q81893|Q81893]] ==

Abū G̲h̲abs̲h̲ān al-Muḥtaris̲h̲ b. Hulail b. Salūl, sold the key of the temple to Ḳuṣaiy b. Kināna, through whom the custodianship came down to the tribe of Ḳurais̲h̲, for a skin of wine. This tribe was divided into three principal branches: Ḥubs̲h̲īya, ʿAdī and Ḥirmiz, the last of which was probably very small as no notable persons belonging to this clan are mentioned. Ḥubs̲h̲īya was divided into several families, namely: Ḥulail, Ḳumair, Ḍāṭir, Kulaib and G̲h̲āḍira. To the first belonged al-Muḥtaris̲h̲ mentioned above and Kurz b. ʿAlḳama who followed the Prophet on his flight from Mekka to al-Medīna as far as the cave where he lost trace of him, when he found a spider-web over the entrance of the cave. He lived to the time of Muʿāwiya and it was through his knowledge of the topography of the country that the limits of the Holy Territory were fixed, which have been retained to this day. Of the family of Ḳumair was Ḳabīsa b. Ḏh̲uʾaib, who was bom in’ the life-time of the Prophet and died in Syria in 86 a. h., and Mālik b. al-Hait̲h̲am b. ʿAwf, one of the principal emissaries of the ʿAbbāsids and friend of Abū Muslim, who left him in charge of the army when he went to see the Caliph al-Manṣūr and was murdered.

Bibliography

Ibn Duraid, Is̲h̲tiḳāḳ, ed. Wüstenfeld, p. 276 sqq.

al-Nuwairī, Nihāyat al-Arab, ed. Cairo, ii. 318 sqq. and 336

al-Ḳalḳas̲h̲andī, Nihāyat al-Arab, ed. Bag̲h̲dād, p. 199, 242, 260, 312, 326

al-ʿIḳd al-Farīd, ed. Cairo, 1316, ii. 53

al-Samʿānī, Ansāb, ed. Margoliouth, Gibb Memorial Series, vol. xx., fol. 304a

Ag̲h̲ānī, ix. 93, xv. 53

Usd al-G̲h̲āba, ed. Cairo, 1286 (passim)

Ibn Ḥad̲j̲ar, Tahd̲h̲īb, ed. Ḥaidarābād, (passim)

Wüstenfeld, Genealogische Tabellen and Register.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]