== Notes for [[Item:Q102760|Q102760]] ==

Talmud Bavli - Sanhedrin 5a,

The Gemora relates: When Rabbah b. Hana was about to go to Babylon, R. Hiyya said to Rabbi: ‘My brother's son is going ''[8]'' to Babylon. May he, decide in matters of ritual law?’ Rabbi answered: ‘He may. May he decide monetary cases?’ — He may.’ ‘May he declare firstborn animals permissible [for slaughter]?’ ''[9]''

— ‘He may.’

When Rab went there, R. Hiyyasaid to Rabbi: ‘My sister's son is going to Babylon. May he decide on matters of ritual law?’ — He may. ‘May he decide [monetary] cases?’ — ‘He may.’ ‘May’ he declare firstborn animals permissible for slaughter?’ — ‘He may not.’

The Gemara then asks: Why did Rabbi Chiya call Rabbah bar Chanah ―my brother’s son‖ and Rav ―my sister’s son? And it cannot be that it was actually so, since a Master said that '''Aivu (Rav’s father), Chanah (Rabbah’s father), Shila, Marsa and Rabbi Chiya were all the children of Abba bar Acha Karsela of Kafri!?''' [We see that Rabbah bar Chanah and Rav were both Rabbi Chiya’s brother’s sons!?] ''[10]''

The Gemara responds — '''Rav was also Rabbi Chiya’s sister’s son (on his mother’s side; Rav was the son of Rav Chiya’s brother, whose name was Aivu, and Rav was also the son of Rav Chiya’s sister whose name was Ima. Rav was the son of Rav Chiya’s half brother and also the son of Rav Chiya’s half sister), while Rabbah bar Chanah was only his brother’s son.''' Alternatively, you might answer that he chose to call him his sister’s son, on account of his exceptional wisdom, as it is written: ''Say to wisdom, you are my sister.''

(8) Lit., ‘descending’. (9) On finding, after careful examination, that they had permanent blemishes. After the destruction of the Temple, firstborn animals could be slaughtered only on having permanent defects. (10) In Babylonia. '''Hence Rab was also the son of R. Hiyya's brother's son.'''

''NOTE - Prior attempts to classify Aivu/Aibo have not been successful because they lost track of the generations of Tannaim prior to Amoraim. In this case, Aivu is first last generation of Tanna, while his son (Rab) represents the transition to the Amoraim period. This point is made clear by examining the notes below - they try to demonstrate that Aivu was a 3rd generation Amora of the 3rd century. In fact, there are a number of them:

1. is an Amora of the 3rd century named Aivu ('Aivu bar Nagri' a/k/a 'Aivu bar Agrah') whose teacher was Rabbi Chiya bar Abba;

2. another is Rabbi Aivu, Amora of 3rd century whose teacher was. possibly the Amora Rabbi Yochanan;

3. Aivu, a 2nd generation Amora and son of Rab who is found in Talmud Bavli Pesachim 113,

4. Aivu, 3rd generation Amora, grandson of Rab who may very well be the person cited in #1 above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rab said to his son Aibo: I have labored to teach thee law, without success; come, I will instruct thee in worldly affairs. While the dust is still on thy feet, sell thy wares; you may regret a (premature) sale of anything except wine; untie thy purse, then open thy sack ;לbetter a kab from the ground than a kor from the roof; if thou hast dates in thy cask, run to the brewer." http://www.hebrewbooks.org/pagefeed/hebrewbooks_org_37713_54.pdf

Babylonian scholar of the third century; junior to Rab (B. M. 41a). He was an expert dialectician, and prevailed in argument even against his famous senior (Yer. Sanh. vii. 25c).

His patronymic is variously given as "Abba," "Abaye," "Abina," "Abuha," "Abun," and "Aibu" (comp. Yer. Sanh. x. 28b; Gen. R. xlii. 3; Ruth R., proem, 7; Tan., Aḥare Mot, 7; ib., ed. Buber, 9; Num. R. ii. 26).

As regards his nativity, he appears in the company of Palestinian scholars (Pesiḳ. viii. 71a; Lev. R. xxviii. 6), but also, before the leaders of the fourth amoraic generation, in Babylonia ('Er. 12a; Ḳid. 31b). The fact, however, that he was a favorite in Babylonia would make it seem more probable that he was a Babylonian by birth.

Whenever Jacob returned from school his father and mother would vie with each other in waiting on him; but this Jacob did not consider consonant with the respect due from child to parent; he therefore appealed to Abaye, who told him: "Thy mother's services thou mayest receive, but not those of thy father, who is himself a scholar" (Ḳid. 31a). He doubtless visited Palestine, since he is mentioned in the company of Palestinians; but as an old man he is found in Babylonia (Zeb. 70b).

Bibliography: Heilprin, Seder ha-Dorot, ii.

http://www.jewishencyclopedia.com/articles/8385-jacob-b-abba

See "My Lines"

( http://homepages.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~cousin/html/p116.htm#i13812 )

from Compiler: R. B. Stewart, Evans, GA

( http://homepages.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~cousin/html/index.htm )

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000005747693329

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]