== Notes for [[Item:Q88854|Q88854]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ashur-dan_I
--------------------
Ashur-dan IFrom Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Ashur-Dan I) Jump to: navigation, search Aššur-dān I, mAš-šur-dān(kal)an, was the 83rd king of Assyria, reigning for 46[i 1] (variant: 36[i 2]) years, ca. 1179 to 1134 BC (variant: ca. 1169 to 1134 BC[1]), and the son of Ninurta-apal-Ekur,[i 3] where one of the three variant copies of the Assyrian King List shows a difference. The Synchronistic King List[i 4] and a fragmentary copy[i 5] give his Babylonian contemporaries as Zababa-šum-iddina, ca. 1158 BC, and Enlil-nādin-aḫe, ca. 1157—1155 BC, the last of the kings of the Kassite dynasty, but it is probable he was contemporary with two more preceding and two following these monarchs, if the length of his reign is correct.

[edit] BiographyDuring the twilight years of the Kassite dynasty, the Synchronistic History[i 6] records that he seized the cities of Zaban, Irriya, Ugar-sallu and a fourth town name not preserved, plundering them and “taking their vast booty to Assyria.” A fragmentary clay tablet[i 7] usually assigned to this king lists his military conquests over “[…]yash and the land of Irriya, the land of the Suhu, the kings of the land Shadani, […y]aeni, king of the land Shelini.”[2] Fresh from their conquest of the Babylonians, it seems the Elamite hordes overwhelmed the Assyrian city of Arraphe, which was not recovered until late in Aššur-dān’s reign.[1]

Few inscriptions have been recovered for this king although he is mentioned in two of those of his descendant Tukultī-apil-Ešarra.[3] One of these inscriptions mentions his demolition of the dilapidated temple of An and Adad, originally built by Išme-Dāgan II 641 years earlier. It was not to be reconstructed until 60 years later by Tukultī-apil-Ešarra, who also names him in his genealogy.[4] A dedication for the king appears on a bronze statue votive offering[i 8] to the Egašankalamma, temple of Ištar in Arbail, offered by Šamši-Bēl, a scribe.[2]

A partial reconstruction of the sequence of limmus, the Assyrian Eponym dating system, has been proposed influenced by a letter[i 9] which provides the initial sequence of Pišqiya, the official during whose reign his predecessor died, Aššur-dān (the king), Atamar-den-Aššur, Aššur-bel-lite, and Adad-mušabši.[5] A harem edict or palace decree was issued giving the penalties for misdemeanors of maidservants, where the first offence is punishable with a beating thirty times with rods by her mistress.[2] Two sons of Aššur-dān were to contest the throne after his death, Ninurta-tukulti-Ashur ruling for less than a year before being overthrown and forced to flee by his brother Mutakkil-Nusku.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ashur-Dan_I

Ashur-dan I
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.

Ashur-dan I was one of the longest-reigning Kings of Assyria, reigning for some 46 years according to the Assyrian King List (although one version of the list gives him only 36 years). According to one of the more commonly used chronologies of the middle Assyrian period, he reigned from 1179 BC to 1133 BC. He succeeded his father, Ninurta-apal-Ekur, and was succeeded by his son, Ninurta-tukulti-Ashur. Beyond this, little is known of his long reign.

Preceded by:
Ninurta-apal-Ekur King of Assyria
1179–1133 BC Succeeded by:
Ninurta-tukulti-Ashur

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]