== Notes for [[Item:Q114561|Q114561]] ==

'''García Sánchez III''' c. 1012 – 1 September 1054),
aka García III de Nájera was
King of Pamplona from 1034 until his death in 1054.

He was also Count of Álava and had control of the County of Castile. As the eldest son of Sancho III he inherited the dynastic rights over the crown of Pamplona
House Jiménez
Father '''Sancho III of Pamplona'''
Mother '''Muniadona of Castile'''



García Sánchez III of Navarre From < [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garc%C3%ADa_Sánchez_III_of_Pamplona Wikipedia] >, the free encyclopedia


García Sánchez III, sometimes García III, IV, V, or VI (also García of Nájera, from Spanish: García el de Nájera), was king of Navarre from 1035 to 1054. He was the eldest legitimate son and heir of Sancho the Great, thus he succeeded in his father's inheritance of Navarre. He not only received the patrimony of his family, he was given a seniority amongst his brothers, a sort of "High Kingship". However, his father divided his many conquests among García's brothers: Ramiro, the eldest but illegitimate son, received the petty kingdom of Aragón; Ferdinand, the second eldest legitimate son, received Castile (which his father received through marriage to his mother); and his youngest surviving son (legitimate), Gonzalo, received the kingdoms of Sobrarbe and Ribagorza. In 1037, Ferdinand requested García's aid against his brother-in-law, Bermudo III of León, in battle near Pisuerga. The two brothers defeated Bermudo, who died in battle, the final descendant of Pedro de Cantabria, and Ferdinand succeeded in León. By aiding Ferdinand, García received his brother's favour and, in a repartition of Castile, he expanded Navarre to the bay of Santander and incorporating the entire Basque Country. Soon he was confronted by his brother Ramiro at Tafalla (1043) and defeated him. He was one of the Christian kings to profit greatly from the weakened taifa kingdoms inhabiting the "vacuum" that was the Caliphate of Córdoba. In 1045, he conquered Calahorra. Relations eventually soured with Ferdinand and war broke out between the fraternal kingdoms, García dying in the Battle of Atapuerca, 15 September, 1054. His nickname comes from his foundation of the monastery of Santa María la Real in Nájera. [edit]Family

He was married, in 1038, to Estefanía, daughter of Ramon Borrell, Count of Barcelona, an hereditary count of Barcelona (her dowry was the Cameros), and they produced nine children (four sons, five daughters): Sancho "El de Peñalén", king of Navarre, married Placencia Ramiro (d.1083), lord of Calahorra, married Teresa Ferdinand, lord of Bucesta, married Nuña de Vizcaya Raymond the Fraticide (Ramón el Fratricida), lord of Murillo and Cameros Ermesinda, married Fortún Sánchez de Yarnoz Mayor, married Guy II of Masón. Urraca (d.1108), married García Ordóñez Jimena Mencia (d.1106), married Lope de Nájera He also had illegitimate sons: Sancho, lord of Uncastillo and Sangüesa, married Constanza, grandfather of García Ramírez, king of Navarre Ramiro After García's death, Estefanía is said to have remarried to Roger de Tosny, a Norman adventurer. Estefanía may have been a widow at the time of her marriage to García. A traditional poem tells of the marriage of an illegitimate son of García (presumed to be Sancho) to his step-sister, a daughter of Estefanía by a former husband.

--------------------
García Sánchez III, sometimes García III, IV, V, or VI (also García of Nájera, from Spanish: García el de Nájera, 1016-1054), was king of Navarre from 1035 to 1054. He was the eldest legitimate son and heir of Sancho the Great, born November 1016, and he succeeded his father to the crown of Navarre. He not only received the patrimony of his family, he was given a seniority amongst his brothers, a sort of "High Kingship". However, his father divided his many conquests among García's brothers: Ramiro, the eldest but illegitimate son, received the petty kingdom of Aragón; Ferdinand, the second eldest legitimate son, received Castile (which his father received through marriage to his mother); and his youngest surviving son (legitimate), Gonzalo, received the kingdoms of Sobrarbe and Ribagorza.

In 1037, Ferdinand requested García's aid against his brother-in-law, Bermudo III of León, in battle near Pisuerga. The two brothers defeated Bermudo, who died in battle, the final descendant of Pedro de Cantabria, and Ferdinand succeeded in León.

By aiding Ferdinand, García received his brother's favour and, in a repartition of Castile, he expanded Navarre to the bay of Santander and incorporating the entire Basque Country.

Soon he was confronted by his brother Ramiro at Tafalla (1043) and defeated him.

He was one of the Christian kings to profit greatly from the weakened taifa kingdoms inhabiting the "vacuum" that was the Caliphate of Córdoba. In 1045, he conquered Calahorra.

Relations eventually soured with Ferdinand and war broke out between the fraternal kingdoms, García dying in the Battle of Atapuerca, 15 September, 1054. His nickname comes from his foundation of the monastery of Santa María la Real in Nájera. He was married, in 1038, to Estefanía, daughter of Ramon Borrell, Count of Barcelona, an hereditary count of Barcelona (her dowry was the Cameros), and they produced nine children (four sons, five daughters):

Sancho "El de Peñalén", king of Navarre, married Placencia Ramiro (d.1083), lord of Calahorra, married Teresa Ferdinand, lord of Bucesta, married Nuña de Vizcaya Raymond the Fraticide (Ramón el Fratricida), lord of Murillo and Cameros Ermesinda, married Fortún Sánchez de Yarnoz Mayor, married Guy II of Masón. Urraca (d.1108), married García Ordóñez Jimena Mencia (d.1106), married Lope de Nájera He also had illegitimate sons:

Sancho, lord of Uncastillo and Sangüesa, married Constanza, grandfather of García Ramírez, king of Navarre Ramiro After García's death, Estefanía is said to have remarried to Roger de Tosny, a Norman adventurer. Estefanía may have been a widow at the time of her marriage to García. A traditional poem tells of the marriage of an illegitimate son of García (presumed to be Sancho) to his step-sister, a daughter of Estefanía by a former husband.
--------------------
García Sánchez III, sometimes García III, IV, V, or VI (also García of Nájera, from Spanish: García el de Nájera, 1016-1054), was king of Navarre from 1035 to 1054. He was the eldest legitimate son and heir of Sancho the Great, born November 1016, and he succeeded his father to the crown of Navarre, becoming feudal overlord over two of his brothers: Ramiro, who was given lands that would serve as the basis for the kingdom of Aragón; and Gonzalo, who received the counties of Sobrarbe and Ribagorza. Likewise, he had some claim to suzerainty over brother Ferdinand, who under their father had served as Count of Castile, nominally subject to the Kingdom of León but brought under the personal control of Sancho III.

In 1037, Ferdinand requested García's aid against his brother-in-law, Bermudo III of León, at the Battle of Tamarón near Pisuerga. The two brothers defeated Bermudo, who died in battle, the final king of the male line of Pedro de Cantabria, and Ferdinand succeeded in León.

By aiding Ferdinand, García received his brother's favour and, in a repartition of Castile, he expanded Navarre to the bay of Santander, incorporating the entire Basque Country.

Soon he was confronted by his brother Ramiro at Tafalla (1043) and defeated him, but this victory resulted in the effective independence of Ramiro.

García was one of the Christian kings to profit greatly from the weakened taifa kingdoms that arose through the disintegration of central control by the Caliphate of Córdoba. In 1045, he conquered Calahorra.

Relations eventually soured with Ferdinand and war broke out between the fraternal kingdoms, García dying in the Battle of Atapuerca, 15 September, 1054.

His nickname comes from his foundation of the monastery of Santa María la Real of Najera.

[edit] Family He was married, in 1038, to Estefanía, possibly daughter of Ramon Borrell, Count of Barcelona (her dowry was the Cameros), and they produced nine children (four sons, five daughters):

Sancho "El de Peñalén", king of Navarre, married Placencia Ramiro (d.1083), lord of Calahorra, married Teresa, daughter of count Gonzalo Salvadórez de Lara[citation needed] Ferdinand, lord of Bucesta, married Nuña de Vizcaya Raymond the Fraticide (Ramón el Fratricida), lord of Murillo and Cameros Ermesinda, married Fortún Sánchez de Yarnoz Mayor, married Guy II of Masón. Urraca (d.1108), married Castilian count García Ordóñez Jimena Mencia (d.1106), married Lope de Nájera He also had illegitimate sons:

Sancho, lord of Uncastillo and Sangüesa, jure uxoris-by right of his wife, Constanza. He was grandfather of García Ramírez, king of Navarre Ramiro After García's death, Estefanía is said to have remarried to Roger de Tosny, a Norman adventurer. Estefanía may have been a widow at the time of her marriage to García. A traditional poem tells of the marriage of an illegitimate son of García (presumed to be Sancho) to his stepsister, a daughter of Estefanía by a former husband.

Preceded by: Sancho III King of Navarre 1035–1054 Sancho IV Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garc%C3%ADa_S%C3%A1nchez_III_of_Navarre" Categories: 1054 deaths | House of Jiménez | Navarrese monarchs | Monarchs killed in action | 1016 births
--------------------
García Sánchez III (después de 1020 – Atapuerca, 15 de septiembre de 1054) apodado el de Nájera, fue rey de Pamplona desde 1035. Hijo de Sancho III el Mayor y de Muniadona Sánchez de Castilla.

Biografía Heredero del trono según la costumbre, a la muerte de su padre Sancho Garcés III, pues el primogénito Ramiro que heredó Aragón era hijo ilegítimo.

Venció a su hermano Ramiro I de Aragón en Tafalla (1043), fijando la frontera oriental de su reino.

Aprovechando la debilidad de los reinos de taifas, se dedicó a aumentar por el sur sus dominios con buen éxito, logrando conquistar Calahorra en el 1045.

El 12 de diciembre de 1052 consagró el Monasterio de Santa María la Real de Nájera que había mandado construir unos años antes. Tras esto quiso enriquecerlo trayendo los cuerpos de Santos de la comarca, pidiendo su aprobación a los obispos Sancho de Pamplona, García de Álava y Gómez de Burgos. En 1052 intentó trasladar el cuerpo de Felices de Bilibio, llegando a tal acuerdo con el obispo de Álava. Éste se dirigió a los Riscos de Bilibio acompañado de muchos caballeros pero cuando abrió la sepultura, sintió separarse del túmulo y se le torció la boca, tras lo que dio inicio una fuerte tormenta. Al parecer que el cielo se oponía al traslado se marcharon, pero parece que el obispo conservaría la deformación de su cara de por vida.[1] El 29 de mayo de 1053 intentó trasladar los restos de Millán sin conseguirlo, por el milagro de los bueyes que no querían continuar con el traslado.[1] Por este milagro decidió construir un nuevo monasterio para albergar su cuerpo en el lugar donde los bueyes habían quedado parados, este sería el Monasterio de Yuso.

[editar] Relaciones con Castilla García además de recibir de Sancho el Mayor el reino patrimonial de Pamplona, heredó de su padre Álava y gran parte del Condado de Castilla (La Bureba, Trasmiera, Montes de Oca, Encartaciones y Castilla Vieja). Si bien para José María Lacarra estos territorios los dio Fernando a García por su ayuda prestada en la batalla de Tamarón,[2] en la actualidad gracias a la documentación esta teoría de Lacarra se hace imposible ya que el nombre de García antes de la batalla de Tamarón ya aparece calendando los diplomas de Valpuesta, o en la documentación del monasterio de Valvanera y San Millán reinando en Oca y en la Bureba.[3]

El propio García el año 1044 y el año 1046 describe así el territorio donde gobierna:

Reinando el rey García, que mandó hacer esta escritura, en Pamplona y en Álava y en Castilla Vieja hasta Burgos y hasta Bricia, poseyendo también Cudeyo con su término en Asturias; su hermano Fernando rey en León y en Burgos...

[4] No es de extrañar que cuando García restaura el Monasterio de Santa María del Puerto en Santoña, el escriba considere que García reinaba en Pamplona y Castilla, y Fernando en León y Galicia:

En aquel tiempo cuando reinaba el rey García en Pamplona y en Castilla y su hermano Fernando rey de León y de Galicia

[5] En el año 1037, cuando su hermano Fernando I de Castilla solicita su ayuda para combatir a su cuñado Bermudo III de León cerca del Pisuerga, éste se la presta, combatiendo los dos hermanos juntos contra el monarca leonés en la batalla de Tamarón, siendo vencido y muerto el último descendiente directo de Don Pelayo.

Debido al conflictivo reparto de las tierras castellanas estalló la lucha entre los hermanos Fernando y García, muriendo este último en la batalla de Atapuerca el 15 de septiembre de 1054.

[editar] Nupcias y descendientes García Sánchez III de Navarra se casó en 1038, en Barcelona con Estefanía de Foix, de la Casa de Cominges. Estefanía (viuda de su primer matrimonio y, según algunos estudiosos, con una hija, Constanza, que estuvo presente en su segundo matrimonio)[6] era la hija más joven de Bernardo I Roger de Carcasona, conde de Conserans, señor del País de Foix y conde consorte de Bigorra y de Garsenda, condesa de Bigorra. En su boda, García Sánchez entregó a Estefanía en arras, entre otros bienes, a ambabus Cambaribus, los dos Cameros riojanos. Con ella tuvo nueve hijos:[7]

Sancho IV el de Peñalén (* 1039 – † 4 de junio de 1076), rey de Navarra, casado con Placencia de Normandía. Urraca Garcés, señora de Alberite, Lardero y Logroño, casada en primeras nupcias hacia 1078 con el conde García Ordóñez (muerto el 30 de mayo de 1108 en la batalla de Uclés), señor de Nájera y Grañón. Ermesinda o Hermesinda Garcés († después de 1 de julio de 1110), casada con Fortún Sánchez, señor de Yarnoz y de Yéqueda. En 1076 acompañaba a su hermano Raimundo en Peñalén cuando éste asesinó al hermano mayor de ambos. Ramiro de Navarra († 6 de enero de 1083), señor de Calahorra, de Torrecilla en Cameros y de Ribafrecha y sus villas. Casado con Teresa. Murió luchando por Alfonso VI de León y Castilla, asesinado por los moros del castillo de Rueda de Jalón cuando estos simularon la rendición del castillo al rey de Castilla. Fernando de Navarra († 1068), señor de Bucesta, Jubera, Lagunilla y Oprela, casado con Nuña Íñiguez, hija de Íñigo López, conde y señor de Vizcaya y Nájera. Ramón (Raimundo) de Navarra el Fratricida († después de 1079), señor de Murillo y Agoncillo. Después del asesinato de su hermano y rey Sancho IV el de Peñalén, se refugió en Zaragoza con el rey moro Al-Muqtadir. Jimena Garcés de Navarra († después del 27 de mayo de 1085), señora de Corcuetos (Navarrete), Hornos y Daroca. Mayor Garcés de Navarra(† después de 1115), señora de Yanguas, Atayo y Velilla. No es probable que sea, por cuestión de fechas, la española Doña Mayor casada con el conde de Mâcon Guy II de Mâcon. Sancha Garcés († 1065), abadesa seglar de San Martín de Cuevagallegos, un poblado de Pancorbo. García Sánchez III de Navarra tuvo dos hijos bastardos, con madre o madres desconocidas:

Sancho Garcés, Señor de Uncastillo y Sangüesa, casado con Constanza, la hija del primer matrimonio de Estefanía de Foix y por lo tanto, hermanastra suya. Su hijo, Ramiro Sánchez de Pamplona fue el padre de García VI, el Restaurador, rey de Pamplona. Mencia Garcés, casada con Fortún Ochoa, señores ambos de Nalda, Leza y Jubera, siendo su marido el primer señor de Cameros.

--------------------
García Sánchez III, sometimes García III, IV, V, or VI (also García of Nájera, from Spanish: García el de Nájera, 1016-1054), was king of Navarre from 1035 to 1054. He was the eldest legitimate son and heir of Sancho the Great, born November 1016, and he succeeded his father to the crown of Navarre. He not only received the patrimony of his family, he was given a seniority amongst his brothers, a sort of "High Kingship". However, his father divided his many conquests among García's brothers: Ramiro, the eldest but illegitimate son, received the petty kingdom of Aragón; Ferdinand, the second eldest legitimate son, received Castile (which his father received through marriage to his mother); and his youngest surviving son (legitimate), Gonzalo, received the kingdoms of Sobrarbe and Ribagorza.

In 1037, Ferdinand requested García's aid against his brother-in-law, Bermudo III of León, in battle near Pisuerga. The two brothers defeated Bermudo, who died in battle, the final descendant of Pedro de Cantabria, and Ferdinand succeeded in León.

By aiding Ferdinand, García received his brother's favour and, in a repartition of Castile, he expanded Navarre to the bay of Santander and incorporating the entire Basque Country.

Soon he was confronted by his brother Ramiro at Tafalla (1043) and defeated him.

He was one of the Christian kings to profit greatly from the weakened taifa kingdoms inhabiting the "vacuum" that was the Caliphate of Córdoba. In 1045, he conquered Calahorra.

Relations eventually soured with Ferdinand and war broke out between the fraternal kingdoms, García dying in the Battle of Atapuerca, 15 September, 1054. His nickname comes from his foundation of the monastery of Santa María la Real in Nájera.

He was married, in 1038, to Estefanía, daughter of Ramon Borrell, Count of Barcelona, an hereditary count of Barcelona (her dowry was the Cameros), and they produced nine children (four sons, five daughters):

Sancho "El de Peñalén", king of Navarre, married Placencia

Ramiro (d.1083), lord of Calahorra, married Teresa

Ferdinand, lord of Bucesta, married Nuña de Vizcaya

Raymond the Fraticide (Ramón el Fratricida), lord of Murillo and Cameros

Ermesinda, married Fortún Sánchez de Yarnoz

Mayor, married Guy II of Masón.

Urraca (d.1108), married García Ordóñez

Jimena

Mencia (d.1106), married Lope de Nájera

He also had illegitimate sons:

Sancho, lord of Uncastillo and Sangüesa, married Constanza, grandfather of García Ramírez, king of Navarre

Ramiro

After García's death, Estefanía is said to have remarried to Roger de Tosny, a Norman adventurer. Estefanía may have been a widow at the time of her marriage to García. A traditional poem tells of the marriage of an illegitimate son of García (presumed to be Sancho) to his step-sister, a daughter of Estefanía by a former husband.
--------------------
De Wikipedia:

Venció a su hermano Ramiro I de Aragón en Tafalla (1043), fijando la frontera oriental de su reino. Aprovechando la debilidad de los reinos de taifas, se dedicó a aumentar por el sur sus dominios con buen éxito, logrando conquistar Calahorra en el 1045.

El 12 de diciembre de 1052 consagró el Monasterio de Santa María la Real de Nájera que había mandado construir unos años antes. Tras esto quiso enriquecerlo trayendo los cuerpos de Santos de la comarca, pidiendo su aprobación a los obispos Sancho de Pamplona, García de Álava y Gómez de Burgos. En 1052 intentó trasladar el cuerpo de san Felices de Bilibio, llegando a tal acuerdo con el obispo de Álava. Éste se dirigió a los Riscos de Bilibio acompañado de muchos caballeros pero cuando abrió la sepultura, sintió separarse del túmulo y se le torció la boca, tras lo que dio inicio una fuerte tormenta. Al parecer que el cielo se oponía al traslado se marcharon, pero parece que el obispo conservaría la deformación de su cara de por vida. El 29 de mayo de 1053 intentó trasladar los restos de Millán sin conseguirlo, por el milagro de los bueyes que no querían continuar con el traslado. Por este milagro decidió construir un nuevo monasterio para albergar su cuerpo en el lugar donde los bueyes habían quedado parados, este sería el Monasterio de San Millán de Yuso.

Rey de Navarra (1035-1054)

García Sánchez III, sometimes García III, IV, V, or VI (also García of Nájera, from Spanish: García el de Nájera, 1016-1054), was king of Navarre from 1035 to 1054. He was the eldest legitimate son and heir of Sancho the Great, born November 1016, and he succeeded his father to the crown of Navarre, becoming feudal overlord over two of his brothers: Ramiro, who was given lands that would serve as the basis for the kingdom of Aragón; and Gonzalo, who received the counties of Sobrarbe and Ribagorza. Likewise, he had some claim to suzerainty over brother Ferdinand, who under their father had served as Count of Castile, nominally subject to the Kingdom of León but brought under the personal control of Sancho III.

In 1037, Ferdinand requested García's aid against his brother-in-law, Bermudo III of León, in battle near Pisuerga. The two brothers defeated Bermudo, who died in battle, the final king of the male line of Pedro de Cantabria, and Ferdinand succeeded in León.

By aiding Ferdinand, García received his brother's favour and, in a repartition of Castile, he expanded Navarre to the bay of Santander, incorporating the entire Basque Country.

Soon he was confronted by his brother Ramiro at Tafalla (1043) and defeated him, but this victory resulted in the effective independence of Ramiro.

García was one of the Christian kings to profit greatly from the weakened taifa kingdoms that arose through the disintegration of central control by the Caliphate of Córdoba. In 1045, he conquered Calahorra.

Relations eventually soured with Ferdinand and war broke out between the fraternal kingdoms, García dying in the Battle of Atapuerca, 15 September, 1054.

His nickname comes from his foundation of the monastery of Santa María la Real of Najera.


Family
He was married, in 1038, to Estefanía, possibly daughter of Ramon Borrell, Count of Barcelona (her dowry was the Cameros), and they produced nine children (four sons, five daughters):

Sancho "El de Peñalén", king of Navarre, married Placencia
Ramiro (d.1083), lord of Calahorra, married Teresa, daughter of count Gonzalo Salvadórez de Lara[citation needed]
Ferdinand, lord of Bucesta, married Nuña de Vizcaya
Raymond the Fraticide (Ramón el Fratricida), lord of Murillo and Cameros
Ermesinda, married Fortún Sánchez de Yarnoz
Mayor, married Guy II of Masón.
Urraca (d.1108), married Castilian count García Ordóñez
Jimena
Mencia (d.1106), married Lope de Nájera

Rey de Navarra (1035-1054)

Rey de Galicia y Portugal (1065-1071)

Rey de Galicia y Portugal (1065-1071)

--Other Fields

Ref Number: 4291

KING OF NAVARRE 1035-1054

1 NAME Garcia III Sanchez De Nájera, King Of /Pamplona/
2 GIVN Garcia III Sanchez De Nájera, King Of
2 SURN Pamplona

1 NAME Garcia III Sanchez De Nájera, King Of /Pamplona/
2 GIVN Garcia III Sanchez De Nájera, King Of
2 SURN Pamplona

1 NAME Garcia III Sanchez De Nájera, King Of /Pamplona/
2 GIVN Garcia III Sanchez De Nájera, King Of
2 SURN Pamplona

Name Prefix:<NPFX> King Name Suffix:<NSFX> V, of Navarre Still Living.

García V of Navarre
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

García V of Nájera (in Spanish, García V El de Nájera), was king of Navarre from 1035 to 1054. He was the eldest legitimate son and heir of Sancho the Great, thus he succeeded in his father's inheritance of Navarre. He not only received the patrimony of his family, he was given a seniority amongst his brothers, a sort of "High Kingship". However, his father divided his many conquests among García's brothers: Ramiro, the eldest but illegitimate son, received the petty kingdom of Aragón; Ferdinand, the second eldest legitimate son, received Castile (which his father received through marriage to his mother); and his youngest surviving son (legitimate), Gonzalo, received the kingdoms of Sobrarbe and Ribagorza.

In 1037, Ferdinand requested García's aid against his brother-in-law, Bermudo III of León, in battle near Pisuerga. The two brothers defeated Bermudo, who died in battle, the final descendant of Pedro de Cantabria, and Ferdinand succeeded in León.

By aiding Ferdinand, García received his brother's favour and, in a repartition of Castile, he expanded Navarre to the bay of Santander and incorporating the entire Basque Country.

Soon he was confronted by his brother Ramiro at Tafalla (1043) and defeated him.

He was one of the Christian kings to profit greatly from the weakened taifa kingdoms inhabiting the "vacuum" that was the Caliphate of Córdoba. In 1045, he conquered Calahorra.

Relations eventually soured with Ferdinand and war broke out between the fraternal kingdoms, García dying in the Battle of Atapuerca, 15 September, 1054. His nickname comes from his foundation of the monastery of Santa María la Real in Nájera.


[edit] Family
He was married, in 1038, to Estefanía, daughter of Ramon Borrell, Count of Barcelona, an hereditary count of Barcelona (her dowry was the Cameros), and they produced nine children (four sons, five daughters):

Sancho "El de Peñalén", king of Navarre, married Placencia
Ramiro (d.1083), lord of Calahorra, married Teresa
Ferdinand, lord of Bucesta, married Nuña de Vizcaya
Raymond the Fraticide (Ramón el Fratricida), lord of Murillo and Cameros
Ermesinda, married Fortún Sánchez de Yarnoz
Mayor, married Guy II of Masón.
Urraca (d.1108), married García Ordóñez
Jimena
Mencia (d.1106), married Lope de Nájera
He also had illegitimate sons:

Sancho, lord of Uncastillo and Sangüesa, married Constanza, grandfather of García VI Ramírez, king of Navarre
Ramiro
After García's death, Estefanía is said to have remarried to Roger de Tosny, a Norman adventurer. Estefanía may have been a widow at the time of her marriage to García. A traditional poem tells of the marriage of an illegitimate son of García (presumed to be Sancho) to his step-sister, a daughter of Estefanía by a former husband.

He is sometimes numbered García III or García IV, depending on whether the patronymics, (e.g. Sánchez), are taken into account, whether one counts regents or just monarchs, and whether separate numbering is used for the Íñiguez and Jiménez dynasties.

Preceded by:
Sancho III King of Navarre
1035–1054 Sancho IV

The eldest son of Sancho III and grandson of Garcia III, he repelled an
attack at Tafallo by his brother Ramiro I of Aragon in 1043. He was invaded
by another brother Ferdinand I of Castile to recover annexed territories in
1054 - killed at the Battle of Atapuerca, succeeded by son Sancho IV.

The eldest son of Sancho III and grandson of Garcia III, he repelled an
attack at Tafallo by his brother Ramiro I of Aragon in 1043. He was invaded
by another brother Ferdinand I of Castile to recover annexed territories in
1054 - killed at the Battle of Atapuerca, succeeded by son Sancho IV.

The eldest son of Sancho III and grandson of Garcia III, he repelled an
attack at Tafallo by his brother Ramiro I of Aragon in 1043. He was invaded
by another brother Ferdinand I of Castile to recover annexed territories in
1054 - killed at the Battle of Atapuerca, succeeded by son Sancho IV.

[Weis 104] disinherited Infante of Navarre, Lord of Urroz 1104-1108 and Monçon 1108-1116, on 1st Crusade w. Count Raymond of Toulouse.

It is still being debated who Garcia's wife is. Some say de Foix, others say de Barcelona. He may have been married to both?He was the eldest legitimate son and heir of Sancho the Great, thus he succeeded in his father's inheritance of Navarre. He not only received the patrimony of his family, he was given a seniority amongst his brothers, a sort of "High Kingship". However, his father divided his many conquests among García's brothers: Ramiro, the eldest but illegitimate son, received the petty kingdom of Aragón; Ferdinand, the second eldest legitimate son, received Castile (which his father received through marriage to his mother); and his youngest surviving son (legitimate), Gonzalo, received the kingdoms of Sobrarbe and Ribagorza.
In 1037, Ferdinand requested García's aid against his brother-in-law, Bermudo III of León, in battle near Pisuerga. The two brothers defeated Bermudo, who died in battle, the final descendant of Pedro de Cantabria, and Ferdinand succeeded in León.
By aiding Ferdinand, García received his brother's favour and, in a repartition of Castile, he expanded Navarre to the bay of Santander and incorporating the entire Basque Country.
Soon he was confronted by his brother Ramiro at Tafalla (1043) and defeated him.
He was one of the Christian kings to profit greatly from the weakened taifa kingdoms inhabiting the "vacuum" that was the Caliphate of Córdoba. In 1045, he conquered Calahorra.
Relations eventually soured with Ferdinand and war broke out between the fraternal kingdoms, García dying in the Battle of Atapuerca, 15 September, 1054. His nickname comes from his foundation of the monastery of Santa María la Real in Nájera.

The eldest son of Sancho III and grandson of Garcia III, he repelled an
attack at Tafallo by his brother Ramiro I of Aragon in 1043. He was invaded
by another brother Ferdinand I of Castile to recover annexed territories in
1054 - killed at the Battle of Atapuerca, succeeded by son Sancho IV.

Name Prefix:<NPFX> King Name Suffix:<NSFX> V, of Navarre Still Living.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]