== Notes for [[Item:Q91171|Q91171]] ==

Antipater the Idumaean [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antipater_the_Idumaean Wikipedia] (d. 43 BC) was the founder of the Herodian Dynasty and father of Herod the Great. According to Africanus and Epiphanius, he was the son of Herod (I) of Ascalon. According to Josephus, he was the son of Antipas (I).

Personal details

Antipater was married to Cypros, a Nabataean noblewoman. They had four sons: Phasael, Herod, Joseph, and Pheroras, and a daughter, Salome, one of several Salomes among the Herodians.

--------------------

See [http://www.geni.com/discussions/151163?msg=1053520 Discussion] of his birthdate

------------------------------------------

•ID: I82392

•Name: Antipater II of Judea

•Prefix: Procurator

•Given Name: Antipater II

•Surname: of Judea

•Sex: M

•_UID: C49905603CCDAE4CACE700DF72D54ADFA73A

•Change Date: 6 Oct 2005

•Death: deceased

Father: Antipater of Judea

Marriage 1 Cypros of Nabatea

•Married:

Children

1. Herod of Judea b: ABT 73 BC

2. Salome of Judea

3. Phasael of Judea

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I82392

--------------------------------------
==[http://jewishencyclopedia.com/articles/1598-antipater From the Jewish encyclopedia]:

ANTIPATER (abridged form, Antipas):

Father of Herod I.; died 43 B.C. He was the son of Antipas, a convert to Judaism, who was governor of Idumæa under the reigns of Alexander Jannæus and his queen dowager Alexandra, and rendered himself serviceable to the Jewish rulers, through his connections with his former congeners, of Arabia Petræa. Antipater, who seems to have succeeded his father as governor of Idumæa, had reason to fear that King Aristobulus II. would not retain him in his position. He therefore tried his utmost to dethrone Aristobulus, and to restore the weak Hyrcanus II., who would be an easy tool in his hands, to the throne which was rightfully his. With this view Antipater tried to persuade Hyrcanus, who was not only of a peaceful and kindly disposition but altogether free from suspicion, that his brother was plotting his death in order to secure himself upon the throne. Hyrcanus at first refused credence to Antipater, but finally allowed himself to be gained over. Antipater, who felt no attachment for Judaism or the Jewish state, and who stood ready to sacrifice their interests in order to serve his own ends, had made previous arrangements with Aretas, an Arabian chief, to give his help to Hyrcanus in return for a large sum of money and possession of twelve cities, which had been conquered from the Arabians by the Hasmoneans after long and hard fighting. Antipater then took Hyrcanus with him to Aretas, who forthwith proceeded with a large army against Aristobulus, and defeated him. ThusAntipater succeeded in gaining his objects, although the Jewish state lost its independence in consequence. The dispute was referred to Rome, and decision was given against Aristobulus.

PROCURATOR OF JUDAEA; DIED 43 BC

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per00604.htm#0

RESEARCH NOTES:
procurator of Judea ?-37 BCE; father of Herod the Great King of Judea
- - Salome of Judea
- - Phasael I of Judea

Antipater the Idumaean
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.

Antipater the Idumaean, also known as Antipas, as was his father and his grandson Herod Antipas, was the founder of the Herodean dynasty and father of Herod the Great. He was a half-Arab, Hellenized client of Pompey. Antipater came from Idumaea, the then-current name for the land of Edom of the Hebrew Bible, which lay southeast of Judea, between the Dead Sea and the Gulf of Aqaba.

Antipater was married to Cypros, a Nabataean noblewoman. His genealogy was more a matter of public relations than confirmed history: although some list Antipater as descending from the Jewish remnant that returned from the Babylonian Captivity, it is more likely he was an Edomite. Idumeans had been forcibly converted to Judaism, so both Antipater and Herod the Great were of the Jewish faith, but were resented by the observant and nationalist Jews of Judea for their non-Jewish and Arab ancestry, their Hellenized culture, and their collusion with the kittim, the Roman invaders.

Antipater laid the foundation for Herod's ascension to the throne of Judea partly through his activities in the court of the Hasmoneans, the heirs of the Maccabees, who were the hereditary leaders of the Jews, and partly by currying favor with the Romans, who made him the first Roman procurator of Judea. Antipater and Cypros had four sons: Phasael, Herod, Joseph, and Pheroras. They also had a daughter, Salome, one of several Salomes among the Herodians.

Antipater was a wealthy man, and was favored by his fellow Idumeans. Josephus – from whom the details of Judean politics in this period are derived – described him as seditious in his nature. Antipater insinuated himself into the party of Hyrcanus II in his contest for power with his brother Aristobulus; both were Hasmonean princes. Their father, Alexander, had made Antipater general of all of Judea, for he had a rapport with the Arabians. Hyrcanus succeeded his mother as ruler, but bowed out in favor of his younger brother, Aristobulus. But Antipater continued to support Hyrcanus, and he advised Hyrcanus to put himself under the protection of the Arabian King Aretas III in Petra. Together they would attack Aristobulus in Jerusalem. Pompey put down the trouble, and made Hyrcanus the ethnarch of Judea. Antipater remained in charge of affairs of the state.

The Roman province of Judea in Syria was split, and Idumaea was eventually given to Antipater to govern. These divisions would later be seats of power for the Herodean descendants of Antipater. When Caesar defeated Pompey, Antipater aided Caesar in Alexandria, and was made chief minister of Judea, with the right to collect taxes. Antipater eventually made his son, Phasael, governor of Jerusalem, and Herod became governor of Galilee. After the assassination of Caesar, Antipater was forced to side with Cassius against Marc Antony. The pro-Roman politics of Antipater led to his increasing unpopularity among the devout, non-Hellenized Jews, and he was poisoned.

The diplomacy and artful politics of Antipater, as well as his insinuation into the Hasmonean court, paved the way for the rise of his son Herod the Great, who used this position to marry the Hasmonean princess Mariamne, endear himself to Rome, and usurp the Judean throne, to become king of Judea under Roman influence.

Note: The number of Antipaters, Antipases, Herods, Philips, Marys, Josephs, Salomes, etc., at this time in history, makes differentiating among them quite a challenge.

[edit]
References
Josephus, Flavius. William Whistom, translator. (2003) The Works of Josephus: Complete and Unabridged, Updated Edition(17th printing). The Antiquities of the Jews.The Wars of the Jews. Peabody, MA: Hendrickson Publishers. ISBN 1-56563-167-6
Eisenman, Robert, 1997. James, the Brother of Jesus. Political background of Judea.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]