== Notes for [[Item:Q90387|Q90387]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaius_Julius_Quadratus_Bassus

__________

Wagner, Sir Anthony Richard; ‘Pedigree and Progress: Essays in the Genealogical Interpretation of History’

Gaius Julius Quadratus Bassus (70–117), a Romanized Galatian, was a Legate at Judaea between 102/103 and 104/105, Consul of Rome in 105 and Proconsul of Asia in 105. He was the son of Gaius Julius Bassus, Proconsul in Bithynia in 98.

He married Julia of Cilicia (b. ca 80), a princess and of daughter of King Gaius Julius Alexander to his Queen Julia Iotapa of Cetis Cilicia.

Julia bore Bassus a daughter called Julia Quadratilla (b. ca 100). She married to Gaius Julius Lupus Titus Vibius Varus Laevillus (ca 95 - aft. 132), Quaestor in Asia in 132.

Quadratilla and Laevillus had:

Aulus Julius Amyntas, Nobleman of Ephesus Aulus Julius Claudius Charax (ca 115 - aft. 147), married and father of: Julia, married to Gaius Asinius Rufus (ca 110 - aft. 136), and had issue Aulus Julius Proculus (ca 120 - aft. 156), Nobleman of Ephesus, married to Claudia Basilo (b. ca 125) References [edit]

Christian Settipani, Les Ancêtres de Charlemagne (France: Éditions Christian, 1989). Christian Settipani, Continuite Gentilice et Continuite Familiale Dans Les Familles Senatoriales Romaines, A L'Epoque Imperiale, Mythe et Realite. Linacre, UK: Prosopographica et Genealogica, 2000. ILL. NYPL ASY (Rome) 03-983. Chris Bennett, Egyptian Royal Genealogy - Ptolemaic Dynasty, 2005. Avail at http://web.archive.org/web/20091027102236/http://geocities.com/christopherjbennett/ptolemies/ptolemaic_contents.htm, visited 5/12/2005. Anthony Wagner, Pedigree and Progress, Essays in the Genealogical Interpretation of History, London, Philmore, 1975. Rutgers Alex CS4.W33. Kelsey Williams, Plantagenet Descents From Ancient Judea. Posting to soc.genealogy.medieval (email list GEN-MEDIEVAL) on 6/23/2002-201716. Subject: Re: Plantagenet Descents From Ancient Judea. Available at http://archiver.rootsweb.com/th/read/2002-06/1024881359. Author address: gkkwilliams at cowboy dot net. Luíz Paulo Manuel de Menezes de Mello Vaz de São-Payo, A Herança Genética de Dom Afonso I Henriques (Portugal: Centro de Estudos de História da Família da Universidade Moderna do Porto, Porto, 2002). Manuel Dejante Pinto de Magalhães Arnao Metello and João Carlos Metello de Nápoles, "Metellos de Portugal, Brasil e Roma", Torres Novas, 1998 See also [edit]

Descent from antiquity The Administration of Judaea (AD 6-135)

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]