== Notes for [[Item:Q100213|Q100213]] ==

bn Abī ʾl-ʿAysh, Moses (Abū Harūn)

Almost nothing is known about the poet Moses ibn Abī ʾl-ʿAysh. The only reference to him is made by Moses ibn Ezra in the Kitāb al-Muḥāḍara wa ʾl-Mudhākara (ed. Halkin, p. 74). His name is mentioned after an excursus on memory as a notable quality of Judah ibn Balaam of Toledo, linguist and author of commentaries on almost all of the books of the Bible, who was active in the second half of the eleventh century. Ibn Abī ʾl-ʿAysh is introduced as a native of Toledo, along with Abraham (Abū Isḥāq) ibn al-Ḥarīzī, a poet dated to the beginning of the twelfth century. With this scant information, Ibn Abī ʾl-ʿAysh can be placed as one of the Hebrew intellectuals and poets who lived in Toledo in the late eleventh and early twelfth centuries. This was a complex period in the history of Toledo, which in 1085 passed into the hands of Alfonso VI and entered upon its moment of greatest splendor, becoming a center of intense Hebrew cultural, social, and economic activity within a few years. From the mid-twelfth century, the city attracted a great many Jewish personalities, whereas in the earlier period preceding, or coinciding with, the beginning of Christian domination, there were very few poets or figures outstanding in any other intellectual sphere. In this respect, the mention of Moses ibn Abī ʾl-ʿAysh is of special interest because it testifies to the presence of Hebrew poets in Toledo before its period of efflorescence. His lifetime may have coincided with that of Joseph ha-Nasi ibn Ferruziel. Nothing has been preserved of Ibn Abī ʾl-ʿAysh’s work.

Aurora Salvatierra Ossorio

Bibliography

Ashtor, Eliyahu. The Jews of Moslem Spain (Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society, 1973–84), vol. 3, p. 229.

Ibn Ezra, Moses. Sefer ha-ʿIyyunim veha-Diyyunim: ʻal ha-Shira ha-ʻIvrit, ed. Abraham S. Halkin (Jerusalem: Meḳiṣe Nirdamim, 1975).

Sáenz-Badillos, Ángel, and Judit Targarona Borrás. Diccionario de autores Judíos (Sefarad. Siglos X–XV) (Cordova: El Almendro, 1988).

Schirmann, Ḥayyim. “Ha-Meshorerim Benei Doram shel Moshe ibn Ezra,” Yediʿot ha-Makhon le- Ḥ eqer ha-Shira ha-ʿIvrit 2 (1936): 144.

Citation Aurora Salvatierra Ossorio. " Ibn Abī ʾl-ʿAysh, Moses (Abū Harūn)." Encyclopedia of Jews in the Islamic World. Executive Editor Norman A. Stillman. Brill Online , 2013. Reference. Jim Harlow. 30 January 2013 <http://referenceworks.brillonline.com/entries/encyclopedia-of-jews-in-the-islamic-world/ibn-abi-l-aysh-moses-abu-harun-SIM_0010200>

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD7241811EFBBFA9822EF79916C6D78
geni:6000000019241571834

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]