== Notes for [[Item:Q105338|Q105338]] ==

Maria LOBO GUERRERO (aka Maria de las Casas)[663],[885],[2212] was born (date unknown). Marriage investigation #45-34, page 201, names her as Maria de Cordova.
*Parents: Juan Alonso LOBO GUERRERO and Maria de las CASAS.

Spouse: Luis de MORALES. Maria LOBO GUERRERO (aka Maria de las Casas) and Luis de MORALES were married. Children were:
*1. Josefa de MORALES.

http://www.raullongoria.net/Genealogy/FamilyTree/b124.html#P7432

--------------------

4. MARIA-ISABEL3 LOBO-GUERRERO-DE-LAS-CASAS (JUAN-ALONSO2 LOBO-GUERRERO-FERNANDEZ-CORDOVA, JUAN1 LOBO-GUERRERO)
*She married ANTONIO URIBE-DE-LA-CADENA-VERGARA 1648,
**son of JOSE URIBE-Y-VERGARA-TOVAR and MARIA DE-LA-CADENA-PACHECO. He was born in Wichapan, Mexico F.D., Mexico, and
**died 27 May 1678 in Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.
***Notes for ANTONIO URIBE-DE-LA-CADENA-VERGARA: A.K.A. Antonio de la Cadena Vergara. Source: Origen de los Fundadores de Texas, Nuevo Mexico, Coahuila y Nuevo Leon, Saltillo Tomo II, by Guillermo Garmendia Leal. Page 11.

Children of MARIA-ISABEL LOBO-GUERRERO-DE-LAS-CASAS and ANTONIO URIBE-DE-LA-CADENA-VERGARA are:
*1. 8. i. ANTONIO4 DE-LA-CADENA-LOBO,
**b. Wichapan, Mexico F.D. Mexico.
*2. ii. NICOLAS DE-LA-CADENA-LOBO,
**m. MARIA DE LA CONCEPCION, 1680.
*3. 9. iii. AUGUSTINA DE URIBE-DE-LA-CADENA-LOBO,
**b. 1660, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.
*4. 10. iv. CAPTAIN PHELIPE DE URIBE-DE-LA-CADENA-LOBO,
**b. 1666, Wichapan, Mexico F.D. Mexico.

http://www.loscuellar.com.mx/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=82&Itemid=82

--------------------

MARIA3 DE-LAS-CASAS (JUAN-ALONSO2 LOBO-GUERRERO-FERNANDEZ-CORDOVA, JUAN1 LOBO-GUERRERO)
*She married LUIS DE MORALES, son of LUIS RAMON-DE-MORALES and JUANA DE TREVINO-QUINTANILLA-Y-SALAZAR.
**Notes for MARIA DE-LAS-CASAS: A.K.A. Maria Lobo Gerrero.

Child of MARIA DE-LAS-CASAS and LUIS DE MORALES is:
*1. 7. i. JOSEFA4 MORALES-DE-LAS-CASAS,
**b. 1652;
**d. Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.

http://www.loscuellar.com.mx/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=82&Itemid=82

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000014273251313

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]