== Notes for [[Item:Q87742|Q87742]] ==

http://hu.wikipedia.org/wiki/I._Démétriosz_szeleukida_uralkodó

I. Démétriosz Szótér (Δημήτριος Σωτήρ, Kr. e. 187 k. – Kr. e. 150) ókori hellenisztikus király, a Szeleukida Birodalom tizedik uralkodója (Kr. e. 162-től haláláig), IV. Szeleukosz Philopatór gyermeke volt.

---------------------------------------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demetrius_I_Soter

*Demetrius I (Greek: Δημήτριος Α, c. 187 BC - 150 BC), surnamed Soter (Greek: Σωτήρ - "Savior"), was a ruler of the Hellenistic Seleucid Empire.
*He had been sent to Rome as a hostage during the reign of his father, '''Seleucus IV Philopator'''. After his father's death in 175 BC, Antiochus IV Epiphanes took advantage of Demetrius' captivity to seize the throne. Demetrius escaped from confinement and established himself on the Syrian throne (162 BC) after overthrowing and murdering King Antiochus V Eupator, his cousin.

*Demetrius acquired his surname of Soter, or Saviour, from the Babylonians, whom he delivered from the tyranny of the Median satrap, Timarchus. Timarchus, who had distinguished himself by defending Media against the emergent Parthians, seems to have treated Demetrius' accession as an excuse to declare himself an independent king and extend his realm into Babylonia. His forces were however not enough for the legal Seleucid king: Demetrius defeated and killed Timarchus in 160 BCE, and dethroned Ariarathes, king of Cappadocia. The Seleucid empire was temporarily united again.

*Demetrius is famous in Jewish history for his victory over the Maccabees.

*Demetrius' downfall is attributed to Heracleides, a surviving brother of the defeated rebel Timarchus, who championed the cause of Alexander Balas, a boy he claimed was a natural son of Antiochus IV Epiphanes. Heracleides convinced the Roman Senate to support the young pretender against Demetrius, who was defeated and killed in 150 BC.

*This entry incorporates material from the 1911 Encyclopedia Britannica.
--------------------
BIOGRAFI:

Nicknames: "Soter", "??µ?t???? ?' S?t?? Se?e???d?? t?? S???a?", "Demetrios l Soter / S?te? ??µ?t????"

Birthdate: cirka -60

Birthplace: 186 BC

Death: Died -10 in 150 BC

Occupation: Seleucid king, ruled from 161 to 150, King of Syria, [Seleucide]

Nærmeste familie

Laodice V, Queen of Syria

wife

Demetrius II Nicator, King of Syria

son

Antiochus VII Sidetes Grypus, Se...

son

Sanvoritcus of Turkey of Syria

son

Laodice IV, Queen of the Seleuci...

mother

Seleucus IV Philopater, King of ...

father

Antiochus

brother

Philippus

stepson

Alexander

stepson

?

stepdaughter

Antiochus IV Epiphanes, King of ...

stepfather

Nysa, Queen of Pontus

half sister

Demetrios I Soter

Fra Wikipedia, den frie encyklopedi

Gå til: navigasjon, søk Demetrios I Soter

Konge av av Selevkideriket

Navn: ??µ?t???? ?' S?t??

Regjeringstid: 161 – 150 f.Kr.

Født: 185 f.Kr.

Død: 150 f.Kr.

Foreldre: Selevkos IV Filopator (far)

Laodike IV (mor)

Ektefelle?(r): Laodike V

Barn: Demetrios II Nikator

Antiokos VII Sidetes

Antigonos

Demetrios I Soter (gresk: ??µ?t???? ?' S?t??; født 185 f.Kr., død 150 f.Kr.) var en konge av det hellenistiske Selevkideriket i tiden 161–150 f.Kr..Innhold [skjul]

1 Gissel i Roma

2 Krigføring

3 Undergang

4 I litteraturen

5 Referanser

6 Eksterne lenker

Gissel i Roma [rediger]

Demetrios ble sendt til Roma som gissel i løpet av styret til sin far Selevkos IV Filopator og sin mor Laodike IV.[1] Da hans far ble myrdet av sin finansminister Heliodoros i 175 f.Kr.,[2] drepte hans onkel Antiokos IV Epifanes tronraneren, tok selv tronen. Da onkelen døde i 163 f.Kr.,[3] ble hans 9 år gamle sønn Antiokos V Eupator gjort til konge ved hærføreren og kansleren Lysias. Demetrios var da 22 år gammel (hvilket innebærer at han ble født i 185 f.Kr.). Han ba det romerske senatet om gi tilbake tronen til ham, men de avslo da de mente at det var bedre at Syria ble styrt av en gutt og hans regent enn av en mann, i henhold til historikeren Appian.[4] To år senere ble styret til Antiokos V Eupator i stor grad svekket da Roma sendte en ambassadør som i henhold til at Selevkideriket hadde forbrudt seg mot vilkårene i freden i Apamea ved å ha for mye våpen. Den romerske sendebudet reiste rundt i Syria og senket krigsskip og lemlestet krigselefanter, men denne regentens underdanighet som tillott romerne å gjøre dette, opprørte folket så mye at de drepte utsendingen Gnaeus Octavius i 162 f.Kr. I denne kritiske tiden greide Demetrios å flykte fra Roma og da han ankom Syria ble han jublende ønsket velkommen. Han kunne uten vanskeligheter ta tronen og fikk øyeblikkelig henrettet Antiokos V Eupator og hans regent Lysias.[5]

Krigføring [rediger]

Demetrios er kjent jødisk historie for hans seier over makkabeerne i Judea, og drepte helten Judas Makkabeus i 160 f.Kr.[6]

Demetrios fikk sitt tilnavn Soter (gresk S?t??, «frelser») fra babylonerne som han frigjorde fra tyranniet til Timarkos, medernes satrap (guvernør). Timarkos, som hadde utmerket seg selv ved å forsvare Media mot invaderende partiere, synes å behandlet Demetrios' tiltredelse som konge som et påskudd for å erklære seg selv som en uavhengig konge og utvidet sitt rike inn i Babylonia. Hans militære styrker var imidlertid ikke store nok til å stå imot Selevkiderikets konge. Demetrios beseiret og drepte Timarkos i 160 f.Kr., og deretter dro han nordover og avsatte Ariarathes V, konge av Kappadokia i Anatolia. Med dette var Selevkideriket for øyeblikket forent igjen.

Det er mulig at Demetrios giftet seg med sin søster Laodike V som han fikk tre sønner med, Demetrios II Nikator, Antiokos VII Sidetes og Antigonos.

Undergang [rediger]

Demetrios' undergang kan bli tilskrevet til Herakleides, en overlevende bror av den beseirende opprøren Timarkos som kjempet for saken til Aleksander I Balas, en gutt som hevdet å være en ektefødt sønn av Antiokos IV Epifanes og således en rettmessig arving av Selevkiderikets trone. Herakleides greide å overbevise det romerske senatet om støtte for den unge utfordreren mot Demetrios.

Jødene hadde også en rolle i Demetrios' undergang. Aleksander I Balas kom med en hær av leiesoldater, gikk i land og okkuperte havnebyen Ptolemais (dagens Akko) og styrte her som en rivaliserende konge av Selevkideriket i 152 f.Kr.[7] Han utpekte Jonatan Apphus, en bror og etterfølger av Judas Makkabeus, som yppersteprest av Judea for å gjøre jødene som sine allierte. Jonatan, som kom fra en prestefamilie, men ikke fra Sadoks slekt, tok tittelen i 152 f.Kr.[8] Da Demetrios fikk høre om dette, skrev han et brev hvor han overdro flere privilegier til Jonatan Apphus.[9] Jødene hadde gode grunner til å mistro ham grunnet tidligere forfølgelser av jødene. De allierte seg med Balas som beseiret og drepte Demetrios i 150 f.Kr.[10]
--------------------
'''
=Demetrius I Soter=
'''

Demetrius I (Greek: Δημήτριος Α`, born 185 BC, reigned 161-150 BC), surnamed Soter (Greek: Σωτήρ - "Savior"), was a ruler of the Hellenistic Seleucid Empire.

Demetrius was sent to Rome as a hostage during the reign of his father Seleucus IV Philopator and his mother Laodice IV. When his father was murdered by his finance minister Heliodorus in 175 BC., his uncle Antiochus IV Epiphanes killed the usurper, but usurped the throne himself. When Antiochus IV died in 163 BC., his 9-year-old boy son Antiochus V Eupator was made king by Lysias. Demetrius was then 22 years old (thus he was born in 185 BC). He requested the Roman Senate to restore the Syrian throne to him, but was rejected, since the Romans believed that Syria should be ruled by a boy rather than a man. Two years later, Antiochus V was greatly weakened because Rome sent an emissary to sink his ships and hamstring his elephants for his violation of the Peace of Apamea, storing up too much weaponry. Demetrius escaped from confinement and was welcomed back on the Syrian throne in 161 BC. He immediately killed Antiochus V and Lysias.

Demetrius I is infamous in Jewish history for his victory over the Maccabees, killing Judas Maccabaeus in Nisan, 160 BC. Demetrius acquired his surname of Soter, or Savior, from the Babylonians, whom he delivered from the tyranny of the Median satrap, Timarchus. Timarchus, who had distinguished himself by defending Media against the emergent Parthians, seems to have treated Demetrius' accession as an excuse to declare himself an independent king and extend his realm into Babylonia. His forces were however not enough for the legal Seleucid king: Demetrius defeated and killed Timarchus in 160 BC, and dethroned Ariarathes, king of Cappadocia. The Seleucid empire was temporarily united again. Demetrius may have married his sister Laodice V, by whom he had three sons Demetrius II Nicator, Antiochus VII Sidetes and Antigonus.

Demetrius' downfall may be attributed to Heracleides, a surviving brother of the defeated rebel Timarchus, who championed the cause of Alexander Balas, a boy who claimed to be a natural son of Antiochus IV Epiphanes. Heracleides convinced the Roman Senate to support the young pretender against Demetrius I.

The Jews also had a role in the down fall of Demetrius I. Alexander Balas came with a mercenary army, landed and occupied Ptolemais, and reigned as a rival king of the Seleucids in 152 BC. He appointed Jonathan Maccabaeus, the brother and successor of Judas Maccabaeus, as the high priest of Judea, in order to make the Jews his allies. Jonathan, who was born of a priestly family but not from Zadok, the high priestly stock, took the title in Tishri, 152 BC.[9] When Demetrius heard of it, he wrote a letter granting more privileges to Jonathan (1 Macc. 10:25-45). The Jews did not believe in him, because of his past persecutions of the Jews. They joined with Balas, who defeated and killed Demetrius I in 150 BC.

In 1919 Constantine Cavafy published a poem about Demetrius's time as a hostage in Rome.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demetrius_I_Soter

Demetrius I (of Syria), called Soter (circa 187-150 bc), king of Syria
(162-150 bc), son of Seleucus IV Philopator (222?-175 bc). Held a hostage
in Rome during the reigns of his father and of his uncle, Antiochus IV
Epiphanes, he escaped in 163 bc and deposed and killed his cousin,
Antiochus V Eupator (173-162 bc), who had occupied the Syrian throne on
the death of his father, Antiochus IV. The reign of Demetrius I was marked
by warfare against the Jews, who were then ruled by the Maccabees, against
the Cappadocians, and against the Medes. He was named Soter (Greek,
“Savior”) because he liberated the Babylonians from the Median satrap
Timarchus (died about 160 bc). Demetrius I was killed in battle while
resisting the usurpation of Alexander Balas (reigned 150-145 bc), a youth
from Smyrna pretending to be the son of Antiochus IV Epiphanes and backed
by Rome and Syria's neighbors.

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Syria

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per01245.htm#0

SOTER; KING OF SYRIA 162-150 BC; b. 186-d.150 BC

He ruled from 162 BC to 150 BC.

He ruled from 162 BC to 150 BC.

Event: Ruled 162 - 150 BC, King of Syria 1 2
Note:
Demetrius I SOTER (Greek: "Saviour") (b. c. 187 BC--d. 150), king of Syria from 162 to 150 BC. He was one of the line of rulers of the Seleucid dynasty, founded in 312 by a Macedonian successor of Alexander the Great.
The son of King Seleucus IV Philopator (reigned 187 to 175), Demetrius was sent to Rome as a hostage during his father's reign. While he was away, Syria came under the rule of his uncle, Antiochus IV Ephiphanes (d. 164), and then of his cousin, Antiochus V. Aided by the Greek statesman and historian Polybius, Demetrius escaped from Rome in 162 and returned to Syria to claim the throne. He defeated the rebel general Timarchus and was recognized as king by the Roman Senate. In 160 hecrushed a Jewish rebellion in Palestine. Demetrius died while fighting the pretender Alexander Balas, who was supported by Rome, Egypt, and Pergamum

Demetrius I Soter
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.

Demetrius I (d. 150 BC), surnamed Soter, was sent to Rome as a hostage during the reign of his father, Seleucus IV Philopator. After his father's death in 175 BC, Demetrius escaped from confinement and established himself on the Syrian throne (162 BC) after overthrowing and murdering King Antiochus V Eupator, his nephew.

Demetrius acquired his surname of Soter, or Saviour, from the Babylonians, whom he delivered from the tyranny of the Median satrap, Timarchus. He is famous in Jewish history for his contests with the Maccabees.

Demetrius fell in battle against the usurper, Alexander Balas, in 150 BC.

This entry was originally from the 1911 Encyclopedia Britannica.

Preceded by:
Antiochus V Eupator Seleucid King
162–150 BC Succeeded by:
Alexander Balas

Event: Ruled 162 - 150 BC, King of Syria 1 2
Note:
Demetrius I SOTER (Greek: "Saviour") (b. c. 187 BC--d. 150), king of Syria from 162 to 150 BC. He was one of the line of rulers of the Seleucid dynasty, founded in 312 by a Macedonian successor of Alexander the Great.
The son of King Seleucus IV Philopator (reigned 187 to 175), Demetrius was sent to Rome as a hostage during his father's reign. While he was away, Syria came under the rule of his uncle, Antiochus IV Ephiphanes (d. 164), and then of his cousin, Antiochus V. Aided by the Greek statesman and historian Polybius, Demetrius escaped from Rome in 162 and returned to Syria to claim the throne. He defeated the rebel general Timarchus and was recognized as king by the Roman Senate. In 160 hecrushed a Jewish rebellion in Palestine. Demetrius died while fighting the pretender Alexander Balas, who was supported by Rome, Egypt, and Pergamum

Event: Ruled 162 - 150 BC, King of Syria 1 2
Note:
Demetrius I SOTER (Greek: "Saviour") (b. c. 187 BC--d. 150), king of Syria from 162 to 150 BC. He was one of the line of rulers of the Seleucid dynasty, founded in 312 by a Macedonian successor of Alexander the Great.
The son of King Seleucus IV Philopator (reigned 187 to 175), Demetrius was sent to Rome as a hostage during his father's reign. While he was away, Syria came under the rule of his uncle, Antiochus IV Ephiphanes (d. 164), and then of his cousin, Antiochus V. Aided by the Greek statesman and historian Polybius, Demetrius escaped from Rome in 162 and returned to Syria to claim the throne. He defeated the rebel general Timarchus and was recognized as king by the Roman Senate. In 160 hecrushed a Jewish rebellion in Palestine. Demetrius died while fighting the pretender Alexander Balas, who was supported by Rome, Egypt, and Pergamum

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]