== Notes for [[Item:Q58771|Q58771]] ==

http://gw5.geneanet.org/sanchiz?lang=en;pz=tomas;nz=sanchez+garza;ocz=0;p=antonio;n=uribe+de+la+cadena+vergara

Married to Luisa Garza-Falcón González-Hidalgo 1636-1682 (Parents : Blas María Garza-Falcón Treviño ca 1591-1669 & Beatriz González-Hidalgo Navarro ca 1597-1670) ,
* Josefa Uribe de la Cadena Garza 1665
* Andres Uribe de la Cadena Garza 1668
* Juan Uribe de la Cadena Garza

Married to María Isabel Lobo-Guerrero Casas, ■Felipe Uribe de la Cadena Lobo
* Antonio Uribe de la Cadena Lobo

=============================

3. ANTONIO3 URIBE-DE-LA-CADENA-VERGARA (JOSE2 URIBE-Y-VERGARA-TOVAR, PEDRO1 URIBE-Y-VERGARA)
*was born in Wichapan, Mexico F.D., Mexico, and
*died May 27, 1678 in Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.
*He married (1) MARIA-ISABEL LOBO-GUERRERO-DE-LAS-CASAS 1648,
**daughter of JUAN-ALONSO LOBO-GUERRERO-FERNANDEZ-CORDOVA and MARIA DE-LAS-CASAS-NAVARRO.
*He married (2) LUISA DE-LA-GARZA-GONZALEZ 1658 in Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico,
**daughter of BLAS DE-LA-GARZA-FALCON-TREVINO and BEATRIZ GONZALEZ-HIDALGO-NAVARRO. She was born Abt. 1633 in Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico, and
**died April 13, 1682 in Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.

Notes for ANTONIO URIBE-DE-LA-CADENA-VERGARA:
*A.K.A. Antonio de la Cadena Vergara. Source:Origen de los Fundadores de Texas, Nuevo Mexico, Coahuila y Nuevo Leon, Saltillo Tomo II, by Guillermo Garmendia Leal. Page 11.

Notes for LUISA DE-LA-GARZA-GONZALEZ:
*A.K.A. Luisa de Trevino.

Children of ANTONIO URIBE-DE-LA-CADENA-VERGARA and MARIA-ISABEL LOBO-GUERRERO-DE-LAS-CASAS are:
*1. 4. i. ANTONIO4 DE-LA-CADENA-LOBO,
**b. Wichapan, Mexico F.D. Mexico.
*2. ii. NICOLAS DE-LA-CADENA-LOBO,
**m. MARIA DE LA CONCEPCION, 1680.
*3. 5. iii. AUGUSTINA DE URIBE-DE-LA-CADENA-LOBO,
**b. 1660, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.
*4. 6. iv. CAPTAIN PHELIPE DE URIBE-DE-LA-CADENA-LOBO,
**b. 1666, Wichapan, Mexico F.D. Mexico.

Children of ANTONIO URIBE-DE-LA-CADENA-VERGARA and LUISA DE-LA-GARZA-GONZALEZ are:
*1. v. BEATRICE4 URIBE-DE-LA-CADENA,
**m. COMMANDER JUAN-FRANCISCO RODRIGUEZ-DE-MONTEMAYOR, 1685;
***b. 1629.
*2. vi. JOSEPHA URIBE-DE-LA-CADENA-VERGARA,
**b. 1665, Salinas Victoria, Nuevo Leon, Mexico;
**m. (1) CAPTAIN NICOLAS GUTIERREZ-DE-LARA, April 12, 1690, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico;
***b. 1645, Queretaro, Queretaro, Mexico;
**m. (2) FRANCISCO LONGORIA-RODRIGUEZ, January 25, 1695, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico;
***b. Abt. 1652, Salinas Victoria, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.
****Marriage Notes for JOSEPHA URIBE-DE-LA-CADENA-VERGARA and NICOLAS GUTIERREZ-DE-LARA: Index to the Marriage Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara by Raul J. Guerra, Jr., Nadine M. Vasquez, Valdomero Vela, Jr. Page 33.
****Marriage Notes for JOSEPHA URIBE-DE-LA-CADENA-VERGARA and FRANCISCO LONGORIA-RODRIGUEZ: Index to the Marriage Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara by Raul J. Guerra, Jr., Nadine M. Vasquez, Valdomero Vela, Jr. Page 41.
*3. 7. vii. MARIA URIBE-DE-LA-CADENA-VERGARA,
**b. 1665.
*4. viii. ANDRES URIBE-DE-LA-CADENA-DE-LA-GARZA,
**b. December 25, 1668, Sagrario Metro, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.
*5. 8. ix. JUANA URIBE-DE-LA-CADENA-DE-LA-GARZA,
**b. 1678, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.
*6. 9. x. TOMASINA URIBE-DE-LA-CADENA-DE-LA-GARZA,
**b. 1672;
**d. May 23, 1749, Sabinas Hidalgo, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.
*7. 10. xi. JUAN URIBE-DE-LA-CADENA-VERGARA,
**b. January 23, 1674, Sagrario Metro, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.
*8. 11. xii. FRANCISCO URIBE-DE-LA-CADENA-VERGARA,
**b. 1675.

http://www.somosprimos.com/inclan/uribe.htm

--------------------

Antonio de la CADENA Vergara (de Iribe)16,688,689 was born (date unknown).

Spouse: Luisa DE LA GARZA. Children were:
*1. Josepha de la CADENA,
*2. Tomasa de la CADENA (aka Tomasa de la Garza),
*3. Juana de la CADENA Bergara,
*4. Agustina Iribe de la CADENA,
*5. Maria de la CADENA (aka Maria de la Garza),
*6. Francisco de la CADENA.

http://www.raullongoria.net/Genealogy/FamilyTree/b27.html#P965

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]