== Notes for [[Item:Q89408|Q89408]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Septimius_Bassus

'''Septimius Bassus''' (fl. 317-319) was a Roman politician.

Bassus was born in a senatorial family, the son of Lucius Septimius Severus (b. c. 245) and wife Pomponia Bassa (born c. 250). His paternal grandfather was Lucius Septimius ... (b. c. 210), of the Gens Septimia, while his maternal grandparents were the Roman Senator Pomponius Bassus and the noblewoman Pomponia Gratidia. Bassus through his maternal grandfather was a descendant of the Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius, Roman Empress Faustina the Younger and of the former ruling Nerva–Antonine dynasty of the Roman Empire.

Bassus was praefectus urbi of Rome between 317 (he is attested in office on May 15) until 319 (at least until September 1). Between July 13 and August 13, 318, he was at court; for this reason he was substituted by Julius Cassius.

He married an unknown woman and had a daughter Septimia, born c. 305, first wife of Lucius Valerius Maximus Basilius.

== References ==

* "Septimius Bassus 19", Prosopography of the Later Roman Empire, Volume 1, Cambridge University Press, 1992, ISBN 0-521-07233-6, p. 157.
* Christian Settipani. Continuité gentilice et continuité sénatoriale dans les familles sénatoriales romaines à l'époque impériale, 2000
--------------------
'''
=Septimius Bassus=
'''

Septimius Bassus (fl. 317–319) was a Roman politician.

Bassus was born in a senatorial family, the son of Lucius Septimius Severus (b. c. 245) and wife Pomponia Bassa (born c. 250). His paternal grandfather was Lucius Septimius ... (b. c. 210), of the Gens Septimia, while his maternal grandparents were the Roman Senator Pomponius Bassus and the noblewoman Pomponia Gratidia. Bassus through his maternal grandfather was a descendant of the Roman emperor Marcus Aurelius, Roman empress Faustina the Younger and of the former ruling Nerva–Antonine dynasty of the Roman Empire.

Bassus was praefectus urbi of Rome between 317 (he is attested in office on May 15) until 319 (at least until September 1). Between July 13 and August 13, 318, he was at court; for this reason he was substituted by Julius Cassius.

He married an unknown woman and had a daughter Septimia, born c. 305, first wife of Lucius Valerius Maximus Basilius.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Septimius_Bassus

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]