== Notes for [[Item:Q86146|Q86146]] ==

''Do not confuse her with her sister, also named [http://www.geni.com/people/Iotapa-of-Commagene/6000000003828405317 Iotapa]. This Iotapa was the wife of [http://www.geni.com/people/Sampsigeramus-II-Priest-King-of-Emesa/6000000003645989988 Sampsiceramus II of Emesa].''

''Do not confuse her with her daughter, also named [http://www.geni.com/people/Iotapa-of-Emesa/6000000006101246176 Iotape]. The [http://www.loebtree.com/emesa.html Loeb Family Tree] and other sources erroneously say the wife of Sampsigeratnus II was a daughter of [http://www.geni.com/people/Aristobulus-Minor/6000000006101240937 Aristobulus Minor]. In fact, the wife of Aristobulus Minor was a daughter of Sampsigeratnus and this Iotape.''

From Wikipedia:

[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iotapa#Wife_of_King_Sampsiceramus_II_of_Emesa Iotapa] was a princess from the Kingdom of Commagene, who lived between the 1st century BC and 1st century AD. She was one of the daughters of King Mithridates III of Commagene and Queen Iotapa of Commagene. Iotapa was of Armenian, Greek and Medes descent. She was most probably born, raised and educated in Samosata, the capital of the Kingdom of Commagene.

Iotapa married the King Sampsiceramus II from the Royal family of Emesa, Syria who ruled from 14-42. Through her marriage to Sampsiceramus II, she became Queen of Emesa. Iotapa with Sampsiceramus II had four children; two daughters: Iotapa, Mamaea and two sons: Gaius Julius Azizus, Gaius Julius Sohaemus.

== Additional Sources ==

* D. C. O'Driscoll, [http://dcodriscoll.pbworks.com/w/page/9955710/Emesa Emesa]
* Wikipedia, [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Royal_family_of_Emesa Royal Family of Emesa]
--------------------
'''
=Iotapa=
'''

Iotapa (born around 20 BC-unknown date of death) was a princess of Commagene, daughter of King Mithridates III of Commagene, Queen consort of Syrian King Sampsiceramus II of Emesa.

'''Biography'''

Iotapa was a princess from the Kingdom of Commagene, who lived in the second half of the 1st century BC and the first half of the 1st century. She was one of the daughters of King Mithridates III of Commagene and Queen Iotapa of Commagene. Iotapa was of Armenian, Greek and Median descent. She was most probably born, raised and educated in Samosata, the capital of the Kingdom of Commagene.

Iotapa married the King Sampsiceramus II from the Royal family of Emesa, Syria, who ruled from 14-42. Through her marriage to Sampsiceramus II, she became Queen of Emesa.

Iotapa with Sampsiceramus II had four children; two daughters: Iotapa, Mamaea and two sons: Gaius Julius Azizus, Gaius Julius Sohaemus.

From a surviving inscription dated from the reign of her husband, Sampsiceramus II along with Iotapa are known as a happy couple.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iotapa_(spouse_of_Sampsiceramus_II)

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]