== Notes for [[Item:Q104615|Q104615]] ==

Luis morales
* father: LORENZO SUAREZ DE LONGORIA (1560-)
* Mother name ?

spouse : JUANA Treviño Salazar (1588-)

Children
* DIEGO Morales (-)
* JUAN Morales (-)
* LUIS Morales (1615-1701)
* cristobal Morales (1620-)
* LEONOR Morales (1625-1685)
* JOSE Ramon De Morales (1627-1670)
* ANTONIO Morales (1632-1674)
* RODRIGO Morales (1634-1660)
* FRANCISCA Morales (1641-1707)

http://genforum.genealogy.com/ramon/messages/75.html

http://genforum.genealogy.com/ramon/messages/74.html

--------------------

From The Descendents of Don Pedro de Salazar, Compiled by John D. Inclan

http://www.somosprimos.com/inclan/salazar.htm

Generation No. 2
*1. 2. JUANA2 DE TREVINO-QUINTANILLA-Y-SALAZAR (PEDRO1 DE SALAZAR)
**was born 1592.
**She married LUIS RAMON-DE-MORALES.
***He was born 1590.

Children of JUANA DE TREVINO-QUINTANILLA-Y-SALAZAR and LUIS RAMON-DE-MORALES are:
*1. 5. i. DIEGO3 DE MORALES.
*2. 6. ii. LEONOR DE MORALES,
**b. Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
*3. 7. iii. CAPTAIN ANTONIO DE MORALES-TREVINO,
**b. Saltillo, Coahulia, Mexico.
*4. 8. iv. LUIS DE MORALES.
*5. 9. v. SERGEANT MAJOR JOSEPH DE MORALES-Y-RAMON,
**d. 1670, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
*6. 10. vi. ALFEREZ REAL RODRIGO DE MORALES-TREVINO,
**b. 1634, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico;
**d. Aft. 01 Nov 1660, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
*7. 11. vii. FRANCISCA DE MORALES-TREVINO,
**b. 1641.
*8. viii. CRISTOBAL DE MORALES,
**b. 1620.

---

Misplaced...

Capt. Pedro de AGUIRRE107 was born (date unknown).

Spouse: Antonia GUILLEN. Antonia GUILLEN and Capt. Pedro de AGUIRRE were married. Children were: Capt. Nicolas de AGUIRRE, Margarita de AGUIRRE, Ynes de AGUIRRE, General Pedro de AGUIRRE, Juan de AGUIRRE, Clara (Ana) de AGUIRRE, Maria de AGUIRRE, Teresa de AGUIRRE.

http://www.raullongoria.net/Genealogy/FamilyTree/b10.html#P8356

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000014677046623

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]