== Notes for [[Item:Q85153|Q85153]] ==

Quintus Sulpicius Camerinus Peticus From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Quintus Sulpicius Camerinus Peticus Consul of the Roman Empire Reign 46 Quintus Sulpicius Camerinus Peticus was a Roman statesman who served as Consul in 46 and as Proconsul of Africa from 56 to 57.[1][2] He was a member of the gens, Sulpicia, a member of the Arval Brethren who served as president of the Board of Sacrifice in 60.[2] He was charged with extortion but was acquitted by Roman emperor Nero.[3] In 67, he was killed with his son also named, Quintus Sulpicius Camerinus Pythicus[4] by Helius during the absence of Nero.[5] He had a daughter called Sulpicia Praetextata who married the consul of 64, Marcus Licinius Crassus Frugi.[6][7]

References[edit] Jump up ^ Sherk, Robert K. (14 July 1988). The Roman Empire: Augustus to Hadrian. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 52. ISBN 978-0-521-33887-5. ^ Jump up to: a b Raleigh Nelson, J. (1903), The Boy Poet Sulpicius: A Tragedy of Roman Education, The School Review 11 (5): 384–395 Jump up ^ Vasily Rudich (2013). Political Dissidence Under Nero: The Price of Dissimulation. New York: Routledge. p. 213. ISBN 978-1-134-91451-7. Jump up ^ Steven H. Rutledge (2002). Imperial Inquisitions: Prosecutors and Informants from Tiberius to Domitian. Routledge. Jump up ^ Shaminga, Bope Katal (2000). La justice de Néron d'après Tacite. Thèse à la carte. Villeneuve d'Ascq: Presses universitaires du Septentrion. p. 103. Jump up ^ Rudich, Political Dissidence Under Nero: The Price of Dissimulation Jump up ^ Romeins Imperium – Marcus Licinius Crassus Frugi translated from Dutch to English

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quintus_Sulpicius_Camerinus_Peticus

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
66F29409D2B321EFBBE49822EF79916C4858
geni:6000000003828385888

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]