== Notes for [[Item:Q100018|Q100018]] ==

Salmon ben Jeroham (Yerūḥam),—known in Arabic as Sulaym, or Sulaymān, ibn Ruḥaym, flourished in Jerusalem around the middle of the tenth century alongside such important Karaite littérateurs as Abu ʾl-Surri ibn Zūṭṭā, David ben Abraham al-Fāsī, Ḥasan ben Mashiaḥ, Sahl ben Maṣliah, Japheth (Yefet) ben ʿEli, and Joseph ibn Nūḥ. According to the chronicle of Ibn al-Hītī he died in Aleppo. His patronymic should probably be spelled Yerūḥam, as implied by the rhyme with yenūḥam in (inter alia) the proem to his commentary on Esther (Ms. RNL Yevr.-Arab. I 4467, fol. 1v), though it is spelled Yerūḥām in the epilogue to Japeth ben ʿEli’s commentary on Daniel, and Yerūḥi/īm per the acrostic at the end of Salmon’s Sefer Mil ḥamot Adonay.

Notwithstanding the Arabic commentary on the Pentateuch by al-Qirqisānī, of which only a small portion is extant, and the use of Arabic glosses by Daniel al-Qūmisī in his commentary on the Minor Prophets, Salmon is the first Karaite writer for whom any substantial amount of exegetical literature written in Arabic is identifiably extant. Moreover, in addition to Saʿadya Gaon and the authors of certain anonymous fragments from the Cairo Geniza, he was one of the first Jewish writers to produce continuous (i.e., verse-by-verse) Arabic translations of the biblical text (see Bible Translations). These translations, like those of his contemporary Japheth ben ʿEli and the tafāsīr kabīra (comprehensive commentaries) of Saʿadya, are interspersed with commentary after each verse or pericope (in Salmon’s case usually the former). His exegetical method, like that of the medieval Karaites and oriental Jewish exegetes generally, is consistently rationalistic and linguistically oriented; yet in contrast to such peers as Japheth ben ʿEli, who demonstrate an eclectic tendency to accept—or at least to mention—divergent explanations, Salmon, reflecting a more popular-didactic, or even dogmatic, state of mind, typically affirms only one correct view on a given passage or expression. This tendency to dogmatism finds especially vivid expression in his versified polemical work Sefer Milḥamot Adonay, directed against the Rabbanites and Saʿadya in particular. Notwithstanding his raillery, however—and perhaps underscoring its more rhetorical than truly social or personal nature (Ibn al-Hītī, albeit in a highly disputed statement, claims that Saʿadya in fact attended his funeral)—Salmon does not refrain from advancing views shared by Rabbinic sources, or even from citing them outright, where they fit within the strictures of his rationalistic approach.

Among Salmon’s known works are the following:

1. Commentaries (designated tafāsīr or shurū ḥ) in Arabic, with tarājim (Arabic translations of the biblical text), on the following books (separately indexed Mss. in parentheses): Genesis (1), Isaiah (2), Psalms (26), Proverbs (1), Job, Song of Songs (6), Ecclesiastes (27), Lamentations (107), Esther (10), and Daniel (2), of which all but Job are more or less extant (for specific information on the editions and most of the manuscripts see Frank’s Bibliography, s.v., and the manuscripts database [in which are some misattributions] on the JNUL website, http://jnul.huji.ac.il, as well as the catalogue on the Friedberg Genizah Project website, http://genizah.org). It is also possible, given stylistic and contentual similarities to his extant commentaries, that a unique witness to Salmon’s commentary on Ruth—covering the introduction as well as his translation and most of the commentary on the first two verses—is contained in Ms. RNL Yevr.-Arab. 3966, fols. 1r–2v. An edition of his translation and commentary on Esther is currently in preparation by the present writer.

2. A versified Hebrew polemical work directed against Saʿadya and the Rabbanites entitled Sefer Milḥamot Adonay (The Book of the Wars of the Lord; ed. Davidson). The Kitāb al-Radd ʿalā ʾl-Fayyūmī (The Book of Refutation against the Fayyūmite), mentioned by Salmon in his comment on Ps. 104:19, may be a nonextant Arabic version.

3. An Arabic translation of and commentary on the Karaite prayers (see Steinschneider, p. 78 [§40.8]).

4. A nonextant Arabic work, mentioned in his comment on comments on Ps. 109:6 and Song 2:12–13, entitled Kitāb al-Intiṣār li-ʾl-Ḥaqq (The Book of the Triumph of the Truth), probably the same as Kitāb al-Intiṣār li-llāhi (The Book of the Triumph of God), mentioned at the end of his comment on Esth. 1:13 (per Ms. RNL Yevr.-Arab. II 3295, fol. 1v) in connection with intercalation—in view of which the work is perhaps to be identified as an Arabic version of Sefer Milḥamot Adonay, in which a large section is devoted to intercalation (see Davidson, pp. 51–77; on the phenomenon of two versions [not translations] of the same poetic-polemical work, one in Hebrew and one in Arabic, among tenth-century Arabic-speaking Jewish writers, see Drory, Contacts, p. 47).

5. A nonextant book concerning “the exchangeable letters”(a ḥ rūf al-ibdāl), mentioned as a completed work in his comment on Lam. 1:14 (per Ms. British Library Or. 2516, fol. 51v: wa-qad kuntu ʿamiltu li-hādhā ʾl-a ḥ rūf kitāb mufrad).

6. A nonextant book, divided into five parts, concerning the privileges of the priests, mentioned in his comment on Ps. 115:11.

7. A nonextant liturgical composition (ḥibbur).

8. Possibly a nonextant treatise on the resurrection of the dead, which he expresses the intention of writing in his comment on Ps. 104:30.

Michael G. Wechsler

Bibliography

Davidson, Israel (ed.). Sefer Mil ḥ amot Adonay [The Book of the Wars of the Lord, Containing the Polemics of the Karaite Salmon ben Yeruhim against Saadia Gaon] (New York: Jewish Publication Society/Jewish Theological Seminary, 1934).

Drory, Rina. The Emergence of Jewish-Arabic Literary Contacts at the Beginning of the Tenth Century (Tel Aviv: Tel Aviv University and ha-Qibbuṣ ha-Meʾuḥad, 1988) [Hebrew].

Frank, Daniel. Search Scripture Well: Karaite Exegetes and the Origins of the Jewish Bible Commentary in the Islamic East (Leiden: Brill, 2004).

Gottlober, Abraham Baer. Sefer Biqqoret le-Toledot ha-Qara’im (Vilna: Fünn et Rozenkrancz, 1865; repr. Jerusalem, 1972).

Nemoy, Leon. Karaite Anthology (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1952).

Pinsker, Simcha. Liqqu ṭ e Qadmoniyyot [Zur Geschichte des Karaismus und der karäischen Literatur] (Vienna: Adalbert della Torre, 1860).

Poznański, Samuel. The Karaite Literary Opponents of Saadiah Gaon (London: Luzac, 1908; repr. from Jewish Quarterly Review, o.s. 18 [1906]: 209–250; 19 [1907]: 59–83; 20 [1908]: 74–85, 216–231).

Steinschneider, Moritz. Die arabische Literatur der Juden (Frankfurt a.M.: J. Kauffmann, 1902; repr. Hildesheim, Georg Olms, 1986).

Cite this page

Michael G. Wechsler. "Salmon ben Jeroham (Sulaym ibn Ruḥaym)." Encyclopedia of Jews in the Islamic World. Executive Editor Norman A. Stillman. Brill Online, 2013. <http://referenceworks.brillonline.com/entries/encyclopedia-of-jews-in-the-islamic-world/salmon-ben-jeroham-sulaym-ibn-ruhaym-SIM_0018990>

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD733AA91EFBBFA9822EF79916C8E72
geni:6000000017144992176

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]