== Notes for [[Item:Q57891|Q57891]] ==

Leonor de AYALA (aka Leonor de Treviño)74 was buried.410 According to the Testament of Jose de Ayala, signed in the Hacienda de San Nicolas del Topo on April 14, 1666, his parents Jose de Treviño and Leonor de Ayala were buried at the church at the Convent of San Francisco in Monterrey.

Spouse: Joseph de TREVIÑO. Leonor de AYALA (aka Leonor de Treviño) and Joseph de TREVIÑO were married. Children were: Francisco de TREVIÑO (aka Francisco de Ayala), Juan de TREVIÑO, Ana de AYALA (aka Ana de Treviño), Capt. Alejo de TREVIÑO, Capt. Joseph de AYALA, General Diego de AYALA, Leonor de AYALA (aka Leonor de Valverde).

http://www.raullongoria.net/Genealogy/FamilyTree/b17.html#P1052
--------------------
21. LEONOR7 DE AYALA-VALVERDE (MARIANA6 DE GUEVARA-ESTRADA, JUAN-ALONSO5 DE ESTRADA, ANA4 ESTRADA-DE-LA-CABALLERIA, ALONSO3 DE ESTRADA, FERDINAND II (THE2 CATHOLIC), JOHN II OF1 ARAGON) was born 1580. She married JOSEPH-DIEGO DE TREMINO-Y-QUINTANILLA Abt. 1603, son of JOSE-DIEGO DE TREMINO and BEATRIZ DE QUINTANILLA-DE-FARIAS. He was born 22 Mar 1564/65 in Ciudad de Mexico, Distrito Federal, Mexico, and died 1651 in Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.

Notes for LEONOR DE AYALA-VALVERDE:

Descendent of the infante Don Vela, son to Don Sancho Ramirez, the King of Aragon.

Source:From the book Mil Familias III by Rodolfo Gonzalez de la Garza.

Notes for JOSEPH-DIEGO DE TREMINO-Y-QUINTANILLA:

Note:The Surname - Tremino - is how he signed his name.

In 1603, both he and his wife entered the state of Nuevo Leon. Source:From the book Origin of the Surnames Garza and Trevino in Nuevo Leon by Tomas Mendirichaga Cueva.

Marriage Notes for LEONOR DE AYALA-VALVERDE and JOSEPH-DIEGO DE TREMINO-Y-QUINTANILLA:

Marriage source:Mil Familias III by Rodolfo Gonzalez de la Garza. Page 316.

Fundadores de Nueva Galicia - Guadalajara - Tomo I, by Guillermo Garmendia Leal. Page 145.

Children of LEONOR DE AYALA-VALVERDE and JOSEPH-DIEGO DE TREMINO-Y-QUINTANILLA are:

29. i. CAPTAIN JUAN-JOSE8 DE AYALA, b. Abt. 1603, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico; d. 10 Apr 1694, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.

ii. ALONSO TREVINO-Y-AYALA, b. Abt. 1606; m. MARIA DE-LAS-CASAS-NAVARRO; b. 1604, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico; d. Abt. 1694, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.

Notes for MARIA DE-LAS-CASAS-NAVARRO:

She signed her last will and testament on March 1, 1694.

Source:From the book Testamentos Coloniales de Monterrey by Lilia E. Villanueva de Cavazos.

30. iii. GENERAL DIEGO DE AYALA-TREVINO, b. Abt. 1610, Mexico City, D. F., Mexico; d. 25 Dec 1682, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.

31. iv. FRANCISCO DE TREVINO, b. Abt. 1611.

32. v. ANA DE TREVINO, b. Abt. 1612; d. 04 Nov 1669, Saltillo, Coahulia, Mexico.

vi. JUAN DE TREVINO, b. Abt. 1613, Mexico City, F.D., Mexico.

33. vii. CAPTAIN FRANCISCO-ALEJO DE TREVINO-AYALA, b. Abt. 1617, Cerralvo, Nuevo Leon, Mexico; d. Bef. 1684, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.

34. viii. LEONOR DE VALVERDE, b. 1620; d. Bef. Oct 1684.

http://www.somosprimos.com/inclan/estrada.htm
--------------------
There are other children not listed here. I only listed my direct ancestor, Gen. Diego de Ayala Treviño for my own purpose.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]