== Notes for [[Item:Q113517|Q113517]] ==

Fernando & his wife had [three] children:

-https://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/SPANISH%20NOBILITY%20EARLY%20MEDIEVAL.htm#CristinaFernandezMDiegoFernandez

(c) ['''CRISTINA''' . Torres refers to a copy of a document at Oviedo, the original of which has disappeared, which names “Cristina” as the mother of Jimena, daughter of Diego Fernández Conde [in Asturias] and wife of Rodrigo Díaz "el Cid"[482]. Menéndez Pidal hypothesises that Diego´s wife was the daughter of Fernando Gundemáriz[483]. As noted above, another possibility is to identify Diego Fernández with the son of Fernando Gundemáriz (see above). It should be noted that it is not necessary that Conde Diego married a second wife at all in order to explain the various family relationships which are specified in the charters quoted in this section.

'''m''' [as his second wife,] DIEGO Fernández Conde [in Asturias, son of ---.]




-------


[https://www.geni.com/people/Jimena-D%C3%ADaz-se%C3%B1ora-de-Valencia/6000000002980014649 Jimena] was the daughter of Diego Fernández, Count of Oviedo, the son of count Fernando Flaínez. Her mother was his wife '''Cristina'''. She was a sister of Fernando Díaz, Count of Asturias.


*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jimena_Diaz ''(multilingual agree)''
-------


/!\

Cristina Fernández de Astúrias (* c. 1025)

Padre: Fernando Gondemarez, conde das Astúrias

Madre: Ximena Alfonso de León

Matrimonio: Diego Fernández, conde de Oviedo (* c. 1020)

Hijos:
#Rodrigo Diaz Conde de Asturias y de Oviedo ++ N
#Pedro Diaz Munia ++ N
#Fernando Diaz
#Bernardo Diaz ++ N Alfonso
#Ximena Diaz de Oviedo, regente de Valência (* c. 1050) ++ Rodrigo Diaz de Bivar, el Cid

/!\ http://www.geneall.net/H/per_page.php?id=272168 /!\

--------

Cristina is said to have been the great granddaughter off Alfonso V, King of Leon. Alfonso V is in our family history already.

!DESCENT: Frederick Lewis Weis and Walter Lee Sheppard, Jr., Ancestral Roots
of Certain American Colonists Who Came to America Before 1700, 7th ed., at 104
(1992). Line 113A-23.

great-granddaughter of Alfonso V, King of Leon.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]