== Notes for [[Item:Q112724|Q112724]] ==

Not the husband of https://www.geni.com/people/D-Ximena-Ord%C3%B3%C3%B1ez-de-Le%C3%B3n/6000000004533651416?through=6000000008463025320

----


CONDE DE ASTORGA. CONDE DEL BIERZO. SEÑOR DE ALDAVA , DE DEZA Conde y Tenente de Monterroso, Grainilio, Alba de Búbal y Novoa.

/!\ DIY: https://gw.geneanet.org/maite2021?lang=es&iz=2&p=munio+nuno+hugo&n=rodriguez+del+bierzo /!\

- - - - - - - - - -

'''D. NUNO RODRIGUES''' fº. de D. Rodrigo Arias N 9 sucedeu nas terras, e estados de seu pai, e foi Sr. da Casa de Aldana Sande, Deza, e trás Deza, e outras terras no Reino de Galiza e Leão, e terras del Vierzo, e Rico Homem dos Reis D. Afonso e D. Bermudo 3º e D. Fernando o Magno com quem se achou na conquista de Portugal. '' /!\ Casou com a Infanta D. [https://www.geni.com/people/Jimena-Ord%C3%B3%C3%B1ez/6000000004533651416 Ximena Ordonhes] 1ª filha do Infante D. Ordonho que era fº. natural do [https://www.geni.com/people/Bermudo-II-el-Gotoso-rey-de-Le%C3%B3n/6000000000114627350 Rei D. Bermudo 2º] seu avô /!\''

11 D. Álvaro Nunes progenitor dos Gusmões de quem procede a grande Casa de Medina Sidonia c.g.

11 D. Ximena Nunes m.er outros dizem que amiga de El Rei D. Afonso 6º de Leão, e mãe da Rainha D. Teresa por quem os Sr.es Reis deste Reino de Portugal têm o Senhorio dele c.c. o Conde D. Henrique

11 D. Arias Nunes

- - - - - - - - - - -
translation:

'''D. NUNO RODRIGUES''' fº. of D. Rodrigo Arias N 9 succeeded in the lands, and estates of his father, and was Sr. of the House of Aldana Sande, Deza, and after Deza, and other lands in the Kingdom of Galicia and León, and Terras del Vierzo, and Rico Homem dos Reis D. Afonso and D. Bermudo 3rd and D. Fernando the Great with whom he was found in the conquest of Portugal. ''/!\ He married Infanta D. Ximena Ordonhes 1st daughter of Infante D. Ordonho who was a fº. natural of King D. Bermudo 2nd his grandfather /!\ ''

11 D. Álvaro Nunes progenitor of the Gusmões from whom the great House of Medina Sidonia proceeds c.g.

11 D. Ximena Nunes and others say that she was a friend of King D. Afonso 6th of León, and mother of Queen D. Teresa through whom the Kings of this Kingdom of Portugal have his Lordship c.c. the Count D. Henrique

11 D. Arias Nunes

-----------

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]