== Notes for [[Item:Q86236|Q86236]] ==

Lucius Aemilius Paullus (who served as a censor) See: his son profile

Lucius Aemilius Lepidus Paullus or Paullus Aemilius Lepidus (ca 77 BC – ca 14 BC) was a member of the Roman Senate. Paullus was a member of the gens Aemilia.

He was grandson to Marcus Aemilius Lepidus and Appuleia through their son Lucius Aemilius Lepidus Paullus. His paternal uncle Marcus Aemilius Lepidus served as member of the Second Triumvirate.

He served as Consul in 34 BC and censor in 22 BC.

Paullus married firstly to Cornelia (ca 54BC - 16 BC), by whom he had three children: Lucius Aemilius Paullus (c. 37 BC - 14 AD), husband of Julia the Younger and consul in 1 AD, Marcus Aemilius Lepidus (c. 30 BC-33 AD), who was consul in 6 AD, and Aemilia Paulla (c. 22 BC), wife of Lucius Munatius Plancus (c. 45 BC - aft. 14), Consul in 13 and Legate in 14 and son of Lucius Munatius Plancus then later Publius Memmius Regulus.

He married secondly Claudia Marcella Minor, daughter of Gaius Claudius Marcellus Minor and Octavia Minor, without issue. Her maternal uncle was Emperor Augustus. Paullus died of unknown causes ca 14 BC.[citation needed]

His widow was remarried to Marcus Valerius Messalla Messallinus, son to Marcus Valerius Messalla Corvinus. They were parents to Marcus Valerius Messalla Barbatus.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Aemilius_Lepidus_Paullus_(consul_34_BC)

----

Paullus Aemilius Lepidus[1][2] (c. 77 BC – after 11 BC) was a Roman senator.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paullus_Aemilius_Lepidus


Paullus was a consul in 34 BC and censor in 22 BC.


He was a grandson of Marcus Aemilius Lepidus and Appuleia through their son Lucius Aemilius Paullus and his wife. His paternal uncle Marcus Aemilius Lepidus served as a member of the Second Triumvirate. Paullus served as consul in 34 BC and censor in 22.[2] Paullus was in some way related to a Cassia.[3]

Paullus first married Cornelia (c. 54 BC-16 BC). With Cornelia, Paullus had three children: Lucius Aemilius Paullus (c. 37 BC-14 AD) the husband of Julia the Younger and consul in AD 1; Marcus Aemilius Lepidus (c. 30 BC-33 AD), consul in AD 6; and a daughter Aemilia Paulla (c. 22 BC). Aemilia was married twice: first to Lucius Munatius Plancus, consul in AD 13; second to Publius Memmius Regulus.



Cornelia was married only once, to the Paullus Aemilius Lepidus mentioned above who was censor in 22 BC.[10] Their children were:

# Lucius Aemilius Paullus (b. before 29 BC), consul in AD 1; married his first cousin Julia the Younger.[11]
# Marcus Aemilius Lepidus (b. before 24 BC), consul in AD 6.
# Aemilia Paulli filia (b. 22 BC)

Paullus was widowed in 18 BC, the same year Cornelia's brother Publius Cornelius Lentulus Marcellinus was consul.[4] Not long after Cornelia's death, he married Claudia Marcella Minor, a daughter of Octavia the Younger, sister of the Roman emperor Augustus.[1] The marriage of Marcella and Paullus linked two honored republican houses and tied them closely to the imperial circle.[2] At some point after 11 BC, Marcella bore him a son,

#Paullus Aemilius Regulus,[5] who later served as a quaestor during the rule of the Roman emperor Tiberius.[6]
----
===References
# https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paullus_Aemilius_Lepidus
## article of Octavia Minor at Livius.org https://www.livius.org/articles/person/octavia-minor/
## Lightman, A to Z of Ancient Greek and Roman Women, p. 205
## L.R. Penner (2013). The Epigraphic Habits of the Slaves and Freed Slaves of the Julio-Claudian Households. University of Calgary.
## John Scheid, "Scribonia Caesaris et les Cornelii", Bulletin de Correspondance Hellénique 100 (1976), p. 490
## Syme, The Augustan Aristocracy p. 111
## ILS 949

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]