== Notes for [[Item:Q111562|Q111562]] ==

----


'''García Iñiguez'''
King of Pamplona
Reign 851-2 – 870
Predecessor Íñigo Arista
Successor Fortún Garcés
Born c. 810
Burial Monastery of Leyre
Consort Urraca
Issue
more... Fortún Garcés
House House of Íñiguez
Father Íñigo Arista

----

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garc%C3%ADa_%C3%8D%C3%B1iguez_of_Pamplona

'''García Íñiguez I''' (Latin: Garsea Enneconis, Basque: Gartzea Eneko; c. 810 – 882), also known as García I was the second king of Pamplona from 851–2 until his death. He was the son of Íñigo Arista, the first king of Pamplona. Educated in Cordoba, he was a successful military leader who led the military campaigns of the kingdom during the last years of his father's life.[1][2]


===Biography

García Íñiguez, sometimes García I, II, or III (Arabic: قرسية بن ونّقه البشكنشي‎, Garsiya ibn Wannaqo al Baškuniši) was king of Pamplona from 851/2 to his death in 882. He was educated in Córdoba, as a guest at the court of the Emir of Córdoba. He was the son of Íñigo Arista, the first king of their dynasty. When his father was stricken by paralysis in 842, he became regent of the kingdom (or perhaps co-regent with his uncle Fortún Íñiguez). He and his kinsman Mūsā ibn Mūsā ibn Fortún of the Banu Qasi rebelled against the Cordoban emir in 843. This rebellion was put down by Emir Abd-ar-Rahman II, who attacked the Kingdom of Pamplona, defeating García badly and killing Fortún. At his father's death in 851/2, he succeeded to the crown.

Following the death of Íñigo Arista, the Banu Qasi leader Mūsā ibn Mūsā pursued a policy of closer allegiance with Muhammad I of Córdoba, leaving García to look to Christian Asturias for an ally.[1] In 859, the Vikings captured García, probably far removed from his Basque kingdom of Navarre,[4] somewhere in the Andalusian heartland, and extorted a hefty ransom,[5] rising to around 70,000 gold dinars.[6] Later the same year, Mūsā ibn Mūsā attacked the Pamplonese city of Albelda. García and his new friend Ordoño I of Asturias together dealt Mūsā a crushing blow, killing, it is said, 10,000 of his magnates in the Battle of Albelda. This, in turn, provoked a raid by Mohammed I of Córdoba[7] in response and the next year, 860, saw García's son and heir Fortún captured and imprisoned by Mohammed I of Córdoba.[7][6]

He languished in Córdoba for the next 20 years. In 870, García formed an alliance with the Muslim rebel Amrūs ibn Umar ibn Amrūs, who had killed Garcia's nephew Mūsā ibn Galindo of Huesca, and the next year was apparently in a new alliance with the sons of Mūsā ibn Mūsā, now in rebellion against Córdoba.

García's death has been subject to scholarly dispute, a result of a paucity of records from the last years of his reign. The lack of subsequent mention of him after 870 led to the suggestion that he died in that year, while his eldest son and heir was in the hands of his enemies, it was argued that García Jiménez governed the kingdom as regent. García's son, Fortún Garcés, is then made to succeed upon his release in 880. There is, however, no evidence for such a regency, and Sanchéz Albornoz has cited evidence that García was still living at the time of his son's return.[6] Thus it is likely that Balparda was reporting an accurate tradition when he suggested García and ally Umar ibn Hafsun fought a battle at Aibar, not far from present-day Lumbier, against the troops of the Emir of Córdoba in 882, García dying there (although the age provided him, 84 years, is clearly exaggerated).

Marriage and descendants

The identity of García's wife or wives is poorly documented, and has been subject to much speculation. An undated confirmation of an earlier lost charter refers to King García and Queen Urraca Mayor, and this is thought by some to refer to García Íñiguez and an otherwise unknown wife. Based on her name alone, it has been suggested that she was of the Banu Qasi, but other historians have given her different parentage, or even a different king as husband.

Likewise, royal princess Leodegundia Ordoñez of Asturias, daughter of Ordoño I of Asturias, is known to have married a ruler of Pamplona, and García Íñiguez is one of those speculated to have been this prince.

García Íñiguez had following children:

# Fortún Garcés, king of Pamplona from 870 until 905 and married to Auria.
# Onneca Garcés, married to Count Aznar Galíndez II of Aragon.[9]
# Sancho Garcés, father of Aznar Sánchez de Larraun — the second husband of his cousin Onneca Fortúnez — and probably of Velazquita, who married Mutarrif ibn Musa, of the Banu Qasi.[a]

He may also have been the father of Jimena, who married King Alfonso III of Asturias[13] between 26 May and 20 December 873, both appearing together for first time in 874 making a donation to the Cathedral of Santiago de Compostela.[14] Her name and the status of her husband as the premier monarch in Christian Iberia suggests that she could have come from nothing short of the highest levels of Pamplona society, though some have instead derived her from the Jimenez dynasty.

Notes

a. Chronicler Ibn Hayyan says Velasquita was daughter of king García Íñiguez, but al-Udri names her father as Sancho, lord of Pamplona.[10] The latter has been preferred by historians.[9][11] This reference to Sancho as 'lord', along with a reference by Ibn Khaldun to a Sancho, 'governor of Pamplona and chief of the Basques' in 865, and an 867 charter that names 'king' Sancho as son-in-law of Galindo Aznárez I of Aragón, led Antonio Ubieto Arteta to propose that it was Sancho Garcés who ruled in Pamplona in the mid-to-late 860s, during at least part of the period that his brother, Fortún Garcés, was held captive in Córdoba.[12]


--------------------


García I Íiguez (c.810-870), son of Íñigo Arista from about 842, was regent and led the military campaigns during the last years of the life of his father who fell ill around 841-842 and remained paralytic. It happened to its father in the throne of Pamplona in 851-852, [1] [2] besides that of Sobrarbe.

Garcia was educated in Córdoba. In May 843 he helped his uncle Musa ibn Musa in his insurrection against the emir of Cordoba. The result was the attack of Abd al-Rahman II of Cordova to the lands of Pamplona, ​​that finished the following month with a resounding victory of the emir on García Íñiguez and Musa.

In 859 he was captured by a Viking expedition. Released after paying a ransom of 70,000 gold, [1] [6] abandoned the old alliances with the Banu Qasi and approached the kingdom of Asturias. Garcia allied with the Asturian king Ordoño I and together they obtained an important triumph before the Muslims in the battle of Albelda in 859-860, that also was called the "battle of Monte Laturce" or the one of Clavijo. This Christian victory motivated the bankruptcy of the Banu Qasi's power and the consequent Cordovan reaction.

His son Fortun Garces was taken prisoner by the Muslims in 860 and was held in Cordoba, in a golden exile, more than 20 years. After the death of García Íñiguez in 870 until the return of his son Fortún Garcés of its captivity in Cordova in 882, it seems that governed like Jiménez governor in Jiménez, son of Jimeno García (dynasty Jimena).

During his reign the first steps were taken to favor the passage of pilgrims who came to Compostela, laying the first stones of the future "Camino de Santiago".

Marriage and descent

He was married to Urraca, who does not have any documentary data to know his lineage, although bearing in mind that he had a son named Fortún, a name that several members of the mulad llev dynasty took, he could be the daughter of Fortun Ibn Musa (died 874 ) And cousin sister of Muhammad ibn Lub, the grandfather of the Urraca, Queen Asturian.

They were parents of:

*Fortun Garcés, king of Pamplona, ​​married to Oria (Áurea), possibly daughter of Lopo Ibn Musa.
* Sancho Garcés of Pamplona, ​​father of Aznar Sánchez de Larraún, count of Aragon and Valasquita Sánchez, married with Mutarif Ibn Musa, wal of Huesca.
*Onneca of Pamplona, ​​married with Aznar II Galíndez.
* He could also be the father of Jimena Garcés, married to Alfonso III the Great, and several parents, including King Garcia I of Leon, who would bear the name of his paternal grandfather. Jimena, however, is not mentioned in the Codex de Roda as the daughter of King Garcia Iniguez.

<Hr>

----

Http://www.abcgenealogia.com/Navarra00.html

III - GARCÍA I ÍÑIGUEZ.

Regent 842, King of Pamplona 852; Deceased 870. Married in 1ªnp with:

URRACA DE GASCUÑA, daughter of Count Sancho Sánchez de Gascony. Parents of:

1.- Fotún Garcés, follow the line.

4.- Sancho Garcés, Coregen of Pamplona with García Jiménez 870-82. Father of:

A.- Aznar Sánchez de Larraún, married his cousin-sister Oneca Durr, daughter of King Fortún Garcés. C / s.

5.- Belasquita, married Mutarif ibn Musa of Huesca.

Married in 2ªnp with:

N. DE GOHTIA. Parents of:

3.- Jimena, married in 869-70 with Alfonso III "the Magno", King of Asturias, Leon and Galicia. C / s.

In 3ªnp married with:

LEODEGUNDIA DE LEÓN, daughter of King Ordoño Iº de Asturias. Parents of:.

2 .- Oneca (Íñiga), married Aznar II Galindo, Count of Aragon. C / s.



----

http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/NAVARRE.htm#AssonaIniguez

Íñigo "Arista" & his wife ONECA had four children:

1. GARCÍA Iñíguez ([810]-killed by Arabs [Lumberri] 882[57], bur Leire Monastery). The Codex de Roda names "Garsea Enneconis et domna Assona…et domna ---" as the children of "Enneco cognomento Aresta"[58]. He succeeded his father in [852] as GARCÍA I [King] of Pamplona. He was defeated by the Muslims in [858]. "Rexo Garsia, filius Eneconis" donated property to the monastery of Leire, with the advice of "filii mei Fortunii", by charter dated 21 Oct 880[59]. This is the only source so far identified which accords the royal title to García and it is not clear whether it was contemporary. The Libro de Regla of Leire Monastery, compiled in 1076, records that "filius eius Garsea Ennecones" ruled for 12 years after the death of "Enneco Xemenones" and died "era DCCCXXXV…in Lumberri", his body being returned "ad monasterium Legeren" (for burial)[60].

m [firstly] URRACA, daughter of ---. An undated charter refers to a confirmation by “rex domnus Garcia et regina domna Urraca maiore”[61]. Her origin is not known. Rodrigo Ximénez de Rada, writing in the first half of the 13th century, records that "Enecho…Arista…filium Garsiam" married "Urracam, de Regio semine"[62]. Jaurgain suggests that "de Regio semine" should be interpreted as meaning "de la même race que lui" (based on his assumption that the kings of Navarre were descended from the dukes of Gascony, about which there appears to be no proof) and that Urraca was "fille de Sanche-Sancion duc de Vasconie", although he cites no primary source which confirms this parentage[63]. Her origin is discussed by Salazar y Acha who suggests that she was a member of the Banu Qasi family, related to the second wife of Fruela II King of Asturias, which would account for the introduction of the name Fortún into the family of the kings of Navarre[64].

[m secondly LEODEGUNDIS de Asturias, daughter of [ORDOÑO I King of Asturias & his wife Munia ---]. The manuscript of the Codex de Roda entitled "Versi domna Leodegundia regina" names "Leodegundiam Ordonii filiam" and indicates her position as Queen of Pamplona after her marriage[65]. She is not named in the genealogies in the earlier part of the Codex de Roda. She has been suggested as a possible second wife of King García I but, as there is no indication of dates in the "Versi", this is mere speculation. Barrau-Dihigo casts doubt on this identification[66]. It is of course possible that she was not a historical figure at all. It may have been convenient for chroniclers of the rulers of Pamplona to invent a dynastic connection with the kings of Asturias in order to boost local credibility.]

García I & his [first] wife had [four] children:

*a) FORTÚN García ([830]-after 905). The Codex de Roda names "Fortunio Garseanis et Sanzio Garseanis et domna Onneca" as the children of "Garsea Enneconis" and his unnamed wife[67]. He succeeded his father in 882 as FORTÚN [King] of Pamplona. See below.
* b) SANCHO García . The Codex de Roda names "Fortunio Garseanis et Sanzio Garseanis et domna Onneca" as the children of "Garsea Enneconis" and his unnamed wife[68]. m ---. The name of Sancho's wife is not known. Sancho García & his wife had [two] children: …
* c) ONECA García. The Codex de Roda names "Fortunio Garseanis et Sanzio Garseanis et domna Onneca" as the children of "Garsea Enneconis" and his unnamed wife, stating that Oneca married "Asnari Galindones de Aragone"[77]. m AZNAR [II] Galíndez Conde de Aragón, son of GALINDO [I] Aznar Conde de Aragón & his wife --- (-893).
* d) [JIMENA (-after Jun 912, bur [Astorga, transferred to Oviedo Santa María]). m ([869/70]) ALFONSO III “el Magno” King of Asturias, son of ORDOÑO I King of Asturias & his wife Munia --- (848-20 Dec 910).]
* García & his [wife/mistress] had one [illegitimate] child: e) daughter . Ibn Hayyan´s Muqtabis II records "la hija de Garsiya ibn W.n.q." as the wife of "Amrus ibn Amr ibn Amrus" in A.H. 259 [872/73][85]. It is possible that this daughter of [King] García was illegitimate. m as his (x) wife, AMRUS ibn Umar Wali [governor/king] of Huesca, son of UMAR ibn Amrus (-[Huesca] Apr 875).


===References
* http://dbe.rah.es/biografias/10259/garcia-iniguez
* https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garc%C3%ADa_Ier_de_Navarre
* http://genealogics.org/getperson.php?personID=I00106656&tree=LEO
** Leo: Europäische Stammtafeln, J.A. Stargardt Verlag, Marburg, Schwennicke, Detlev (Ed.), Reference: II 53.
* https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garc%C3%ADa_%C3%8D%C3%B1iguez
* http://vascongados.blogspot.com/2015/02/garcia-iniguez-el-rey-pamplones-aliado.html
* http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garc%C3%ADa_Jim%C3%A9nez_of_Pamplona
* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garc%C3%ADa_Íñiguez_of_Pamplona cites
** Barrau-Dihigo, Lucien. Les origines du royaume de Navarre d'apres une théorie récente. Revue Hispanique. 7: 141-222 (1900).
** Cañada Juste, Alberto. "Los Banu Qasi (714-924)". Princípe de Viana 41:5-95 (1980).
**Lacarra de Miguel, José María. "Textos navarros del Códice de Roda". Estudios de Edad Media de la Corona de Aragon. 1:194-283 (1945).
**Lévi-Provençal, Évariste. "Du nouveau sur le Royaume de Pampelune au IXe Siècle". Bulletin Hispanique. 55:5-22 (1953).
** Lévi-Provençal, Évariste and Emilio García Gómez. "Textos inéditos del Muqtabis de Ibn Hayyan sobre los orígines del Reino de Pamplona". Al-Andalus. 19:295-315 (1954).
**Mello Vaz de São Payo, Luiz. "A Ascendência de D. Afonso Henriques". Raízes & Memórias 6:23-57 (1990).
* http://www.biografiasyvidas.com/biografia/g/garcia_i_iniguez.htm
* http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/NAVARRE.htm#AssonaIniguez
* https://dbe.rah.es/biografias/10259/garcia-iniguez

Rey de Pamplona (851? u 852?-870? u 882? [ver referencia 3). El inicio del reinado, en la página web "Árbol Genealógico de los Reyes de Navarra", se señala fue el 851. En la página web Reyes de Pamplona se lo hace reinar hasta el año 870, tras lo cual habría asumido García Jiménez como regente, entre los años 870-880.
Según la tradición murió en la batalla de Aibar en 882.

Rey de Pamplona (851? u 852?-870? u 882? [ver referencia 3). El inicio del reinado, en la página web "Árbol Genealógico de los Reyes de Navarra", se señala fue el 851. En la página web Reyes de Pamplona se lo hace reinar hasta el año 870, tras lo cual habría asumido García Jiménez como regente, entre los años 870-880.
Según la tradición murió en la batalla de Aibar en 882.

443590912. Grev Garcia Jimenez INIEGOSON av Aragonien(16177) died between 882 and 884.(16178) He was a Greve in Aragonien.(16179) Kalles også Garcia Iniegues. Disse to navn er ofte feilaktig tilrettelagt to forskjellige personer. He was married to Urraca N.NSDTR av kongelig byrd. (16180)

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Pamplona (851-880)

SOURCE NOTES:
www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal07677

Source: Codex de Roda.

Got the title of The Bad after he killed Centulf (Centule) through a bad "Joke" that was payed on Centulf.
Also known as The Usurper.

García I Íñiguez (em língua árabe: Garsiya ibn Wannaqo al Baškuniši) foi Rei de Pamplona entre 851|2 e a sua morte, tendo se tornado regente desde 842 por invalidez do pai, Íñigo Arista, primeiro rei da Dinastia Iñiguez. Garcia foi educado em Córdoba, como convidado do Emir de Córdoba. Quando o seu pai foi assolado pela paralisia, Garcia assumiu a regência, possivelmente ajudado pelo seu tio Fortún Íñiguez.
***
Na parte de casamento e filhos, há possíveis discrepâncias com o apurado em outras fontes:
Casado em primeiras núpcias em 858 com Oria (Leodegundis), filha de Musa ibn Musa ibn Fortún, e em segundas núpcias com Urraca Giménez, Condessa de Aragão (852-870), teve os seguintes filhos:
* Fortún Garcés I, futuro Rei de Pamplona
* Sancho Garcés de Pamplona, cujo único filho, Aznar Sánchez, casou com uma filha do rei Fortún Garcés, de quem descende Toda Aznárez, esposa de Sancho Garcés I, e Sancha Aznárez, esposa de Jimeno Garcés.
* Jimena de Pamplona, casada com Alfonso III, o Grande.
* Oneca de Pamplona, casada com Aznar II Galíndez.
* Velasquita Garcés.

He became Count in 851.

1 NAME Garcie /Iniquez/ 1 BIRT 2 DATE ABT. 795 2 PLAC Pamplona, Spain

Name Suffix:<NSFX> King Of Pamplona

852 - 882 King of Pamplona [Navarre]

852 - 882 King of Pamplona [Navarre]

852 - 882 King of Pamplona [Navarre]

-- MERGED NOTE ------------

Wikidata: https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q1231049 | Geni: https://www.geni.com/people/6000000000037773272

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]