== Notes for [[Item:Q87560|Q87560]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Licinius_Crassus

=Marcus Licinius Crassus=

* Born 115 BC, Roman Republic
* Died 53 BC (aged 62), Carrhae, Parthian Empire
* Spouse(s) '''Tertulla'''
* Children
# '''Marcus Licinius Crassus''',
# '''Publius Licinius Crassus'''

==Biography==

'''Marcus Licinius Crassus''' was the third and youngest son of '''Publius Licinius Crassus Dives''', a man who had himself been consul in 97 BC and censor 89 BC. One brother died during the Social War; his father and another brother were killed or committed suicide to evade capture during the Marian purges in December 87 BC.[2]

*Crassus' grandfather was '''Marcus Licinius Crassus Agelastus''', of whom little is known. This grandfather was descended from a consul and censor '''Publius Licinius Crassus Dives''', best known for being Pontifex Maximus (from 212 BC to his death 183 BC) and consul (in 205 BC) and political ally of the Roman general and statesman Scipio Africanus. Crassus could therefore claim to be descended from a man who was successively elected Pontifex Maximus, censor, and then consul, in a rather unusual chronological order.

'''Crassus''' and his brothers were raised together in a small modest house[3] despite the family's great inherited wealth and his father's immense personal fortune.[citation needed] As was customary, the two elder brothers lived with their parents and youngest brother even after they married and had children.[3]

--------------------------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Licinia_(gens)#Licinii_Crassi

===Licinii Crassi===
*Father of Marcus: See. #13
*Brothers of Marcus: See: #18 and #19

*List of Licinii Crassi
*1. Publius Licinius P. f. P. n. Crassus Dives, censor in 208 BC and consul in 205, during the Second Punic War. (+Wikipedia) http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Publius_Licinius_Crassus_Dives_(consul_205_BC)
*2. Publius Licinius P. f. P. n. Crassus Dives, son of the consul of 205 BC.
*3. Publius Licinius C. f. P. n. Crassus, consul in 171 BC, defeated by Perseus of Macedon.[29] (+Wikipedia) http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Publius_Licinius_Crassus_(consul_171_BC)
*4. Gaius Licinius C. f. P. n. Crassus, consul in 168 BC, assigned the province of Gallia Cisalpina, but brought his army to Macedonia instead.[30]
*5. Gaius Licinius (C. f. C. n.) Crassus, tribunus plebis in 145 BC, proposed a bill to fill vacant priesthoods by popular election; it was defeated following a speech by the praetor, Gaius Laelius Sapiens.[31][32]
*6. Gaius Licinius (C. f. C. n.) Crassus, probably son of the tribune of 145 BC.[33]
*7. Licinia C. f. C. n., one of the Vestal Virgins in 123 BC.
*8. Publius Licinius Crassus Dives Mucianus, consul in 131 BC. He was the son of Publius Mucius Scaevola, the consul of 175 BC, but was adopted by Publius Licinius Crassus, son of the consul of 205. (+Wikipedia) http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Publius_Licinius_Crassus_Dives_Mucianus
*9. '''Marcus Licinius P. f. P. n. Crassus Agelastus, grandfather of the triumvir, he was said to have obtained his surname because he never laughed.[34][35]'''
*10. '''Licinia P. f. P. n., sister of Marcus Licinius Crassus Agelastus'''.
*11. Licinia P. f. P. n., daughter of Publius Licinius Crassus Mucianus, married Gaius Sulpicius Galba, son of the orator Servius Sulpicius Galba.
*12. Licinia P. f. P. n., daughter of Publius Licinius Crassus Mucianus, married Gaius Sempronius Gracchus, the tribune.
*13. '''Publius Licinius M. f. P. n. Crassus Dives''', ''father of the triumvir''; he was consul in 97 BC, and triumphed over the Lusitani. (+Wikipedia) http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Publius_Licinius_Crassus_Dives_(consul_97_BC)
*14. Lucius Licinius L. f. Crassus, the greatest orator of his day, was consul in 95 BC, and censor in 92.
*15. Licinia L. f. L. n., daughter of the consul of 95 BC, married Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica, praetor in 94 BC.
*16. Licinia L. f. L. n., daughter of the consul of 95 BC, married the younger ''Gaius Marius'', consul in 82 BC. (+Wikipedia) ''http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaius_Marius_the_Younger''
*17. Lucius Licinius Crassus Scipio, grandson of the consul of 95 BC, was the son of Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica and Licinia, and was adopted by his grandfather, who had no sons of his own. His brother was Quintus Caecilius Metellus Scipio.[36][37]
*18. '''Publius Licinius P. f. M. n. Crassus Dives''', brother of the triumvir, he was slain by the horsemen of Gaius Flavius Fimbria, one of the partisans of Marius, in 87 BC.[38][39][40]
*19. '''Licinius P. f. M. n. Crassus Dives''', a brother of the triumvir who escaped the massacre of 87 BC.[41]
*20. '''►Marcus Licinius P. f. M. n. Crassus Dives''', the triumvir, was consul in 70 and 55 BC, and censor in 65◄.
*21. '''Publius Licinius P. f. P. n. Crassus Dives''', a nephew of the triumvir, squandered his fortune.[42]
*22. ''' Licinius Crassus Dives''', praetor in 59 BC, was perhaps the same as Publius Licinius Crassus Dives, nephew of the triumvir.[3][43]
*23. Publius Licinius Crassus, praetor in 57 BC, favored Cicero's return from exile.[44]
*24. Publius Licinius Crassus Junianus, tribunus plebis in 51 BC, and a friend of Cicero; during the Civil War he was a partisan of Pompeius, and fought under Quintus Caecilius Metellus Scipio in Africa.[45][46]
*25. '''Marcus Licinius M. f. P. n. Crassus Dives''', elder son of the triumvir, he was Caesar's quaestor in Gaul, and praefectus of Gallia Cisalpina at the beginning of the Civil War in 49 BC.[47][48][49]
*26. '''Publius Licinius M. f. P. n. Crassus Dives''', younger son of the triumvir, he was Caesar's legate in Gaul from 58 to 55 BC. He accompanied his father to Syria, and died at the Battle of Carrhae in 53.
*27. '''Marcus Licinius M. f. M. n. Crassus Dives''', consul in 30 BC. with Octavianus; in the following year, as proconsul of Macedonia, he fought successfully against the surrounding barbarians.[50] (+Wikipedia) http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Licinius_Crassus_Dives_(consul_30_BC)
*28. '''Marcus Licinius M. f. M. n. Crassus Dives''', consul in 14 BC.[51] (+Wikipedia) http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Licinius_Crassus_Dives_(consul_14_BC)
*29. Marcus Licinius Crassus Frugi, consul in AD 27. (+Wikipedia) http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Licinius_Crassus_Frugi
*30. Marcus Licinius M. f. Crassus, son Marcus Licinius Crassus Frugi, he was slain by the emperor Nero.
*31. Licinius Crassus Scribonianus, son of Marcus Licinius Crassus Frugi, he was offered the empire by Marcus Antonius Primus, but refused.[52]
*32. Lucius Calpurnius Piso Licinianus, son of Marcus Licinius Crassus Frugi, he was adopted as the heir of Galba, but slain by the soldiers of Otho in AD 69. (+Wikipedia) http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Calpurnius_Piso_Licinianus
*33. Marcus Licinius Crassus Mucianus, consul in AD 52, 70, and 75, the general and chief advisor of Vespasian. (+Wikipedia) http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mucianus

--------------------
He was Consul of Rome (70 BCE, 55 BCE), and Triumvir (60-53 BCE, with Julius Caesar and Pompey). He was killed by having molten gold poured down his throat.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]