== Notes for [[Item:Q105344|Q105344]] ==

As commandant of the presidio of San Juan Bautista from its establishment in 1703 until his death, Diego Ramón played a key role in the development of Spanish Texas and the founding of missions in both Texas and Coahuila. Conjecturally, Querétaro has been given as his birthplace, but that is by no means certain. In the baptismal record of the parish of Santiago de Querétaro appears the name of a daughter, Juana, born to Diego Ramón and María de los Ríos. Record of the couple's marriage does not appear. There is reason to believe that Ramón had liaisons outside marriage that resulted in "natural" (i.e., illegitimate) children. His known offspring besides Juana included at least two other daughters and three sons: Domingofra24, Diego, and José. In 1716, while Don Diego remained at San Juan Bautista and Domingo led a new Texas entrada, José Ramón-whose name often is joined to Domingo's as though they were one person-was living at Boca de Leones (present Villadama, Nueva León). Living there also were his mother and two sisters.

In 1674 Diego Ramón was a soldier with Francisco de Elizondo's expedition to Fray Juan Larios's Coahuila mission, "fourteen leagues" north of the Río de Sabinas. As a captain in 1687–88, Ramón was left in charge of Santiago de la Monclova during absences of Governor Alonso De León. His first entry into what is now Texas probably occurred in 1688, when he accompanied De León on the expedition to arrest the Frenchman Jean Jarry in the future Kinney County. After De León's death in 1691, Ramón served as governor ad interim of Coahuila. Following the ineffectual Texas expedition of Domingo Terán de los Ríos in 1691–92, he reported to the viceroy on the plight of the missionaries in eastern Texas. As a result, Gregorio de Salinas Varona, who had just been named Coahuila governor to succeed Ramón, undertook in the spring of 1693 an expedition to relieve the missionaries' distress. In 1699 Ramón led the founding expedition of Mission San Francisco Xavier, forty miles northwest of Monclova. On January 1, 1700, Ramón, now sargento mayor, officiated in the removal of San Juan Bautista Mission from the Río de Sabinas on the Coahuila-Nuevo León border to the site of present-day Guerrero, Coahuila, five miles from the Rio Grande. His association with this settlement, which ultimately included two other missions, endured until his death twenty-four years later. In March 1701, on recommendation of the bishop of Guadalajara, Captain Ramón was placed in command of a "flying company" charged with defending the Rio Grande missions. Two years later, the company was given permanent station in Presidio de San Juan Bautista, adjacent to San Juan Bautista Mission, with Ramón in command. In 1706, when smallpox swept through the native population, both in the mission settlement and in the montes, the captain and several of his soldiers accompanied a missionary priest into the Texas wilds to baptize dying Indians. The following year he led an expedition to the Nueces River to punish hostile Indians for raiding in Coahuila and Nuevo León, while exploring the country and recruiting Indians for the smallpox-ravaged missions (see RAMÓN EXPEDITION). In 1714 he received the French commercial agent Louis Juchereau de St. Denis, who had journeyed from Mobile seeking an entry to trade with the Spaniards, and sent him on to Mexico City for interrogation. In 1715, following an Indian uprising, Ramón crossed the Rio Grande with Fray Francisco Ruiz to return the rebellious natives to the missions.

Many of Ramón's descendants also were involved in historic events. In 1716 Manuela Sánchez Navarro, the granddaughter of Ramón's wife, Feliciana Camacho y Botello, was wed to St. Denis. She later joined her husband at the French post at Natchitoches, Louisiana. Also in 1716, Diego Ramón saw his son Domingo off for eastern Texas at the head of a new mission-founding expedition, accompanied by St. Denis as commissary and the younger Diego Ramón (Domingo's brother) as alferez. Domingo was to command the presidio of Nuestra Señora de los Dolores de los Tejas on the Neches River, then Nuestra Señora de Loreto de la Bahía Presidio at its first site. He officiated also in the founding of Nuestra Señora del Espíritu Santo Mission, near the presidio at La Bahía.

The second Diego Ramón, born in 1677, returned to Coahuila and ultimately came into possession of his father's hacienda, Santa Mónica. A third Diego Ramón, Domingo's son, succeeded to command of La Bahía upon his father's (Domingo's) death but was soon removed for negligence. He afterward became lieutenant of San Antonio de Béxar Presidio and temporarily commanded San Xavier de Horcasitas Presidio on the San Gabriel River. Assigned to serve as alferez at San Luis de las Amarillas Presidio (San Sabá), he was sent to Mexico City as a prisoner in 1757.

Diego Ramón the elder himself came under a cloud in his later years. In 1717, on the basis of complaints by Fray Antonio de San Buenaventura y Olivares, Governor Martín de Alarcón launched an investigation into the Ramón family's involvement in St. Denis's trade scheme. A royal decree dated January 30, 1719, ordered Don Diego's removal from San Juan Bautista Presidio and his reassignment to a distant post. The decree, not acted upon immediately, ultimately was nullified by Diego Ramón's death of natural causes.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

198. MAJOR DIEGO6 RAMON (CATARINA5 MARTINEZ-GUAJARDO, ISABEL4 GARCIA-DEL-VALLE, PEDRO3 DE-LOS-SANTOS-DE-ROJO-RUELAS, BERNARDO2 DE-LOS-SANTOS-COY, JUAN1 DE CALIZ)
*was born 1641 in Queretaro, Queretaro, Mexico, and
*died April 10, 1719 in San Juan Bautista del Rio Grande, Presidio del Norte, Coahulia, Mexico.
*He met (1) UNKNOWN.
*He met (2) MARIA DE-LOS-RIOS in Queretaro, Coahuila (sic: Queretaro is far south of present and historic Coahuila), Mexico.
**She was born in Queretaro, Coahuila, Mexico, and died in Boca de Leones, Villaldama, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.
*He married (3) FELICIANA CAMACHO-Y-BOTELLO Abt. 1676,
**daughter of ANDRES CAMACHO-Y-OLEA and JUANA BOTELLO-DE-MORALES. She was born Abt. 1660 in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.

Child of DIEGO RAMON and UNKNOWN is:
* 1. i. UNKNOWN7 RAMON,
**m. MAYORDOMO FRANCISCO DE SALINAS.

Children of DIEGO RAMON and MARIA DE-LOS-RIOS are:
*2. ii. JUANA7 RAMON-DE-LOS-RIOS,
**b. Queretaro, Coahuila, Mexico;
**d. Boca de Leones, Nuevo Leon, Mexico;
**m. JUAN VALDEZ.
*3. iii. DIEGO RAMON-DE-LOS-RIOS,
**b. Queretaro, Coahuila, Mexico;
**d. Boca de Leones, Nuevo Leon,Mexico;
**m. ANTONIA GARCIA-ARISPE, May 14, 1690, Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico.

Children of DIEGO RAMON and FELICIANA CAMACHO-Y-BOTELLO are:
*1. iv. ALFEREZ JOSEPH7 RAMON-CAMACHO,
**b. Coahuila, Mexico;
**d. Boca de Leones, Nuevo Leon, Mexico;
**m. JUANA GARCIA-FLORES, January 01, 1695/96, Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico;
***b. Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
*2. v. JACINTA RAMON-CAMACHO,
**m. LT. GENERAL JUAN-JOSEPH DE VALDEZ, February 27, 1707, Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico.
*3. vi. CAPTAIN JOSE-DOMINGO RAMON-CAMACHO,
**b. Boca de Leones, Nuevo Leon, Mexico;
**d. December 23, 1723, La Bahia, Goliad County, Texas;
**m. LUISA MALDONADO-DE-ORANDAZ.
*4. vii. ANDRES RAMON-CAMACHO,
**b. 1670, San Juan Bautista del Rio Grande, Coahulia, Mexico;
**m. (1) MARIA-LUISA GARCIA-FLORES;
***b. 1675;
**m. (2) MANUELA FLORES-DE-LA-FUENTE, September 24, 1704, Monclova, Nuevo Leon, Mexico;
**m. (3) JUANA MENCHACA-XIMENEZ, November 19, 1707, Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahulia, Mexico;
***b. 1670, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
*5. viii. ALFEREZ DIEGO RAMON-CAMACHO,
**b. 1677;
**d. San Juan Bautista del Rio Grande ,Presidio del Norte, Coahulia, Mexico;
**m. MARIE ESPERRICCO SANCHEZ-DE-NAVARRE.
*6. ix. DONA ANTONIA RAMON-CAMACHO,
**b. Abt. 1680, San Juan Bautista del Rio Grande, Presido del Norte, Coahulia, Mexico;
**d. Bef. 1704;
**m. CAPTAIN JOSEPH DE URRUTIA2, January 06, 1696/97, Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico;
***b. Abt. 1678, Guipuzcoa prov., Spain2;
***d. July 16, 1741, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas2
*7. x. PEDRO RAMON-CAMACHO,
**b. July 27, 1685, Sagrario Metropolitano, Saltillo, Coahulia, Mexico;
**m. (1) ANTONIA GARCIA;
**m. (2) MARIA-DE-LORETO FLORES, August 12, 1726, Sagrario Metro, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.

There are comments for both him and his children.

http://www.somosprimos.com/inclan/santoscoy.htm

also at -

http://www.somosprimos.com/inclan/salazar.htm

---

From The Descendents of Don Pedro de Salazar, Compiled by John D. Inclan

http://www.somosprimos.com/inclan/salazar.htm

38. MAJOR DIEGO4 RAMON (JOSEPH3 DE MORALES-Y-RAMON, JUANA2 DE TREVINO-QUINTANILLA-Y-SALAZAR, PEDRO1 DE SALAZAR)
*was born 1641 in Queretaro, Queretaro, Mexico, and
*died 10 Apr 1719 in San Juan Bautista del Rio Grande, Presido del Norte, Coahulia,Mexico.
*He met (1) UNKNOWN.
*He met (2) MARIA DE-LOS-RIOS in Queretaro, Coahuila, Mexico.
**She was born in Queretaro, Coahuila, Mexico, and
**died in Boca de Leones, Villaladama,Nuevo Leon,Mexico.
*He married (3) FELICIANA CAMACHO-Y-BOTELLO Abt. 1676,
**daughter of ANDRES CAMACHO-Y-OLEA and JUANA BOTELLO-DE-MORALES. She was born Abt. 1660 in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.

Notes for MAJOR DIEGO RAMON:
*He was the natural born son of Sgt. Major Joseph Ramon and Dona Catalina Martinez.
*His relationship with Maria de los Rios and their children are noted - the Handbook of Texas Online.
*Located in the state of Coahuila, Mexico, he owned the Hacienda named "El Carrizalejo",
*In 1674, he was a soldier with Francisco Elizondo's Expedition.
*In 1688, he accompanied Governor Alonso De Leon into Texas.
*Between March 1691 to June 1698, he served as the third governor of Coahuila, Mexico. (Wikipedia lists him as the second governor, serving only an interim term in 1691. Domingo Teran de los Rios was officially appointed to the office on Jan. 23 1691, and traveled extensively in Tejas after leaving Monclova on May 16, same year. After arriving in Veracruz on Apr. 15, 1692, he was apparently relieved of command in favor of Gregorio Salinas, who served through 1698. It is possible that Diego Ramon served in an administrative capacity as governor while the official governors were absent from Monclova.)
*On December 14, 1698, Diego Ramon and Fray Cristobal Montes de Oca founded the mission San Francisco Xavier y Valle de San Cristobal, some forty leaugues northeast of Villa de Pilon (Monclova).
*On March 1, 1700, he founded the Mission San Fernando Solano. This mission would later be relocated and remembered today as the Alamo.
*By March 28, 1701 Captain Ramon was receiving five hundred pesos for evey year served. Considered top paid in those years. From 1703, till his death, he was the Commandant of the Royal presidio of San Juan Bautista, Coahuila, Mexico. This presidio had been established in 1702. His offical title was, Theniente General, Cabo y Caudillo.

Source:From the book's
*Gallant Outcast - Texas Turmoil 1519-1734 by Ben Cuellar Ximenez.
*San Juan Bautista, Gateway to Spanish Texas by Robert S. Weddle.
*Origen de los Fundadores de Texas, Nuevo Mexico, Coahilia, y Nuevo Leon, by Guillermo Garmendia Leal. Page 70.
*With All Arms by Carl Laurence Duaine. Page 242.
*With Makers of San Antonio by Frederick C. Chabot. Page 46.
*Northern New Spain, A Research Guide, by Thomas C. Barnes, Thomas H. Nayor and Charles W. Polzer.
*Diary of the Alarcon Expedition into Texas, 1718-1719 by Fray Francisco Celiz.
*Published by the Quivira Society.

The following is from "The Biographical Dictionary of Saltillo" by Martha Duron Jimenez and Ignacio Etchegaray, pg 143. Don Jose Ramon is mentioned as the eldest and the natural born son of Captain Diego Ramon.

"En los ultimos dias del mes de abril de ese ano (1719), dejo de existir en el Presidio de Rio Grande el Capitan Diego Ramon, que tan importantes servicios presto en la conquista y pacificacion de la Provincia de Coahuila. Sus padres fueron Don Josephe Ramon y Dona Andrea de los Rios, espanoles de nacimiento, pero que en 1636 se embarcaron para America yendo a residir primero en Cadereyta, y despues a la Villa del Saltillo de donde fue nombrado Procurador General por recomendacion del Capitan Don Alonso de Leon de quien fue particular amigo. En esta villa nacio el ano de 1641 el tercero de sus hijos, que se llamo Diego y despues de recibir la education primaria que en esa epoca se impartia, se dedico desde muy joven, a los trabajos del campo y a las campanas contra los indios, al lado de Don Alonso de Leon, el Capitan que lo llego a estima tanto coma a su padre, y que fue su gran maestro en la escuela de las privaciones, fatigas y vicisitudes. Muerto el Capitan, su hijo Don Alonso que regreso de Espana a encargarse de la familia e intereses de su padre, continue sineto el amigo inseparabe de Diego Ramon....."

El Capitan Diego Ramon contrajo matrimonio en el Presidio de San Francisco de Coahuila, con Dona Feliciana Camacho, de la que tuvo entre otros hijos a Don Jose que fue el mayor "

---

Notes for MARIA DE-LOS-RIOS:
*Dona Maria was with her two daughters and an son name Jose, at Boca de Leones.
**Source:San Juan Bautista - Gateway to Spanish Texas by Robert S. Weddle. Page 121.

Child of DIEGO RAMON and UNKNOWN is:
*1. i. UNKNOWN5 RAMON,
**m. MAYORDOMO FRANCISCO DE SALINAS.

Children of DIEGO RAMON and MARIA DE-LOS-RIOS are:
*1. ii. JUANA5 RAMON-DE-LOS-RIOS,
**b. Queretaro, Coahuila, Mexico;
**d. Boca de Leones, Nuevo Leon,Mexico;
**m. JUAN VALDEZ.
***Notes for JUANA RAMON-DE-LOS-RIOS: Source:San Juan Bautista Gateway to Spanish Texas by Robert S. Weddle.
***Notes for JUAN VALDEZ: Alcade Mayor of the Presidio and Villa San Fernando.
****Source:With the Makers of San Antonio, by Frederick C. Chabot. Page 46
*2. iii. DIEGO RAMON-DE-LOS-RIOS,
**b. Queretaro, Coahuila, Mexico;
**d. Boca de Leones, Nuevo Leon,Mexico;
**m. ANTONIA GARCIA-ARISPE, 14 May 1690, Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico.
***Notes for DIEGO RAMON-DE-LOS-RIOS: Marriage record from the LDS film #222,421.

Children of DIEGO RAMON and FELICIANA CAMACHO-Y-BOTELLO are:
*1. iv. ALFEREZ JOSEPH5 RAMON-CAMACHO,
**b. Coahuila,Mexico;
**d. Boca de Leones, Nuevo Leon, Mexico;
**m. JUANA GARCIA-FLORES, 01 Jan 1695/96, Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico;
***b. Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
****Notes for ALFEREZ JOSEPH RAMON-CAMACHO: Source:San Juan Bautista, Gateway to Spanish Texas, by Robert S. Weddle.
****Marriage Notes for JOSEPH RAMON-CAMACHO and JUANA GARCIA-FLORES: Marriage source:Index to the Marriage Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara by Raul J. Guerra, Jr., Nadine M. Vasquez, Baldomero Vela, Jr. Page 40. LDS Film #0167980
*2. v. JACINTA RAMON-CAMACHO,
**m. LT. GENERAL JUAN-JOSEPH DE VALDEZ, 27 Feb 1706/07, Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico.
***Notes for LT. GENERAL JUAN-JOSEPH DE VALDEZ: Alcalde Mayor of the Presidio and villa of Bexar. With Makers of San Antonio by Frederick C. Chabot. Page 46.
*3. vi. CAPTAIN JOSE-DOMINGO RAMON-CAMACHO,
**b. Boca de Leones, Nuevo Leon, Mexico;
**d. 23 Dec 1723, La Bahia, Goliad County, Texas;
**m. LUISA MALDONADO-DE-ORANDAZ.
***Notes for CAPTAIN JOSE-DOMINGO RAMON-CAMACHO: Don Domingo Ramуn was the son of Captain Diego Ramуn, the Commander of the Royal Presidio de San Juan Bautista del Rio Norte and the former Govenor of Coahuila, New Spain (Mexico) and Dona Feliciana Camacho y Botello. In 1703, Captain Domingo Ramon lead a expedition to reoccupy Texas. With him were five priest from the College of Santa Cruz of Queretaro, New Spain, who would participated in the founding of missions in the San Antonio de Bexar area. Following the appearance of the French Cavalier, Louis Juchereau de St. Denis at the Presidio de Rio Grande in July 1714 and his subsequent arrest as a foreign interloper and suspected illegal trader, the French cavalier was ordered to Mexico City. It was during this time that St. Denis would become engaged to Ramon's cousin, Dona Manuela Sanchez Navarro. While in the capital city of Mexico, Ramуn received appointment on September 30, 1715, as commander of a military unit that was to reestablish Spanish presence in East Texas, thereby countering French influence from Louisiana. At the same time, St. Denis, who had ably defended his actions, received appointment as commissary officer and served as a guide for the Ramуn expedition, which totaled 75 persons. The entourage included 12 priests or friars, three Frenchmen, and several dozen civilians. Seven of the soldiers were married and brought along their families; their wives would be the first recorded Spanish women in Texas. In April of 1716, he was the leader of the entrada into San Antonio and East Texas. The expedition, including equipment, supplies, and livestock, departed the Rio Grande on April 27, 1716. Guided by St. Denis, missionaries of the Franciscan colleges of Santa Cruz de Querйtaro and Nuestra Seсora de Guadalupe de Zacatecas reached East Texas in late June. On July 3, 1716, he and his Spanish settlers reestablished the mission of San Francisco de los Neches, also known as Nuestro Padre San Francisco de los Tejas Mission to commemorate the original San Francisco de los Tejas Mission (1690-93). Four days later he founded the mission of Nuestra Senora de la Purisima Concepcion. On July 9, 1716, he help in the founding of the mission, Nuestra Senora de Guadalupe de los Nacogdoches, and San Josй de los Nazonis. That same year he established and was the Commander of the presidio of Nuestra Senora de los Dolores de los Tejas on the Neches River. After returning from a trip to Mobile in late 1716, St. Denis assisted Ramуn in the founding of two more missions in early 1717-Nuestra Seсora de los Dolores and San Miguel de Linares de los Adaes. Ramуn remained in East Texas until 1719, when all the Spaniards there were withdrawn to San Antonio during the so-called "Chicken War." The Chicken War caused abandonment of the Spanish Franciscan missions in eastern Texas in 1719. With news that Spain and France were on opposing sides in the conflict, Lt. Philippe Blondel at the French post of Natchitoches, Louisiana, struck in June 1719 at the nearest Spanish target: San Miguel de Linares de los Adaes Mission, at a site near that of present Robeline, Louisiana. Finding only a lay brother and one soldier at the mission, Lt. Blondel and his detail of seven gathered up the sacred vestments and provisions, then raided the henhouse. As he mounted his horse after tying the chickens to the pommel of his saddle, the chickens flapped their wings, the horse reared, and the lieutenant was spilled in the dirt. His companions rushed to his aid. Taking advantage of the confusion, the lay brother dashed off into the woods. After reaching Nuestra Seсora de los Dolores Mission (at the site of present-day San Augustine, Texas) on June 22, 1719, the brother informed Fray Antonio Margil de Jesus of what he had been told by Blondel: Pensacola, Florida and a Spanish possession, had been captured by the French, and a hundred soldiers were on their way from Mobile with the East Texas settlements as their objective. Lacking confidence in the Spaniards' relationship with the Indians, Father Margil viewed retreat as the only alternative. He packed his vestments and headed for Nuestra Senora de la Purisima Concepcion Mission (in the area of present Nacogdoches County) to spread the alarm. Captain Domingo Ramуn, Commander of the Presidio de la Nuestra Seсora de los Dolores de los Tejas, heeding the clamor of his soldiers and their wives, ordered it's citizens and livestock to withdraw toward San Antonio to await reinforcements. Fray Margil, Isidro Felix de Espinosa, and two soldiers remained at the Mission Concepciуn for 20 days "consoling" the Indians, who were reluctant to let them leave. They received word on July 14 that Ramуn was withdrawing farther than agreed upon, and they set out to overtake the caravan at the border of Hasinai (Tejas) country. There they encamped until the end of September, when Espinosa resolved to go personally to San Antonio de Bexar and San Juan Bautista to seek help. After traveling twenty leagues he encountered a volunteer relief expedition from the Presidio of San Juan Bautista and learned that no military support would be forthcoming. On October 3 the entire camp marched for San Antonio. At San Antonio Fray Margil and the seven other friars took residence at San Antonio de Valero Mission. Espinosa went on to San Juan Bautista to make a personal appeal for military aid in recovering the missions. There he learned of the appointment of the Marquis de San Miguel de Aguayo as governor of Coahuila and Texas and of the military campaign Aguayo was mounting to reclaim eastern Texas for Spain. Despite Espinosa's urging, the Aguayo expedition was delayed a year and a half. In the meantime the war ended, and the operation, planned as one of reconquest, became merely one of reoccupation. The Chicken War represented a costly overreaction by Spanish religious and military men to a feeble French gesture. The French made no aggressive move against Texas after Blondel's comical fiasco. Aside from causing a two-year hiatus in the Spanish missionary effort, the episode also disrupted the commercial aims of the French Company of the West. Directors of the company sent word to Jean Baptiste Benard de La Harpe, who had just established a trading post on the Red River in the area that is now Bowie County, that he was not to make war on the Spaniards but to pursue trade with them. The Spanish withdrawal following Blondel's raid left no one with whom he might trade. By April 10, 1720, Ramon with 40 men had laid the foundation for the Presidio Nuestra Senora de Loreto de la Bahia. He officiated also in the founding of Nuestra Senora del Espiritu Santo Mission, near the presidio at La Bahia, Goliad Texas. He remained at San Antonio until March 10, 1721, when he set out with forty men to occupy Matagorda Bay. Under orders of the Marquйs de Aguayo, Ramуn remained on the coast and was present in the spring of 1722, when Aguayo founded Nuestra Seсora de Loreto Presidio (La Bahia) at the site of the french La Salle's Fort St. Louis. This Fort is located near Goliad, Texas. The nearby mission of Espiritu Santo de Zeniga was also begun in April. Ramуn died on December 23, 1723, from a wound received during a Karankawa Indian uprising at La Bahia (Goliad, Texas).
**Captain Domingo Ramуn married Dona Luisa Maldonado de Orandai, and they had at least three children:
***1. Diego,
***2. Juan Domingo, and
***3. Miguel.
****Source:From the book's,
*****Spanish Texas, 1519-1821 by Donald E. Chipman
*****San Juan Bautista: Gateway to Spanish Texas by Robert S. Weddle
*****Spanish & Mexican Records of the American Southwest by Henry Putney Beers.
*****Gallant Outcast - Texas Turmoil 1519-1734 by Ben Cuellar Ximenez.
*****Diary of the Alarcon Expedition into Texas, by Fray Francisco Celiz. Published by the Quivira Society.
*****The Spanish Borderlands Frontier 1513-1821, by John Francis Bannon.
*****The North Frontier of New Spain by Peter Gerhard.
*****The Presidio and Militia on the Northern Frontier of New Spain, Volume Two, by Diana Hadley, Thomas H. Nayloy, and Mardith K. Schuetz-Miller.
*****Remember Goliad, By Clarence Wharton.
*****The Handbook of Texas Online.
*4. vii. ANDRES RAMON-CAMACHO,
**b. 1670, San Juan Bautista del Rio Grande, Coahulia, Mexico;
**m. (1) MARIA-LUISA GARCIA-FLORES;
***b. 1675;
**m. (2) MANUELA FLORES-DE-LA-FUENTE, 24 Sep 1704, Monclova, Nuevo Leon, Mexico;
**m. (3) JUANA MENCHACA-XIMENEZ, 19 Nov 1707, Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahulia, Mexico;
***b. 1670, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
****Marriage Notes for ANDRES RAMON-CAMACHO and MANUELA FLORES-DE-LA-FUENTE: Marriage source:Index to the Marriage Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara by Raul J. Guerra, Jr., Nadine M. Vasquez, Baldomero Vela, Jr. Page 279.
****Marriage Notes for ANDRES RAMON-CAMACHO and JUANA MENCHACA-XIMENEZ: Source:Index to the Marriage Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara by Raul J. Guerra, Jr., Nadine M. Vasquez, Valdomero Vela, Jr. Page 202.
*5. viii. ALFEREZ DIEGO RAMON-CAMACHO,
**b. 1677;
**d. San Juan Bautista del Rio Grande ,Presido del Norte, Coahulia,Mexico;
**m. MARIE ESPERRICCO SANCHEZ-DE-NAVARRE.
*6. ix. DONA ANTONIA RAMON-CAMACHO,
**b. Abt. 1680, San Juan Bautista del Rio Grande, Presido del Norte, Coahulia,Mexico;
**d. Bef. 1704;
**m. CAPTAIN JOSEPH DE URRUTIA7, 06 Jan 1696/97, Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico;
***b. Abt. 1678, Guipuzcoa prov., Spain7;
***d. 16 Jul 1741, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas7.
****Notes for DONA ANTONIA RAMON-CAMACHO: Her father, Major Diego Ramon, was the Commander of the Presidio de San Juan Bautista del Rio, at Coahulia, Mexico. It was during this period that the Major's step grand-daughter, Dona Maria Manuela Sanchez Navarro y Gomez Mascorry married the french Cavalier, Louis Juchereau de Saint Denis, military commander of Natchitoches, Louisiana. Between March 1691 to June 1698, Major Diego Ramon served as the governor of Coahuila, Mexico.
****Notes for CAPTAIN JOSEPH DE URRUTIA: Power of Attorney by Soldiers at the Presidio de San Antonio de Bexar, Dated 25 September 1735: This document authorized their commanding officer, Captain Joseph de Urrutia , or Dхn Juan de Angulo, a merchant in Mexico City, to collect their annual salaries and apply 12,000 pesos of this on Urrutia's taxes. Urrutia was then to reimburse the soldiers with merchandise in San Antonio. Excellent census of the military in Bexar at time:
*****Power of Attorney: In the royal presidio of San Antonio de Bexar, jurisdiction of these provinces of Texas, kingdom of the New Philippines, on the 25th day of the month of September , 1735, before me, Don Manuel de Sandoval, captain of Spanish infantry, governor and captain general of these said provinces of Texas, their presidios, conversions, and frontiers, commandant of the governors of Coahuila and Pensacola and of the witnesses with whom I am acting as a Juez Receptor in the absence of a royal notary or notary public, since the notary of this jurisdiction is in prison and there is no other as prescribed by law, there appeared, in person, Lieutenant Don Matheo Perez; Ensign Don Juan Galvan; Sergeant Ascencio del Razo; and Privates Juan Cortinas; Joseph Miguel de Sosa; Marcelino Martinez; Andres Hernandez; Manuel de Carvajal; Nicolas de Caravajal; Xavier Perez; Joseph Antonio Flores; Marcos Rodriguez; Joseph Maldonado; Juan Antonio de Luna; Antonio Guerra; Bacilio del Toro; Joseph Quinones; Nicolas Quinones; Sebastian Rincon; Pedro del Toro; Joseph Montes; Jacobo Hernandez; Diego Hernandez; Don Pedro de Ocon y Trillo; Francisco Flores; Lorenzo de Castro; Miguel de Castro; Matin Flores; Bacilio Jimenez; Mathias de la Zerda; Joseph Martinez; Joaquin de Urrutia; Pedro de Urrutia; Andres Garcia; Joseph de Sosa; Geronimo de la Garza; Joaquin Flores; Miguel Guerra; Francisco de la Pena; and Jose Cisneros, all officers and enlisted men of this royal presidio, all of whom I certify I know, and they said that they unanimously, by common consent, together and individually, as a group, do hereby grant by these present such power as may be necessary and required by law, to their captain, Don Joseph de Urrutia, in the first place, and, in the second place, to Don Juan de Angulo, a resident and ware-house keeper in Mexico City, as paymaster for the said officers and men so that in their name and representing their persons, rights, and acts, they may, during the present year of 1735, appear, and they shall appear, each one for himself and for all the others, before the Most Illustrious and the Most Excellent Archbishop and Viceroy of this New Spain and for the necessary warrants for collecting their salaries of 380 pesos which His Majesty has assigned to each of the forty signers, plus 65 pesos for the Lieutenant, Ensign, and Sergeant, all of which amounts to 15,265 pesos, and 240 pounds of power, representing the six pounds which his Majesty likewise gives to each of the said signers every year, all of which is to be issued by Royal Treasury in Mexico City, where the official royal judges, in view of the said warrant from the Most Illustrious and Most Excellent Archbishop and Viceroy, will deliver, in cash to satisfy the aforementioned signers, and in their name, to the aforementioned paymasters and agents, Don Joseph de Urrutia and Don Juan de Angulo to whoever may represent them. The said sum and the quantity of powder, and they now and forevermore will consider themselves satisfied with such amounts as the said agents may receive. Furthermore, they state that they may issue such receipts and quittances as may be necessary to collect the same, plus affidavits that they have received same or the renunciation of laws connected therewith. They shall present before his Excellency the necessary memorials and other documents as may be necessary for that purpose. They hereby grant and give unto the said Don Joseph de Urrutia and Don Juan de Angulo the present power-of-attorney with full authority and power to appoint one, two, three, or more substitutes, and the latter may appoint as many more as may be necessary, without any restriction whatever, for they de hereby authorize and empower each and every one of them to institute legal proceeding and swear to oaths whenever necessary, on the condition that the said agents shall pay and deliver the amount or value of the salaries to which the undersigned are or shall be entitled from the Royal Treasure, to Don Joseph de los Rios, royal tax collector, the amount of 12,000 pesos, which, by order of the present governor of this province of Texas, is to be charged against the Royal Treasury and delivered to them in merchandise through their said captain and agents, Don Joseph de Urrutia in exchange for equal amount, as principal and cost, which the aforesaid captain owes as royal taxes to His Majesty, which said sum the undersigned acknowledge as having received. In view of the above, and since the aforesaid sum of 12,000 pesos is due the Royal Treasury before any sum or sums which the said undersigned or afore-mentioned agents may owe. In case the afore-said sum should not be paid by their agents Don Joseph de Urrutia and Don Juan de Agulo, the undersigned do hereby annul and cancel the power which they give and confer upon their said agents, and they transfer and change the same with full authority, as stated herein, to Don Joseph Luis de los Rios, or to such agent as may be appointed by him as his lawful representative so that he, as royal collector, may deliver and pay to the Royal Treasury the sum of the salaries due the said undersigned for the present year, in the amount of twelve thousand pesos, receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged. Whatever is left, up to the total amount due the said soldiers for their said salaries, shall be placed at the disposal of the undersigned. For the execution of the above they have bound their persons and present and future assets, and they hereby authorize the justices and judges of His Majesty to whom there presents shall come to make them observe and fulfill same to the full force and extent of the law as though it were a sentence pronounced, passed, and agreed to in a case which had been tried in court by a competent judge. They ask and begged me to interpose my royal and judicial authority, and I, the said governor, in the name of His Majesty, do hereby interpose same insofar as I can and should according to law. Done before me and the attendant witnesses with whom I am acting according to law as stated above, and those who knew how to write their names signed same with me, and for those who could not write their one of the following witnesses signed for them,: Don Fermin de Ibirinu, Don Ignacio Gonzalez de Inclan, and Alberto Lopez, who were present and all of whom reside in this said presidio. This has been placed on common paper because there is no stamped paper as provided by law. I certify.
*****(The signatures of the following appear: Don Manuel de Sandoval, the governor; his official witness, Joseph Antonio Bueno de Roxas and Domingo de Oyez; Mateo Perez; Juan Galvan; Juan Cortinas; Marcelino Martinez; Martin Flores y Valdez; Basilio Jimenez; Joaquin de Urrutia; Miguel Guerra; Pedro del Toro; and Pedro de Ocon y Trillo. Fermin de Ibiricu and Ignacio Gonzalez de Inclan signed for the others who did not know how to write).
******From the Bexar Archive Translations, Vol. 7, pp 123-133. Bexar County Courthouse Archives. (Translations also in UT Baker Library at Austin, Texas).
****Marriage Notes for ANTONIA RAMON-CAMACHO and JOSEPH DE URRUTIA: Marriage source: Church record from the LDS microfilm #222,421
*7. x. PEDRO RAMON-CAMACHO,
**b. 27 Jul 1685, Sagrario Metropolitano, Saltillo, Coahulia, Mexico;
**m. (1) ANTONIA GARCIA;
**m. (2) MARIA-DE-LORETO FLORES, 12 Aug 1726, Sagrario Metro, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
--------------------
Entered by David Louis Fournerat Jr

The Descendents of Major Diego Ramon

Compiled by John D. Inclan

Generation No. 1

1. MAJOR DIEGO3 RAMON (JOSEPH2 DE MORALES-Y-RAMON, LUIS1 RAMON-DE-MORALES) was born 1641 in Queretaro, Queretaro, Mexico, and died 10 Apr 1719 in San Juan Bautista del Rio Grande, Presido del Norte, Coahulia,Mexico. He met (1) UNKNOWN. He met (2) MARIA DE-LOS-RIOS in Queretaro, Coahuila, Mexico. She was born in Queretaro, Coahuila, Mexico, and died in Boca de Leones, Villaladama,Nuevo Leon,Mexico. He married (3) FELICIANA CAMACHO-Y-BOTELLO Abt. 1676, daughter of ANDRES CAMACHO-Y-OLEA and JUANA BOTELLO-DE-MORALES. She was born Abt. 1660 in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.

Notes for MAJOR DIEGO RAMON:

He was the natural born son of Sgt. Major Joseph Ramon and Dona Catalina Martinez.

His relationship with Maria de los Rios and their children are noted - the Handbook of Texas Online.

Located in the state of Coahuila, Mexico, he owned the Hacienda named "El Carrizalejo",

In 1674, he was a soldier with Francisco Elizondo's Expedition.

In 1688, he accompanied Governor Alonso De Leon into Texas.

Between March 1691 to June 1698, he served as the third governor of Coahuila, Mexico.

On December 14, 1698, Diego Ramon and Fray Cristobal Montes de Oca founded the mission San Francisco Xavier y Valle de San Cristobal, some forty leaugues northeast of Villa de Pilon (Monclova).

On March 1, 1700, he founded the Mission San Fernando Solano. This mission would later be relocated and remembered today as the Alamo.

By March 28, 1701 Captain Ramon was receiving five hundred pesos for evey year served. Considered top paid in those years. From 1703, till his death, he was the Commandant of the Royal presidio of San Juan Bautista, Coahuila, Mexico. This presidio had been established in 1702. His offical title was, Theniente General, Cabo y Caudillo.

Source:From the book's

Gallant Outcast - Texas Turmoil 1519-1734 by Ben Cuellar Ximenez.

San Juan Bautista, Gateway to Spanish Texas by Robert S. Weddle.

Origen de los Fundadores de Texas, Nuevo Mexico, Coahilia, y Nuevo Leon, by Guillermo Garmendia Leal. Page 70.

With All Arms by Carl Laurence Duaine. Page 242.

With Makers of San Antonio by Frederick C. Chabot. Page 46.

Northern New Spain, A Research Guide, by Thomas C. Barnes, Thomas H. Nayor and Charles W. Polzer.

Diary of the Alarcon Expedition into Texas, 1718-1719 by Fray Francisco Celiz.

Published by the Quivira Society.

The following is from "The Biographical Dictionary of Saltillo" by Martha Duron Jimenez and Ignacio Etchegaray, pg 143. Don Jose Ramon is mentioned as the eldest and the natural born son of Captain Diego Ramon.

"En los ultimos dias del mes de abril de ese ano (1719), dejo de existir en el Presidio de Rio Grande el Capitan Diego Ramon, que tan importantes servicios presto en la conquista y pacificacion de la Provincia de Coahuila. Sus padres fueron Don Josephe Ramon y Dona Andrea de los Rios, espanoles de nacimiento, pero que en 1636 se embarcaron para America yendo a residir primero en Cadereyta, y despues a la Villa del Saltillo de donde fue nombrado Procurador General por recomendacion del Capitan Don Alonso de Leon de quien fue particular amigo. En esta villa nacio el ano de 1641 el tercero de sus hijos, que se llamo Diego y despues de recibir la education primaria que en esa epoca se impartia, se dedico desde muy joven, a los trabajos del campo y a las campanas contra los indios, al lado de Don Alonso de Leon, el Capitan que lo llego a estima tanto coma a su padre, y que fue su gran maestro en la escuela de las privaciones, fatigas y vicisitudes. Muerto el Capitan, su hijo Don Alonso que regreso de Espana a encargarse de la familia e intereses de su padre, continue sineto el amigo inseparabe de Diego Ramon....."

El Capitan Diego Ramon contrajo matrimonio en el Presidio de San Francisco de Coahuila, con Dona Feliciana Camacho, de la que tuvo entre otros hijos a Don Jose que fue el mayor "

Notes for MARIA DE-LOS-RIOS:

Dona Maria was with her two daughters and an son name Jose, at Boca de Leones.

Source:San Juan Bautista - Gateway to Spanish Texas by Robert S. Weddle. Page 121.

Child of DIEGO RAMON and UNKNOWN is:

2. i. UNKNOWN4 RAMON.

Children of DIEGO RAMON and MARIA DE-LOS-RIOS are:

ii. JUANA4 RAMON-DE-LOS-RIOS, b. Queretaro, Coahuila, Mexico; d. Boca de Leones, Nuevo Leon,Mexico; m. JUAN VALDEZ.

Notes for JUANA RAMON-DE-LOS-RIOS:

Source:San Juan Bautista Gateway to Spanish Texas by Robert S. Weddle.

Notes for JUAN VALDEZ:

Alcade Mayor of the Presidio and Villa San Fernando.

Source:With the Makers of San Antonio, by Frederick C. Chabot. Page 46

3. iii. DIEGO RAMON-DE-LOS-RIOS, b. Queretaro, Coahuila, Mexico; d. Boca de Leones, Nuevo Leon,Mexico.

Children of DIEGO RAMON and FELICIANA CAMACHO-Y-BOTELLO are:

4. iv. ALFEREZ JOSEPH4 RAMON-CAMACHO, b. Coahuila,Mexico; d. Boca de Leones, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.

v. JACINTA RAMON-CAMACHO, m. LT. GENERAL JUAN-JOSEPH DE VALDEZ, 27 Feb 1707, Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico.

Notes for LT. GENERAL JUAN-JOSEPH DE VALDEZ:

Alcalde Mayor of the Presidio and Villa of Bexar (San Antonio).

With Makers of San Antonio by Frederick C. Chabot. Page 46.

5. vi. CAPTAIN JOSE-DOMINGO RAMON-CAMACHO, b. Boca de Leones, Nuevo Leon, Mexico; d. 23 Dec 1723, La Bahia, Goliad County, Texas.

6. vii. ANDRES RAMON-CAMACHO, b. 1670, San Juan Bautista del Rio Grande, Coahulia, Mexico.

7. viii. ALFEREZ DIEGO RAMON-CAMACHO, b. 1677; d. San Juan Bautista del Rio Grande ,Presido del Norte, Coahulia,Mexico.

8. ix. DONA ANTONIA RAMON-CAMACHO, b. Abt. 1680, San Juan Bautista del Rio Grande, Presido del Norte, Coahulia,Mexico; d. Bef. 1704.

x. PEDRO RAMON-CAMACHO, b. 27 Jul 1685, Sagrario Metropolitano, Saltillo, Coahulia, Mexico; m. (1) ANTONIA GARCIA; m. (2) MARIA-DE-LORETO FLORES, 12 Aug 1726, Sagrario Metro, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.

Generation No. 2

2. UNKNOWN4 RAMON (DIEGO3, JOSEPH2 DE MORALES-Y-RAMON, LUIS1 RAMON-DE-MORALES) She married MAYORDOMO FRANCISCO DE SALINAS.

Child of UNKNOWN RAMON and MAYORDOMO DE SALINAS is:

9. i. JOSE-MANUEL5 SALINAS, b. 1753; d. Aft. 16 May 1787, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas.

3. DIEGO4 RAMON-DE-LOS-RIOS (DIEGO3 RAMON, JOSEPH2 DE MORALES-Y-RAMON, LUIS1 RAMON-DE-MORALES) was born in Queretaro, Coahuila, Mexico, and died in Boca de Leones, Nuevo Leon,Mexico. He married ANTONIA GARCIA-ARISPE 14 May 1690 in Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico, daughter of DIEGO GARCIA and ANA DE ARISPE.

Notes for DIEGO RAMON-DE-LOS-RIOS:

Marriage record from the LDS film #222,421.

Children of DIEGO RAMON-DE-LOS-RIOS and ANTONIA GARCIA-ARISPE are:

i. ANTONIO5 RAMON-GARCIA, b. 19 Jun 1694, Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico.

ii. CATALINA RAMON-GARCIA, b. 05 Jan 1695/96, Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico.

iii. ANTONIO RAMON-GARCIA, b. 08 Aug 1698, Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico.

4. ALFEREZ JOSEPH4 RAMON-CAMACHO (DIEGO3 RAMON, JOSEPH2 DE MORALES-Y-RAMON, LUIS1 RAMON-DE-MORALES) was born in Coahuila,Mexico, and died in Boca de Leones, Nuevo Leon, Mexico. He married JUANA GARCIA-FLORES 01 Jan 1696 in Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico, daughter of JACINTO GARCIA-DE-LA-GARZA and ISABEL FLORES-DE-VALDEZ. She was born in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.

Notes for ALFEREZ JOSEPH RAMON-CAMACHO:

Source:San Juan Bautista, Gateway to Spanish Texas, by Robert S. Weddle.

Marriage Notes for JOSEPH RAMON-CAMACHO and JUANA GARCIA-FLORES:

Marriage source:Index to the Marriage Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara by Raul J. Guerra, Jr., Nadine M. Vasquez, Baldomero Vela, Jr. Page 40.

LDS Film #0167980

Children of JOSEPH RAMON-CAMACHO and JUANA GARCIA-FLORES are:

i. ISABEL-MARIA5 RAMON-GARCIA, b. Boca de Leones, Nuevo Leon, Mexico; m. JOSEPH-ANTONIO PEREZ-DE-CERRALLOS, 22 Nov 1728, Boca de Leones, Nuevo Leon, Mexico; b. Montanes de Burgos, Castilla, Spain.

Marriage Notes for ISABEL-MARIA RAMON-GARCIA and JOSEPH-ANTONIO PEREZ-DE-CERRALLOS: Index to the Marriage Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara by Raul J. Guerra, Jr., Nadine M. Vasquez, Valdomero Vela, Jr. Page 80.

ii. ANTONIO-FELIS RAMON-GARCIA, b. 15 Jan 1701/02, Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico; m. JUANA-GERTRUDIS DE TREVINO-GUTIERREZ, 10 Nov 1728, Boca de Leones, Nuevo Leon, Mexico; b. 1710.

Marriage Notes for ANTONIO-FELIS RAMON-GARCIA and JUANA-GERTRUDIS DE TREVINO-GUTIERREZ: Index to the Marriage Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara by Raul J. Guerra, Jr., Nadine M. Vasquez, Valdomero Vela, Jr. Page 76.

5. CAPTAIN JOSE-DOMINGO4 RAMON-CAMACHO (DIEGO3 RAMON, JOSEPH2 DE MORALES-Y-RAMON, LUIS1 RAMON-DE-MORALES) was born in Boca de Leones, Nuevo Leon, Mexico, and died 23 Dec 1723 in La Bahia, Goliad County, Texas. He married LUISA MALDONADO-DE-ORANDAZ, daughter of MARIA DE MALDONADO.

Notes for CAPTAIN JOSE-DOMINGO RAMON-CAMACHO:

Don Domingo Ramón was the son of Captain Diego Ramón, the Commander of the Royal Presidio de San Juan Bautista del Rio Norte and the former Govenor of Coahuila, New Spain (Mexico) and Dona Feliciana Camacho y Botello.

In 1703, Captain Domingo Ramon lead a expedition to reoccupy Texas. With him were five priest from the College of Santa Cruz of Queretaro, New Spain, who would participated in the founding of missions in the San Antonio de Bexar area.

Following the appearance of the french Cavalier, Louis Juchereau de St. Denis at the Presidio de Rio Grande in July 1714 and his subsequent arrest as a foreign interloper and suspected illegal trader, the French cavalier was ordered to Mexico City. It was during this time that St. Denis would become engaged to Ramon's cousin, Dona Manuela Sanchez Navarro. While in the capital city of Mexico, Ramón received appointment on September 30, 1715, as commander of a military unit that was to reestablish Spanish presence in East Texas, thereby countering French influence from Louisiana. At the same time, St. Denis, who had ably defended his actions, received appointment as commissary officer and served as a guide for the Ramón expedition, which totaled seventy-five persons. The entourage included twelve priests or friars, three Frenchmen, and several dozen civilians. Seven of the soldiers were married and brought along their families; their wives would be the first recorded Spanish women in Texas.

In April of 1716, he was the leader of the entrada into San Antonio and East Texas. The expedition, including equipment, supplies, and livestock, departed the Rio Grande on April 27, 1716. Guided by St. Denis, missionaries of the Franciscan colleges of Santa Cruz de Querétaro and Nuestra Señora de Guadalupe de Zacatecas reached East Texas in late June. On July 3, 1716, he and his Spanish settlers reestablished the mission of San Francisco de los Neches, also known as Nuestro Padre San Francisco de los Tejas Mission to commemorate the original San Francisco de los Tejas Mission (1690-93). Four days later he founded the mission of Nuestra Senora de la Purisima Concepcion. On July 9, 1716, he help in the founding of the mission, Nuestra Senora de Guadalupe de los Nacogdoches, and San José de los Nazonis. That same year he established and was the Commander of the presidio of Nuestra Senora de los Dolores de los Tejas on the Neches River. After returning from a trip to Mobile in late 1716, St. Denis assisted Ramón in the founding of two more missions in early 1717-Nuestra Señora de los Dolores and San Miguel de Linares de los Adaes. Ramón remained in East Texas until 1719, when all the Spaniards there were withdrawn to San Antonio during the so-called "Chicken War."

The Chicken War caused abandonment of the Spanish Franciscan missions in eastern Texas in 1719. With news that Spain and France were on opposing sides in the conflict, Lt. Philippe Blondel at the French post of Natchitoches, Louisiana, struck in June 1719 at the nearest Spanish target: San Miguel de Linares de los Adaes Mission, at a site near that of present Robeline, Louisiana. Finding only a lay brother and one soldier at the mission, Lt. Blondel and his detail of seven gathered up the sacred vestments and provisions, then raided the henhouse. As he mounted his horse after tying the chickens to the pommel of his saddle, the chickens flapped their wings, the horse reared, and the lieutenant was spilled in the dirt. His companions rushed to his aid. Taking advantage of the confusion, the lay brother dashed off into the woods.

After reaching Nuestra Señora de los Dolores Mission (at the site of present-day San Augustine, Texas) on June 22, 1719, the brother informed Fray Antonio Margil de Jesús of what he had been told by Blondel: Pensacola, Florida and a Spanish possession, had been captured by the French, and a hundred soldiers were on their way from Mobile with the East Texas settlements as their objective. Lacking confidence in the Spaniards' relationship with the Indians, Father Margil viewed retreat as the only alternative. He packed his vestments and headed for Nuestra Señora de la Purísima Concepción Mission (in the area of present Nacogdoches County) to spread the alarm.

Captain Domingo Ramón, Commander of the Presidio de la Nuestra Señora de los Dolores de los Tejas, heeding the clamor of his soldiers and their wives, ordered it's citizens and livestock to withdraw toward San Antonio to await reinforcements. Fray Margil, Isidro Félix de Espinosa, and two soldiers remained at the Mission Concepción for twenty days "consoling" the Indians, who were reluctant to let them leave. They received word on July 14 that Ramón was withdrawing farther than agreed upon, and they set out to overtake the caravan at the border of Hasinai (Tejas) country. There they encamped until the end of September, when Espinosa resolved to go personally to San Antonio de Béxar and San Juan Bautista to seek help. After traveling twenty leagues he encountered a volunteer relief expedition from the Presidio of San Juan Bautista and learned that no military support would be forthcoming. On October 3 the entire camp marched for San Antonio. At San Antonio Fray Margil and the seven other friars took residence at San Antonio de Valero Mission. Espinosa went on to San Juan Bautista to make a personal appeal for military aid in recovering the missions. There he learned of the appointment of the Marqués de San Miguel de Aguayo as governor of Coahuila and Texas and of the military campaign Aguayo was mounting to reclaim eastern Texas for Spain. Despite Espinosa's urging, the Aguayo expedition was delayed a year and a half. In the meantime the war ended, and the operation, planned as one of reconquest, became merely one of reoccupation.

The Chicken War represented a costly overreaction by Spanish religious and military men to a feeble French gesture. The French made no aggressive move against Texas after Blondel's comical fiasco. Aside from causing a two-year hiatus in the Spanish missionary effort, the episode also disrupted the commercial aims of the French Company of the West. Directors of the company sent word to Jean Baptiste Benard de La Harpe, who had just established a trading post on the Red River in the area that is now Bowie County, that he was not to make war on the Spaniards but to pursue trade with them. The Spanish withdrawal following Blondel's raid left no one with whom he might trade.

By April 10, 1720, Ramon with forty men had laid the foundation for the Presidio Nuestra Senora de Loreto de la Bahia. He officiated also in the founding of Nuestra Senora del Espiritu Santo Mission, near the presidio at La Bahia, Goliad Texas.

He remained at San Antonio until March 10, 1721, when he set out with forty men to occupy Matagorda Bay. Under orders of the Marqués de Aguayo, Ramón remained on the coast and was present in the spring of 1722, when Aguayo founded Nuestra Señora de Loreto Presidio (La Bahía) at the site of the french La Salle's Fort St. Louis. This Fort is located near Goliad, Texas. The nearby mission of Espíritu Santo de Zúñiga was also begun in April. Ramón died on December 23, 1723, from a wound received during a Karankawa Indian uprising at La Bahía (Goliad, Texas).

Captain Domingo Ramón married Dona Luisa Maldonado de Orandai, and they had at least three children: Diego, Juan Domingo, and Miguel.

Source:From the book's, Spanish Texas, 1519-1821 by Donald E. Chipman

San Juan Bautista: Gateway to Spanish Texas by Robert S. Weddle

Spanish & Mexican Records of the American Southwest by Henry Putney Beers.

Gallant Outcast - Texas Turmoil 1519-1734 by Ben Cuellar Ximenez.

Diary of the Alarcon Expedition into Texas, by Fray Francisco Celiz. Published by the Quivira Society.

The Spanish Borderlands Frontier 1513-1821, by John Francis Bannon.

The North Frontier of New Spain by Peter Gerhard.

The Presidio and Militia on the Northern Frontier of New Spain, Volume Two, by Diana Hadley, Thomas H. Nayloy, and Mardith K. Schuetz-Miller.

Remember Goliad, By Clarence Wharton.

The Handbook of Texas Online.

Children of JOSE-DOMINGO RAMON-CAMACHO and LUISA MALDONADO-DE-ORANDAZ are:

i. JUAN-DOMINGO5 RAMON-MALDONADO, b. Boca de Leones, Nuevo Leon, Mexico; m. (1) ANTONIA PEREZ-NAVARRO; b. Boca de Leones, Nuevo Leon, Mexico; m. (2) JUANA FLORES-DE-VALDEZ, 16 Apr 1727, Saltillo, Coahulia, Mexico; b. Boca de Leones, Nuevo Leon, Mexico; d. Boca de Leones, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.

Marriage Notes for JUAN-DOMINGO RAMON-MALDONADO and JUANA FLORES-DE-VALDEZ:

Source:Index to the Marriage Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara, by Raul J. Guerra., Nadine M. Vasquez, Baldomero Vela, Jr. Page 252.

10. ii. MIGUEL RAMON-MALDONADO.

11. iii. LIEUTENANT DIEGO RAMON-MALDONADO, b. 19 May 1696, Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico; d. Aft. 1757, Mexico City?.

12. iv. IGNACIA-JAVIERA RAMON-MALDONADO, b. 1712, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.

6. ANDRES4 RAMON-CAMACHO (DIEGO3 RAMON, JOSEPH2 DE MORALES-Y-RAMON, LUIS1 RAMON-DE-MORALES) was born 1670 in San Juan Bautista del Rio Grande, Coahulia, Mexico. He married (1) MARIA-LUISA GARCIA-FLORES, daughter of JACINTO GARCIA-DE-LA-GARZA and ISABEL FLORES-DE-VALDEZ. She was born 1675. He married (2) MANUELA FLORES-DE-LA-FUENTE 24 Sep 1704 in Monclova, Nuevo Leon, Mexico, daughter of RODRIGO FLORES-DE-VALDEZ-SALAZAR and JOSEFA DEL VALLE. He married (3) JUANA MENCHACA-XIMENEZ 19 Nov 1707 in Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahulia, Mexico, daughter of JUAN DE MENCHACA and MARIA-MARGARITA XIMENEZ-VALDEZ. She was born 1670 in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.

Marriage Notes for ANDRES RAMON-CAMACHO and MANUELA FLORES-DE-LA-FUENTE:

Marriage source:Index to the Marriage Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara by Raul J. Guerra, Jr., Nadine M. Vasquez, Baldomero Vela, Jr. Page 279.

Marriage Notes for ANDRES RAMON-CAMACHO and JUANA MENCHACA-XIMENEZ:

Source:Index to the Marriage Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara by Raul J. Guerra, Jr., Nadine M. Vasquez, Valdomero Vela, Jr. Page 202.

Child of ANDRES RAMON-CAMACHO and MANUELA FLORES-DE-LA-FUENTE is:

13. i. CATHARINA5 RAMON-MORALES-DE-BURGOS, b. San Juan Bautista Rio de Norte, Coahulia, Mexico.

Children of ANDRES RAMON-CAMACHO and JUANA MENCHACA-XIMENEZ are:

ii. CATARINA5 RAMON-MENCHACA, b. 04 Dec 1706, Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico.

iii. CUATAR RAMON-MENCHACA, b. 08 Dec 1706, Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahulia, Mexico.

14. iv. ANTONIA-BUENAVENTURA RAMON-MENCHACA, b. 14 Jul 1708, Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico.

v. GREGORIO RAMON-MENCHACA, b. 27 Oct 1709, Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahulia, Mexico.

vi. JUANA-AGUSTINA RAMON-MENCHACA, b. 15 Jan 1710/11, Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico.

vii. FELISIANA-MARTINA RAMON-MENCHACA, b. 03 Feb 1711/12, Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico; m. DIEGO XIMENEZ-SUAREZ, 14 Dec 1727, San Juan Bautista de Rio Norte, Coahulia, Mexico; b. San Juan Bautista Rio de Norte, Coahulia, Mexico.

viii. MARGARITA RAMON-MENCHACA, b. 02 Apr 1717, Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico.

7. ALFEREZ DIEGO4 RAMON-CAMACHO (DIEGO3 RAMON, JOSEPH2 DE MORALES-Y-RAMON, LUIS1 RAMON-DE-MORALES) was born 1677, and died in San Juan Bautista del Rio Grande ,Presido del Norte, Coahulia,Mexico. He married MARIE ESPERRICCO SANCHEZ-DE-NAVARRE.

Children of DIEGO RAMON-CAMACHO and MARIE SANCHEZ-DE-NAVARRE are:

i. ISABEL5 RAMON-SANCHEZ.

ii. MANUELA SANCHEZ.

Notes for MANUELA SANCHEZ:

With Makers of San Antonio by Frederick C. Chabot. Page 48.

iii. FEMALE RAMON, m. JUAN DE URRUTIA.

8. DONA ANTONIA4 RAMON-CAMACHO (DIEGO3 RAMON, JOSEPH2 DE MORALES-Y-RAMON, LUIS1 RAMON-DE-MORALES) was born Abt. 1680 in San Juan Bautista del Rio Grande, Presido del Norte, Coahulia,Mexico, and died Bef. 1704. She married CAPTAIN JOSEPH DE URRUTIA1 06 Jan 1696/97 in Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico. He was born Abt. 1678 in Guipuzcoa prov., Spain1, and died 16 Jul 1741 in San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas1.

Notes for DONA ANTONIA RAMON-CAMACHO:

Her father, Major Diego Ramon, was the Commander of the Presidio de San Juan Bautista del Rio, at Coahulia, Mexico. It was during this period that the Major's step grand-daughter, Dona Maria Manuela Sanchez Navarro y Gomez Mascorry married the french Cavalier, Louis Juchereau de Saint Denis, military commander of Natchitoches, Louisiana.

Between March 1691 to June 1698, Major Diego Ramon served as the governor of Coahuila, Mexico.

Note:I have included this genealogy in the chapter titled, The Descendents of Major Diego Ramon and

Dona Feliciana Camacho y Botello.

Notes for CAPTAIN JOSEPH DE URRUTIA:

Power of Attorney by Soldiers at the Presidio de San Antonio de Bexar

Dated 25 September 1735

This document authorized their commanding officer, Captain Joseph de Urrutia , or Dõn Juan de Angulo, a merchant in Mexico City, to collect their annual salaries and apply 12,000 pesos of this on Urrutia's taxes. Urrutia was then to reimburse the soldiers with merchandise in San Antonio. Excellent census of the military in Bexar at time.

Power of Attorney

In the royal presidio of San Antonio de Bexar, jurisdiction of these provinces of Texas, kingdom of the New Philippines, on the 25th day of the month of September , 1735, before me, Dõn Manuel de Sandoval, captain of Spanish infantry, governor and captain general of these said provinces of Texas, their presidios, conversions, and frontiers, commandant of the governors of Coahuila and Pensacola and of the witnesses with whom I am acting as a Juez Receptor in the absence of a royal notary or notary public, since the notary of this jurisdiction is in prison and there is no other as prescribed by law, there appeared, in person, Lieutenant Dõn Matheo Perez; Ensign Dõn Juan Galvan; Sergeant Ascencio del Razo; and Privates Juan Cortinas; Joseph Miguel de Sosa; Marcelino Martinez; Andres Hernandez; Manuel de Carvajal; Nicolas de Caravajal; Xivier Perez; Joseph Antonio Flores; Marcos Rodriguez; Joseph Maldonado; Juan Antonio de Luna; Antonio Guerra; Bacilio del Toro; Joseph Quinones; Nicolas Quinones; Sebastian Rincon; Pedro del Toro; Joseph Montes; Jacobo Hernandez; Diego Hernandez; Dõn Pedro de Ocon y Trillo; Francisco Flores; Lorenzo de Castro; Miguel de Castro; Matin Flores; Bacilio Jimenez; Mathias de la Zerda; Joseph Martinez; Joaquin de Urrutia; Pedro de Urrutia; Andres Garcia; Joseph de Sosa; Geronimo de la Garza; Joaquin Flores; Miguel Guerra; Francisco de la Pena; and Jose Cisneros, all officers and enlisted men of this royal presidio, all of whom I certify I know, and they said that they unanimously, by common consent, together and individually, as a group, do hereby grant by these present such power as may be necessary and required by law, to their captain, Dõn Joseph de Urrutia, in the first place, and, in the second place, to Dõn Juan de Angulo, a resident and ware-house keeper in Mexico City, as paymaster for the said officers and men so that in their name and representing their persons, rights, and acts, they may, during the present year of 1735, appear, and they shall appear, each one for himself and for all the others, before the Most Illustrious and the Most Excellent Archbishop and Viceroy of this New Spain and for the necessary warrants for collecting their salaries of 380 pesos which His Majesty has assigned to each of the forty signers, plus 65 pesos for the Lieutenant, Ensign, and Sergeant, all of which amounts to 15,265 pesos, and 240 pounds of power, representing the six pounds which his Majesty likewise gives to each of the said signers every year, all of which is to be issued by Royal Treasury in Mexico City, where the official royal judges, in view of the said warrant from the Most Illustrious and Most Excellent Archbishop and Viceroy, will deliver, in cash to satisfy the aforementioned signers, and in their name, to the aforementioned paymasters and agents, Dõn Joseph de Urrutia and Dõn Juan de Angulo to whoever may represent them. The said sum and the quantity of powder, and they now and forevermore will consider themselves satisfied with such amounts as the said agents may receive. Furthermore, they state that they may issue such receipts and quittances as may be necessary to collect the same, plus affidavits that they have received same or the renunciation of laws connected therewith. They shall present before his Excellency the necessary memorials and other documents as may be necessary for that purpose. They hereby grant and give unto the said Dõn Joseph de Urrutia and Dõn Juan de Angulo the present power-of-attorney with full authority and power to appoint one, two, three, or more substitutes, and the latter may appoint as many more as may be necessary, without any restriction whatever, for they de hereby authorize and empower each and every one of them to institute legal proceeding and swear to oaths whenever necessary, on the condition that the said agents shall pay and deliver the amount or value of the salaries to which the undersigned are or shall be entitled from the Royal Treasure, to Dõn Joseph de los Rios, royal tax collector, the amount of 12,000 pesos, which, by order of the present governor of this province of Texas, is to be charged against the Royal Treasury and delivered to them in merchandise through their said captain and agents, Dõn Joseph de Urrutia in exchange for equal amount, as principal and cost, which the aforesaid captain owes as royal taxes to His Majesty, which said sum the undersigned acknowledge as having received. In view of the above, and since the aforesaid sum of 12,000 pesos is due the Royal Treasury before any sum or sums which the said undersigned or afore-mentioned agents may owe. In case the afore-said sum should not be paid by their agents Dõn Joseph de Urrutia and Dõn Juan de Agulo, the undersigned do hereby annul and cancel the power which they give and confer upon their said agents, and they transfer and change the same with full authority, as stated herein, to Dõn Joseph Luis de los Rios, or to such agent as may be appointed by him as his lawful representative so that he, as royal collector, may deliver and pay to the Royal Treasury the sum of the salaries due the said undersigned for the present year, in the amount of twelve thousand pesos, receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged. Whatever is left, up to the total amount due the said soldiers for their said salaries, shall be placed at the disposal of the undersigned. For the execution of the above they have bound their persons and present and future assets, and they hereby authorize the justices and judges of His Majesty to whom there presents shall come to make them observe and fulfill same to the full force and extent of the law as though it were a sentence pronounced, passed, and agreed to in a case which had been tried in court by a competent judge. They ask and begged me to interpose my royal and judicial authority, and I, the said governor, in the name of His Majesty, do hereby interpose same insofar as I can and should according to law. Done before me and the attendant witnesses with whom I am acting according to law as stated above, and those who knew how to write their names signed same with me, and for those who could not write their one of the following witnesses signed for them,: Dõn Fermin de Ibiricu, Dõn Ignacio Gonzalez de Inclán, and Alberto Lopez, who were present and all of whom reside in this said presidio. This has been placed on common paper because there is no stamped paper as provided by law. I certify.

(The signatures of the following appear: Dõn Manuel de Sandoval, the governor; his official witness, Joseph Antonio Bueno de Roxas and Domingo de Oyez; Mateo Perez; Juan Galvan; Juan Cortinas; Marcelino Martinez; Martin Flores y Valdez; Basilio Jimenez; Joaquin de Urrutia; Miguel Guerra; Pedro del Toro; and Pedro de Ocon y Trillo. Fermin de Ibiricu and Ignacio Gonzalez de Inclán signed for the others who did not know how to write).

From the Bexar Archive Translations, Vol. 7, pp 123-133. Bexar County Courthouse Archives. (Translations also in UT Baker Library at Austin, Texas).

Marriage Notes for ANTONIA RAMON-CAMACHO and JOSEPH DE URRUTIA:

Marriage source: Church record from the LDS microfilm #222,421

Child of ANTONIA RAMON-CAMACHO and JOSEPH DE URRUTIA is:

15. i. ANTONIA RAMON5 DE URRUTIA, b. Abt. 1698, San Juan Bautista del Rio Grande , el Presido del Norte, Coahuila,Mexico.

Generation No. 3

9. JOSE-MANUEL5 SALINAS (UNKNOWN4 RAMON, DIEGO3, JOSEPH2 DE MORALES-Y-RAMON, LUIS1 RAMON-DE-MORALES) was born 1753, and died Aft. 16 May 1787 in San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas. He married (1) MARGARITA MENCHACA. He married (2) MARIA-ESIPCIACA RODRIGUEZ 1773. She was born 1755, and died in San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas.

Notes for JOSE-MANUEL SALINAS:

His will is dated May 15, 1787. Heirs:First marriage, Margarita Menchaca- children: Antonia de la Garza,

Maranio de la Garza, and Pedro Manuel and Margarita; Second marriage:Margarita Egeciaca- children

Maria Josefa, Josef Francisco, Josef Antonio Salinas. Executor of the will Son-in-Law, Jose Antonio de Casillo Zevalos and second wife.

Source: Wills and Inventories of Bexar County, Texas - San Antonio Genealogical and Historical Society.

Children of JOSE-MANUEL SALINAS and MARGARITA MENCHACA are:

i. PEDRO-XAVIER6 SALINAS-MENCHACA, m. JOSEFA PADRON.

ii. JOSE FRANCISCO SALINAS-MENCHACA, b. San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas; m. JOSEFA DE URAGA.

iii. JOSE ANTONIO SALINAS-MENCHACA, m. FRANCISCA DEL RASO.

Notes for JOSE ANTONIO SALINAS-MENCHACA:

His will was certified on May 16, 1787.

Source:With the Makers of San Antonio by Frederick C. Chabot. Page 194.

iv. FRANCISCO-MANUEL SALINAS-MENCHACA, b. 21 Aug 1752, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas; d. 1820; m. MARIA-IGNACIA FLORES-DELGADO; b. 05 Jan 1751/52, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas.

v. MARIA-MARGARITA SALINAS-MENCHACA, b. 23 Apr 1754, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas; m. JOSEPH ANTONIO BUSTILLOS-Y-CEBALLOS, 1772.

vi. JOSE MANUEL MARIA DE LA TRINIDA SALINAS-MENCHACA, b. 18 Apr 1756, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas.

vii. MARIA MARGARITA DE LA TRINIDAD SALINAS-MENCHACA, b. 21 Mar 1758, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas.

Children of JOSE-MANUEL SALINAS and MARIA-ESIPCIACA RODRIGUEZ are:

viii. MARIA-JOSEFA-DE-LA-LUZ6 SALINAS-RODRIGUEZ, b. 22 Sep 1774, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas; m. CADET JOSE-IGNACIO-DE-LA-CANDELARIA DE AROCHA, 11 Apr 1793, San Fernando, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas; b. 31 Jan 1766, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas; d. 29 Apr 1842, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas.

ix. JOSE FRANCISCO SALINAS-RODRIGUEZ, b. 25 Sep 1776, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas.

x. JOSE ANTONIO JUSTO SALINAS-RODRIGUEZ, b. 21 Mar 1779, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas.

xi. MARIA-GERTRUDIS-DOLORES SALINAS-RODRIGUEZ, b. 05 Jan 1782, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas.

10. MIGUEL5 RAMON-MALDONADO (JOSE-DOMINGO4 RAMON-CAMACHO, DIEGO3 RAMON, JOSEPH2 DE MORALES-Y-RAMON, LUIS1 RAMON-DE-MORALES)

Notes for MIGUEL RAMON-MALDONADO:

The following may be incorrect. They are family members. Parents unknown.

Children of MIGUEL RAMON-MALDONADO are:

i. MANUEL6 RAMON, b. 1735; d. 1823; m. ROSALIA MARTINEZ.

ii. JOSE-FELIX RAMON, b. 1744, La Bahia, Goliad County, Texas; m. JUANA BARRON.

11. LIEUTENANT DIEGO5 RAMON-MALDONADO (JOSE-DOMINGO4 RAMON-CAMACHO, DIEGO3 RAMON, JOSEPH2 DE MORALES-Y-RAMON, LUIS1 RAMON-DE-MORALES) was born 19 May 1696 in Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico, and died Aft. 1757 in Mexico City?. He married (1) GERTRUDIS FLORES-DE-VALDEZ, daughter of NICOLAS FLORES-DE-VALDEZ-Y-DUARTE and NICOLASA XIMENEZ-DE-VALDEZ. She was born 1725, and died 1746 in San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas. He married (2) MARIA TERESA XIMENEZ-FLORES-DE-VALDEZ 1747, daughter of JOSEPH XIMENEZ and MARIA FLORES-DE-VALDEZ. She was born 1720 in San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas, and died in San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas. He married (3) MARIA-THERESA QUINONES 20 Dec 1747 in San Fernando, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas.

Notes for LIEUTENANT DIEGO RAMON-MALDONADO:

Alferez of the Expedition of 1716 and apon his father's death, he served as commander of La Bahia.

On January 17, 1746, he received a Royal Grant in San Antonio.

Lieutenant commander of San Antonio de Bexar Presidio and San Xavier de Horcasitas Presidio.

Source:Handbook of Texas Online and With the Makers of San Antonio, by Frederick C. Chabot. Page 46

The Handbook of Texas Online.

Children of DIEGO RAMON-MALDONADO and GERTRUDIS FLORES-DE-VALDEZ are:

i. MARIA LUISA CAYETANA6 RAMON-FLORES, d. 1793, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas.

ii. ANTONIA RAMON-FLORES, b. 1746, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas; d. San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas; m. MARIANO GOMEZ-SAUCEDO, 10 Jun 1758, Villa de San Fernando, San Antonio de Bexar, Texas; b. 1744, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas.

Marriage Notes for ANTONIA RAMON-FLORES and MARIANO GOMEZ-SAUCEDO:

Marriage source:From the book, Index to the Marriages Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara, by Raul J. Guerra, Jr., Nadine M. Vasquez, Baldomero Vela, Jr. Page 58.

iii. FRANCISCO XAVIER RAMON-FLORES, b. 23 Jan 1745/46, San Fernando, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas; d. 02 Mar 1745/46, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas.

Children of DIEGO RAMON-MALDONADO and MARIA XIMENEZ-FLORES-DE-VALDEZ are:

iv. JOSE MARCELINO6 RAMON-XIMENES, m. ANTONIA CARMARILLO-SANTIAGO, 1801.

v. JUAN RAMON-XIMENES, b. 04 Feb 1749/50, San Fernando, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas; d. 05 Feb 1749/50, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas.

vi. MARIANA LUISA RAMON-XIMENES, b. 1754; m. (1) JOSEPH MANUEL LOPEZ; m. (2) MATIAS GUERRERO, 1776.

12. IGNACIA-JAVIERA5 RAMON-MALDONADO (JOSE-DOMINGO4 RAMON-CAMACHO, DIEGO3 RAMON, JOSEPH2 DE MORALES-Y-RAMON, LUIS1 RAMON-DE-MORALES) was born 1712 in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico. She married (1) IGNACIO DE-LA-GARZA. He was born 1710 in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico. She married (2) JUAN-ANTONIO DE SANDOVAL 15 Jun 1749 in Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahulia, Mexico. He was born 1707 in Monclova, Coahulia, Mexico.

Notes for JUAN-ANTONIO DE SANDOVAL:

Marriage on LDS microfilm #222,421.

Children of IGNACIA-JAVIERA RAMON-MALDONADO and IGNACIO DE-LA-GARZA are:

i. MARIA-JOSEFA6 DE-LA-GARZA-RAMON, b. Monclova, Coahulia, Mexico; m. THOMAS MUNGUIA-RODRIGUEZ, 26 Oct 1750, Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico; b. Monclova, Coahulia, Mexico.

ii. ANTONIO-MARIA DE-LA-GARZA-RAMON, b. Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico; m. (1) ANA-MARIA ORRIBALI-MENCHACA, 29 Aug 1752, Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico; m. (2) ANTONIA-MARIA GALVAN-MALDONADO, 12 May 1756, Villa de San Fernando, San Antonio de Bexar, Texas; b. 1738.

Marriage Notes for ANTONIO-MARIA DE-LA-GARZA-RAMON and ANTONIA-MARIA GALVAN-MALDONADO:

Marriage source:Index to the Marriage Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara by Raul J. Guerrera,

Jr., Nadine M. Vasquez, Baldomero Vela, Jr. 1751 - 1779. Page 54.

13. CATHARINA5 RAMON-MORALES-DE-BURGOS (ANDRES4 RAMON-CAMACHO, DIEGO3 RAMON, JOSEPH2 DE MORALES-Y-RAMON, LUIS1 RAMON-DE-MORALES) was born in San Juan Bautista Rio de Norte, Coahulia, Mexico. She married JOAQUIN FLORES-DE-VALDEZ. He was born in San Juan Bautista Rio de Norte, Coahulia, Mexico.

Child of CATHARINA RAMON-MORALES-DE-BURGOS and JOAQUIN FLORES-DE-VALDEZ is:

i. JERONIMA6 FLORES-DE-VALDEZ, b. San Juan Bautista Rio de Norte, Coahulia, Mexico; m. FRANCISCO PEREZ-MALDONADO, 13 Aug 1746, San Juan Bautista de Rio Norte, Coahulia, Mexico; b. San Juan Bautista Rio de Norte, Coahulia, Mexico.

14. ANTONIA-BUENAVENTURA5 RAMON-MENCHACA (ANDRES4 RAMON-CAMACHO, DIEGO3 RAMON, JOSEPH2 DE MORALES-Y-RAMON, LUIS1 RAMON-DE-MORALES) was born 14 Jul 1708 in Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico. She married JOSEPH MENCHACA-BAEZA 25 Jul 1724 in Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico, son of JOSEPH MENCHACA-BAEZA and JUANA FLORES-DE-VEGA. He was born in Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico.

Children of ANTONIA-BUENAVENTURA RAMON-MENCHACA and JOSEPH MENCHACA-BAEZA are:

i. JOSEPHA-CECELIA6 MENCHACA-BAEZA, m. MIGUEL DE HOYOS-MONTEMAYOR, 19 Oct 1746, Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico.

ii. MANUELA MENCHACA-RAMON, m. FRANCISCO-JAVIER FLORES-FALCON, 15 Aug 1763, Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico.

15. ANTONIA RAMON5 DE URRUTIA (ANTONIA4 RAMON-CAMACHO, DIEGO3 RAMON, JOSEPH2 DE MORALES-Y-RAMON, LUIS1 RAMON-DE-MORALES)1 was born Abt. 1698 in San Juan Bautista del Rio Grande , el Presido del Norte, Coahuila,Mexico1, and died 1. She married JOSEPH-LUIS-ANTONIO MENCHACA-FLORES. He was born Abt. 1698 in San Juan Bautista del Rio Grande , el Presido del Norte, Coahuila,Mexico, and died in San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas.

Notes for JOSEPH-LUIS-ANTONIO MENCHACA-FLORES:

A member of the Martin de Alarcón Expedition of 1718.

Children of ANTONIA DE URRUTIA and JOSEPH-LUIS-ANTONIO MENCHACA-FLORES are:

i. ESMERGILDA-MICAELA6 MENCHACA-URRUTIA, b. San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas; m. (1) JOSE GALVAN-MALDONADO, 27 Feb 1744/45, San Fernando, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas; b. San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas; d. Abt. 1749, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas; m. (2) LUIS PEREZ-SAN-JUANA, 20 Nov 1749, San Fernando, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas.

Notes for JOSE GALVAN-MALDONADO:

Marriage source from the book, With the Makers of San Antonio, by Frederick C. Chabot. Page 102,

and San Fernando's de Bexar marriage record.

Notes for LUIS PEREZ-SAN-JUANA:

He served over 14 years as a soldier in the Presidio of San Antonio. He received a Royal Grant from the King of Spain in 1762. Source:With the Makers of San Antonio, by Frederick C. Chabot. Page 95.

ii. CAPTAIN PEDRO-JOSEPH MENCHACA-URRUTIA, b. San Juan Bautista del Rio Grande ,Presido del Norte, Coahuila,Mexico; m. GRACIA LEAL-FLORES, 21 Dec 1757, San Fernando, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas; b. San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas.

iii. JOSE FELIX MENCHACA-URRUTIA, b. San Juan Bautista del Rio Grande ,Presido del Norte, Coahulia,Mexico; d. 1811, Chihuahua Prison.

iv. JOAQUIN MENCHACA-URRUTIA, m. JUANA-ESMEREJILDA DELGADO-DE-LOS-SANTOS, 29 Apr 1754, San Fernando, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas; b. Abt. 1736.

v. CAPTAIN LUIS ANTONIO MENCHACA-URRUTIA, b. 1713, San Juan Bautista del Rio Grande , el Presido del Norte, Coahulia,Mexico; d. 29 Sep 1793, San Francisco Ranch, Karnes/Wilson County, Texas; m. MARIA-IGNACIA-AGUSTINA NUNEZ-FLORES, 27 Feb 1744/45, San Fernando, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas; b. 1731, San Fernando, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas; d. Aft. 12 Sep 1800, San Francisco Ranch, Karnes/Wilson County, Texas.

Notes for CAPTAIN LUIS ANTONIO MENCHACA-URRUTIA:

Appointed Captain of the Presidio at Bexar in 1763. A prominent ranch owner. The 1779 census for the province of Texas revealed him to be the wealthiest and top cattle owner.

Source:San Antonio de Bexar by Jesus F. De La Teja

(Estado General de la Provincia de Texas)

Served as justicia mayor of the Villa of San Fernando.

Source:The Makers of San Antonio, By Frederich C. Chabot.

Notes for MARIA-IGNACIA-AGUSTINA NUNEZ-FLORES:

Will signed on September 12, 1800. Power of Attorney was given to her son, Luis Mariano Menchaca and brother, Felix Menchaca. Ignacio Maria Luzaro signed for her.

Source:Will and Inventories of Bexar County, Texas - San Antonio Genealogical and Historical Society.

San Antonio de Bexar, by Jesus F. de la Teja.

Endnotes

1. Brøderbund Software, Inc., World Family Tree Vol. 6, Ed. 1, (Release date: August 22, 1996), "CD-ROM," Tree #4100, Date of Import: Sep 10, 1998.

Feliciana married (2) MAJOR DIEGO RAMON Abt. 1676, son of JOSEPH DE MORALES-Y-RAMON and CATARINA MARTINEZ-GUAJARDO. He was born 1641 in Queretaro, Queretaro, Mexico, and died April 10, 1719 in San Juan Bautista del Rio Grande, Presido del Norte, Coahulia,Mexico.

He was the natural born son of Sgt. Major Joseph Ramon and Dona Catalina Martinez.

His relationship with Maria de los Rios and their children are noted - the Handbook of Texas Online.

Located in the state of Coahuila, Mexico, he owned the Hacienda named "El Carrizalejo",

In 1674, he was a soldier with Francisco Elizondo's Expedition.

In 1688, he accompanied Governor Alonso De Leon into Texas.

Between March 1691 to June 1698, he served as the third governor of Coahuila, Mexico.

On December 14, 1698, Diego Ramon and Fray Cristobal Montes de Oca founded the mission San Francisco Xavier y Valle de San Cristobal, some forty leaugues northeast of Villa de Pilon (Monclova).

On March 1, 1700, he founded the Mission San Fernando Solano. This mission would later be relocated and remembered today as the Alamo.

By March 28, 1701 Captain Ramon was receiving five hundred pesos for evey year served. Considered top paid in those years. From 1703, till his death, he was the Commandant of the Royal presidio of San Juan Bautista, Coahuila, Mexico. This presidio had been established in 1702. His offical title was, Theniente General, Cabo y Caudillo.

Source:From the book's

Gallant Outcast - Texas Turmoil 1519-1734 by Ben Cuellar Ximenez.

San Juan Bautista, Gateway to Spanish Texas by Robert S. Weddle.

Origen de los Fundadores de Texas, Nuevo Mexico, Coahilia, y Nuevo Leon, by Guillermo Garmendia Leal. Page 70.

With All Arms by Carl Laurence Duaine. Page 242.

With Makers of San Antonio by Frederick C. Chabot. Page 46.

Northern New Spain, A Research Guide, by Thomas C. Barnes, Thomas H. Nayor and Charles W. Polzer.

Diary of the Alarcon Expedition into Texas, 1718-1719 by Fray Francisco Celiz.

Published by the Quivira Society.

The following is from "The Biographical Dictionary of Saltillo" by Martha Duron Jimenez and Ignacio Etchegaray, pg 143. Don Jose Ramon is mentioned as the eldest and the natural born son of Captain Diego Ramon.

"En los ultimos dias del mes de abril de ese ano (1719), dejo de existir en el Presidio de Rio Grande el Capitan Diego Ramon, que tan importantes servicios presto en la conquista y pacificacion de la Provincia de Coahuila. Sus padres fueron Don Josephe Ramon y Dona Andrea de los Rios, espanoles de nacimiento, pero que en 1636 se embarcaron para America yendo a residir primero en Cadereyta, y despues a la Villa del Saltillo de donde fue nombrado Procurador General por recomendacion del Capitan Don Alonso de Leon de quien fue particular amigo. En esta villa nacio el ano de 1641 el tercero de sus hijos, que se llamo Diego y despues de recibir la education primaria que en esa epoca se impartia, se dedico desde muy joven, a los trabajos del campo y a las campanas contra los indios, al lado de Don Alonso de Leon, el Capitan que lo llego a estima tanto coma a su padre, y que fue su gran maestro en la escuela de las privaciones, fatigas y vicisitudes. Muerto el Capitan, su hijo Don Alonso que regreso de Espana a encargarse de la familia e intereses de su padre, continue sineto el amigo inseparabe de Diego Ramon....."

El Capitan Diego Ramon contrajo matrimonio en el Presidio de San Francisco de Coahuila, con Dona Feliciana Camacho, de la que tuvo entre otros hijos a Don Jose que fue el mayor "

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000014410309648

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]]
[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]][[Category:Pages]]