== Notes for [[Item:Q85858|Q85858]] ==

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galba

* 6th Emperor of the Roman Empire
* Reign 9 June 68 – 15 January 69
* (7 months)
* Predecessor Nero
* Successor Otho
* Born 24 December 3 BC
* Near Terracina, Italy
* Died 15 January 69 (aged 70)
* Rome
* Spouse Aemilia Lepida
* Full name
* Servius Sulpicius Galba
* (at birth);
* Lucius Livius Ocella Sulpicius Galba
* (until ascension);
* Servius Sulpicius Galba Caesar Augustus
* (as emperor);
* Imperator Servius Galba Caesar Augustus
* (imperial name)[1]
* Dynasty None
* Mother Mummia Achaica

Galba (Latin: Servius Sulpicius Galba Caesar Augustus;[2] 24 December 3 BC – 15 January 69), pron.

He was born as Servius Sulpicius Galba near Terracina, "on the left as you go towards Fundi" in the words of Suetonius.[3]

His mother was Mummia Achaica, the granddaughter of Lutatius Catulus (cos. 78) and great-granddaughter of Lucius Mummius Achaicus. They only had one other child, an elder son called Gaius who left Rome after squandering the greater part of his estate, and committed suicide because Tiberius dishonored him by preventing him from taking part in the allotment of the provinces in his year. His father married a second wife, Livia Ocellina, a distant kinswoman of the empress Livia. She later adopted Galba, so he took her names, remaining Lucius Livius Ocella Sulpicius Galba until becoming emperor.

His wife, Aemilia Lepida, however, was connected by the marriages of some of her relatives to some of the Julii-Claudii. They had two sons, probably Gaius and Servius (most likely Livius Ocella Galba), who died during their father's life. The elder son was born circa 25 AD. Hardly anything is known about his life as he died young. He was engaged to his step-sister Antonia Postuma, but they never wed, which leads modern historians to believe that he died during this time. Their engagement is dated to 48, and that is generally believed to be his time of death.

The date of birth of the younger son occurred later than 25 but before 30. This Galba outlived his older brother.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]