== Notes for [[Item:Q101883|Q101883]] ==

Juan GÓMEZ GALLARDO LATAPÍ's Family Tree:

Ana ESTRADA DE-LA-CABALLERÍA Sosa/Ahnentafel # 81,133 Family Tree Profile Matches Print Illustrated family tree Family Ancestry Charts & lists Family tree Check Descendants Lists Family tree Relationship Calculate relationship Relationship with x x (Sosa/Ahnentafel #1) Relationship with Juan Alonso CABRERA (spouse) More Illustrated statistics Map Set as family tree root F Ana ESTRADA DE-LA-CABALLERÍAPrint Family TreeSosa : 81,133 Born in 1492 Deceased - Nueva Galicia, México

Parents Alonso ESTRADA DE-LA-CABALLERÍA Mariana GUTIÉRREZ FLORES-DE-LA-CABALLERIA

Spouses and children Married to Juan Alonso CABRERA †1564 (Parents : Lope SOSA †1520 & Inés CABRERA) with F María SOSA CABRERA M Lope SOSA † married to Inés CASTILLA-OSORIO SOSA M Juan Alonso ESTRADA 1542- married to Mariana GUEVARA BARRIOS

6. ANA4 ESTRADA-DE-LA-CABALLERIA (ALONSO3 DE ESTRADA)was born Abt. 1492, and died in Nueva Galicia, New Spain (Mexico). She married JUAN-ALONSO DE SOSA-CABRERA 1511 in Mexico City, F.D., Mexico?, son of LOPE DE SOSA and INES DE CABRERA. He was born in Cordova, Spain, and died 1564 in Nueva Galicia, New Spain (Mexico).

Notes for ANA ESTRADA-DE-LA-CABALLERIA: and daughter-in-law to a Governor of the Canary Islands.

Notes for JUAN-ALONSO DE SOSA-CABRERA: In 1551 he arrived in New Spain (Mexico). By 1553, he was the Royal Treasurer of New Spain.

From the books:
* ''With All Arms'' by Carl Laurence Duaine, page 70.
* ''Mil Familias III'' by Rodolfo Gonzalez de la Garza, page 26.

Children of ANA ESTRADA-DE-LA-CABALLERIA and JUAN-ALONSO DE SOSA-CABRERA are:
* i. MARIA5 DE SOSA-CABRERA, m. ALONSO DAVILA-ALVARDO.
* 10. ii. LOPE DE SOSA.
* 11. iii. JUAN-ALONSO DE ESTRADA, b. 03 Feb 1541/42, Villa Qrquedo, Toledo, Spain.

http://www.somosprimos.com/inclan/estrada.htm Ana de Estrada Cavalleria and Juan Alonso de Sosa had the following children: 7 . Inez de Sosa was born in Mexico circa 1533. 9 iii. Lope de Sosa was born in Mexico, D.F. circa 1542. 10 iv. Alonso de Sosa was born in Mexico, D.F. circa 1543. 11 v. Maria de Sosa was born in Mexico, D.F. circa 1545.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD9C4DF61EFBBFA9822EF79916C26BF
geni:6000000001500807745

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]