== Notes for [[Item:Q113907|Q113907]] ==

=Rodrigo Martins De Nomães=

'''Also Known as, I Lord of Revinae, Silva-Secura or Señor de Reviñade y Silva-Escura and Rodrigo Martins De Nomamas.
'''
* Son of Rodrigo Romães Conde de Monterroso and Udraica Guterres
* D. Rodrigo Martins de Nomães ( 1215 -?) Was a nobleman and medieval knight of the Kingdom of Portugal , he was lord of Nomães, current Numão .
* Born around 1180 in Portugal.
* [https://our-royal-titled-noble-and-commoner-ancestors.com/p3357.htm#i100825 '''Our Royal Titled Noble Ancestors''']

=Married=

* Married: '''Dona Beatriz Annes Redondo,''' widow of Pedro Soares Coelho (son of Dom Soeiro Viegas Coelho and Dona Mayor Mendes de candarei), daughter of João Pires Redondo and his first wife, Govan Sen .

=They had three daughters:=

* 1.1. '''Dona Joanna Rodrigues de nomamas,''' married to Martim vasques da Cunha, the old, son of Vasco Lourenço da Cunha and Theresa Pires Portugal. Martim passed away in 1305, and Joanna passed away before 1308.

* 1.2. '''Dona Maria Rodrigues de Nomamas,''' Married To Martim Affonso de Resende.

* 1.3. '''Dona Urraca Rodrigues de Nomamas'''

==[https://pt.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rodrigo_Martins_de_Nom%C3%A3es Rodrigo Martins de Nomães, by Wikipedia]

D. Rodrigo Martins de Nomães ( 1215 -?) Was a nobleman and medieval knight of the Kingdom of Portugal , he was lord of Nomães, current Numão .

'''Family Relationships'''

He married Beatriz Anes Redondo, daughter of João Pires Redondo , governor of the localities of Neiva , Refojos and Riba de Ave and Gontinha Soares de Melo, of whom he had:

* '''Joana Rodrigues de Nomães''' ( 1240 -?) Married to Martim Vasques da Cunha , 4th lord of Morgado de Tábua .

=Links=

* https://pt.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Castelo_de_Num%C3%A3o
* http://www.asbrap.org.br/documentos/revistas/rev24_art4.pdf
* https://charters.one-name.net/p445.htm
* https://repositorio.ul.pt/bitstream/10451/23960/1/ulfl200608_tese.pdf
* https://livrozilla.com/doc/722972/os-portugueses-nos-livros-de-repartimiento-da-andaluzia--...
* https://pt.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Casa_de_Bai%C3%A3o

=Sources=

* Genealogy of the Liberator, Ramón Darío Suárez, (Mérida, Venezuela, July 1983, Second Edition Augmented and Corrected. Official Printing. Mérida State Executive. Legal Deposit: If 83-0415), LAT AM 929.28 B638d/G.S.., Page: 361 (Reliability: 3).
* Genea Portugal, http://genealogia.netopia.pt (Reliability: 3).
* FamÍlia ( 3 ) Beraldo By Wanderley - https://books.google.com/books?id=0SZ6DwAAQBAJ&pg=PA1252&lpg=PA1252&dq=Rodrigo+Martins+de+Nomães&source=bl&ots=iGkFlUQ5wt&sig=ACfU3U16G70FURyxmdLA1MXQg7_Jgxmz-g&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjBicmf7KjhAhX1On0KHZtMDlI4ChDoATACegQIBRAB#v=onepage&q=Rodrigo%20Martins%20de%20Nomães&f=false
* Nobiliario de D. Pedro, Conde de Bracelos, hijo del rey D. Dionis de Portugal, By João Baptista Lavanha - https://books.google.com/books?id=2kw3dDk9Ub4C&pg=PA230&lpg=PA230&dq=Beatriz+Anes+Redondo&source=bl&ots=9mv9Ehvkp5&sig=ACfU3U20K5oXawTbPJy_AhZWes9prSQPuQ&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjCiZG2-KjhAhUkHDQIHTiTCR84ChDoATABegQIBRAB#v=onepage&q=Beatriz%20Anes%20Redondo&f=false
* Portugaliae monumenta historica: a saeculo octavo post Christum usque ad ...By Academia das Ciências de Lisboa - https://books.google.com/books?id=4p2uV9QNPDIC&pg=PA225&lpg=PA225&dq=Beatriz+Anes+Redondo&source=bl&ots=w72X3kUfCf&sig=ACfU3U12Rou55pg9BesU8MYfRGvihx_rxQ&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjK5rqO-qjhAhUcJTQIHQhpC5w4ChDoATAPegQIBRAB#v=onepage&q=Beatriz%20Anes%20Redondo&f=false
* Diccionario histórico, genealógico y heráldico de las familias ..., Volume 2, By Luis Vilar y Pascual - https://books.google.com/books?id=2C0BAAAAQAAJ&pg=PA230&lpg=PA230&dq=Rodrigo+Romães+Conde+de+Monterroso&source=bl&ots=h8pxAXvOyB&sig=ACfU3U1gUuJ3Jbu5KIsnkp-Rk-gu37tapw&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwix3uKhj63hAhUCAXwKHbF9Am0Q6AEwBHoECAkQAQ#v=onepage&q=Rodrigo%20Romães%20Conde%20de%20Monterroso&f=false
* O Mosteiro de Santo Tirso, de 978 a 1588. A silhueta de uma entidade - https://books.google.com/books?id=KDdDjQFg1EYC&pg=RA1-PA41&lpg=RA1-PA41&dq=Rodrigo+Martins+de+Nomães&source=bl&ots=c5Ng_RgmaU&sig=ACfU3U3ys_GEiPBClwURUSPe_TYTLgHcHg&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwi9u4WIka3hAhWTDHwKHZItCDo4ChDoATAJegQICRAB#v=onepage&q=Rodrigo%20Martins%20de%20Nomães&f=false
* Monarchia Lusytana. Composta por Frey B. de Brito ... Parte primeira , By Bernardo de BRITO - https://books.google.com/books?id=VQPPDusB39gC&pg=PP21&lpg=PP21&dq=Rodrigo+Martins+de+Nomães&source=bl&ots=FcKSh-Wksx&sig=ACfU3U2tNdxUE1_2XkKB9gARX3aIlbwt7Q&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjUydWZlK3hAhWHFHwKHQm8C_A4FBDoATAAegQICBAB#v=onepage&q=Rodrigo%20Martins%20de%20Nomães&f=false
* Portugaliae monumenta historica: Scriptores 1856-61, By Academia das Ciências de Lisboa - https://books.google.com/books?id=XZNIAQAAMAAJ&pg=PA207&lpg=PA207&dq=Beatriz+Anes+Redondo&source=bl&ots=pZsPni04Y3&sig=ACfU3U2B3S8TL1aZA6jsLWDQQRNzwsgpFQ&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjl7pm5gczvAhXyN30KHTtOAow4FBDoATACegQIBRAC#v=onepage&q=Beatriz%20Anes%20Redondo&f=false
* NOBILIARIO DEL CONDE D. PEDRO, By João Baptista Lavanha - https://books.google.com/books?id=gHFmAAAAcAAJ&pg=PA230&lpg=PA230&dq=Beatriz+Anes+Redondo&source=bl&ots=X_O59NZIs1&sig=ACfU3U2g0VX1t4cvoaaKJM66Is4ZTblyBw&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjl7pm5gczvAhXyN30KHTtOAow4FBDoATAHegQICRAC#v=onepage&q=Beatriz%20Anes%20Redondo&f=false
* Ffeguras & Sinaees III. Heráldica do Mosteiro de Almoster, Tiago de Sousa Mendes, e António de Castro Henriques - https://d1wqtxts1xzle7.cloudfront.net/47642907/Art_04_p083-104_Tiago_Mendes_e_Antonio_Henriques.pdf?1469874752=&response-content-disposition=attachment%3B+filename%3DFfeguras_and_Sinaees_III_Heraldica_do_M.pdf&Expires=1616726917&Signature=ZmRMC0O~I1UOY~MuXrKK~0qf2AkiuGRU0jBNXEezaqVPnOM9A1~apMev-CE8SVqUVxCGCVV9NgQhWjcCdkcvGiad8RzrElFOAZb3qFyzdEzRje8MlSEcnJpXVoGtp0O3w30fyUkZIidgQ3gHaQLkirRmjrfzdLJt388f691XLIjUAQ7Q0VUCz1ZdQ7ckNHJ3e6HmS2bj4U8QjngNrnEx-yTH5~f~HatLyoxK04iwpJqpUmNp2LgyvcSM53R-OISI71aPPqVMbPcxE8NERre-3IiSLmz~OL7vc79harQGFELLyLk3sSGy3UTKyWl4v4AOBcz0Wb2WbUjA~DDTyqitKw__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAJLOHF5GGSLRBV4ZA
* Descendants of Señor de Ribera - https://geneaminas.com.br/genealogia-mineira/descendentes.asp?codpessoa=287491&codenlace=1405488&genero=1&expandir=183359

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]