== Notes for [[Item:Q87520|Q87520]] ==

ID: I62051

Name: Marcus Atius Balbus of Rome

Given Name: Marcus Atius Balbus

Surname: of Rome

Sex: M

_UID: CEFEA4F6C68D974490309CF4CDB8D99DDFC0

Change Date: 3 Oct 2005

Death: deceased

Father: Marcus Aetius Balbus of Rome

Mother: Pompeia

Marriage 1 Julia of Rome

Married:

Children

Atia\Atila of Rome

Marriage 2 Julia of Rome Caesar

Married:

Children

Atia\Atila of Rome

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I62051

Marcus Atius

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Marcus Atius Balbus (105 BC–51 BC) was the son and heir of an elder Marcus Atius Balbus (148 BC–87 BC) and Pompeia. Pompeia was a sister to consul Gnaeus Pompeius Strabo, father of triumvir Pompey. The family of the elder Balbus came from a Roman senatorial family plebs status from Aricia (modern Ariccia, Italy). ‘Balbus’ in Latin means stammer. The younger Balbus was born and raised in Aricia.

Balbus married Julia Minor, second eldest sister of dictator Gaius Julius Caesar.

Julia bore Balbus three daughters and they were:

-1. Atia Balba Prima - mother of Quintus Pedius who served as a general and consul.

-2. Atia Balba Caesonia - mother of Octavia Minor (fourth wife of triumvir Mark Antony) and of first Emperor Augustus.

-3. Atia Balba Tertia - mother of Lucius Pinarius, who was a political supporter of Mark Antony.

He served as a praetor in 62 BC and he managed to obtain the government of Sardinia. Under Caesar in 59 BC, Balbus was appointed along with Pompey on a board of commissioners under Julian Law to divide estates in Campania among the commoners. Cicero stated that Pompey would say as a joke about Balbus, that he was not a person of any importance.

Forrás / Source:

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Atius

--------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Atius
--------------------
The Balbus family originated in Africa and could boast many ancestral busts of senators. His mother was also closely related to Pompeii 'The Great'.
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Atius

'''Marcus Atius Balbus (105 BC – 51 BC)''' was the son and heir of an elder Marcus Atius Balbus (148 BC – 87 BC) and Pompeia.

Balbus married Julia Minor, second eldest sister of dictator Gaius Julius Caesar. Julia bore Balbus three daughters and they were:
# Atia Balba Prima - mother of Quintus Pedius who served as a general and consul.
# Atia Balba Caesonia - mother of Octavia Minor (fourth wife of triumvir Mark Antony) and of first Emperor Augustus.
# Atia Balba Tertia - mother of Lucius Pinarius, who was a political supporter of Mark Antony.

--------------------

http://www.balbifamily.com/balbisfamous.htm
--------------------
'''
=Marcus Atius=
'''

Marcus Atius Balbus (105-51 BC) was a 1st-century Roman who served as a praetor in 62 BC and became governor of Sardinia.

'''Early life'''

Balbus was born and raised in Aricia into a political family and was the son and heir of the elder Marcus Atius Balbus (148-87 BC). His mother was Pompeia the sister to consul Gnaeus Pompeius Strabo, father of Pompey Magnus, a member of the so-called, unofficial, First Triumvirate with Julius Caesar and Marcus Licinius Crassus.

The family of the elder Balbus came from a Roman senatorial family of plebs status from Aricia (modern Ariccia, Italy). "Balbus" in Latin means stammer.

'''Career'''

During the consulship of Julius Caesar in 59 BC, Balbus was appointed along with Pompey to a board of commissioners under a Julian Law to divide estates in Campania among the commoners. Cicero stated that Pompey would say as a joke about Balbus, that he was not a person of any importance.

'''Personal life'''

He married Julia Minor, second eldest sister of the dictator Gaius Julius Caesar. Julia bore him three daughters and they were:

* Atia Balba Prima was the mother of Quintus Pedius who served as a general and consul.
* Atia Balba Caesonia became the mother of Octavia Minor, who was the fourth wife of triumvir Mark Antony, and of the first Emperor Augustus.
* Atia Balba Tertia was the mother of Lucius Pinarius, a political supporter of Mark Antony.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Atius

d. 52/1 BC

Name Suffix:<NSFX> Praetor Of Rome

Name Suffix:<NSFX> Praetor Of Rome

Marcus Atius
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.
Jump to: navigation, search
Marcus Atius Balbus (105 - 51BC) was the son and heir of an elder Balbus (148 - 87 BC) and Pompeia Strabo. Strabo was sister to Gnaeus Pompeius Strabo, father of Pompey the Great.

The family of the elder Balbus came from a senatorial family from Aricia (modern Ariccia, Italy). In villas, relatives would display masks in memory of their ancestors.

Balbus married Julia Caesaris, sister of Julius Caesar. They had 3 daughters Atia Balba Prima, Atia Balba Caesonia (mother of Caesar Augustus) and Atia Balba Tertia.

Balbus served as a praetor and under Caesar was appointed as a commissioner under Julian Law, to divide the estates in Campania among the commoners.


wtf 4:565 Marcus Atius Balbus

[4633] or M. Atius Balbus

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]