== Notes for [[Item:Q87935|Q87935]] ==

ID: I62195

Name: Bernike of Egypt

Given Name: Bernike

Surname: of Egypt

Sex: F

_UID: 39EA11F90AE7EE418A03382ACDD7830E7127

Change Date: 26 Nov 2005

Death: Y

Marriage 1 Ptolemy III Eueregetes of Egypt

Married:

Children

Ptolemy IV Philopator of Egypt

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I62195

--------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berenice_II_of_Egypt

--------------------

ID: I62199

Name: Berenice Phernophorus of Egypt

Prefix: Princess

Given Name: Berenice Phernophorus

Surname: of Egypt

Sex: F

_UID: 6F1188EFCF2F0C49802EFD9751B41C923F91

Change Date: 26 Nov 2005

Death: Y

Father: Ptolemy II Philadelphus of Egypt

Mother: Arsinoe I of Thrace

Marriage 1 Antiochus II of Syria b: ABT 287 BC

Married:

Children

Seleucus II of Syria b: ABT 265 BC

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I62199

--------------------

Berenice Syra, Queen Consort of the Seleucids married Antiochus II Theos, King of the Seleucids, circa 261 BC.
--------------------
Berenice II Reina de Libia
--------------------
'''
=Berenice II of Egypt=
'''

Berenice II (267 or 266 BC-221 BC) was the daughter of Magas of Cyrene and Queen Apama II, and the wife of Ptolemy III Euergetes, the third ruler of the Ptolemaic dynasty of Egypt.

In about 249 BC, she was married to Demetrius the Fair, a Macedonian prince, soon after her father died. However, after coming to Cyrene he became the lover of her mother Apama. In a dramatic event, she had him killed in Apama's bedroom, but Apama lived on afterwards. She had no children with Demetrius.

Afterwards she married Ptolemy III. Their children were: Ptolemy IV Philopator, Magas, Lysimachus, Alexander, Arsinoe III and Berenice.

Berenice is said to have participated in the Nemean Games (between 245 and 241 BC) and to have competed in Olympic games at some unknown date.

Soon after her husband's death (221 BC) she was murdered at the instigation of her son Ptolemy IV, with whom she was probably associated in the government.

Nevertheless, a decree “issued delineating the cult for the newly deified queen Berenike II…specified that men and women singers were to sing all day in front of the statue of Berenike.”

'''Myths'''

During her husband's absence on an expedition to Syria, she dedicated her hair to Aphrodite for his safe return, and placed it in the temple of the goddess at Zephyrium. The hair having by some unknown means disappeared, Conon of Samos explained the phenomenon in courtly phrase, by saying that it had been carried to the heavens and placed among the stars. The name Coma Berenices or Berenice's hair, applied to a constellation, commemorates this incident. Callimachus celebrated the transformation in a poem, of which only a few lines remain, but there is a fine translation of it by Catullus.

The city of Euesperides was refounded by her and received her name, Berenice (near the location of Benghazi). The asteroid 653 Berenike, discovered in 1907, is also named after Queen Berenice.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berenice_II_of_Egypt

Berenice II (b. c. 269--d. 221 BC), daughter of Magas, king of Cyrene(in modern Libya), whose marriage to Ptolemy III Euergetes reunited her country with Egypt.
Magas' queen, who favoured an alliance with the Seleucid dynasty of Syria, tried to thwart the marriage by summoning Demetrius the Fair, a Macedonian prince, as a husband for Berenice. The princess, however, arranged Demetrius' murder and married Ptolemy about 245. When Ptolemy set forth to avenge the murder of his sister (the widow of Antiochus II) in Syria, Berenice dedicated a lock of her hair for his safe return. According to the court astronomer, it was transferred to heaven, where it formed a new constellation that was consequently named Coma Berenices, "Hair of Berenice." Berenice and Ptolemy had four children: the future Ptolemy IV Philopator, Arsinoe III, Magas, and Berenice, whodied as a child. The queen survived her husband, but her son Ptolemy IV linked her to a plot with her father, Magas, and had her poisoned.

Berenice II (b. c. 269--d. 221 BC), daughter of Magas, king of Cyrene(in modern Libya), whose marriage to Ptolemy III Euergetes reunited her country with Egypt.
Magas' queen, who favoured an alliance with the Seleucid dynasty of Syria, tried to thwart the marriage by summoning Demetrius the Fair, a Macedonian prince, as a husband for Berenice. The princess, however, arranged Demetrius' murder and married Ptolemy about 245. When Ptolemy set forth to avenge the murder of his sister (the widow of Antiochus II) in Syria, Berenice dedicated a lock of her hair for his safe return. According to the court astronomer, it was transferred to heaven, where it formed a new constellation that was consequently named Coma Berenices, "Hair of Berenice." Berenice and Ptolemy had four children: the future Ptolemy IV Philopator, Arsinoe III, Magas, and Berenice, whodied as a child. The queen survived her husband, but her son Ptolemy IV linked her to a plot with her father, Magas, and had her poisoned.

Berenice II (b. c. 269--d. 221 BC), daughter of Magas, king of Cyrene(in modern Libya), whose marriage to Ptolemy III Euergetes reunited her country with Egypt.
Magas' queen, who favoured an alliance with the Seleucid dynasty of Syria, tried to thwart the marriage by summoning Demetrius the Fair, a Macedonian prince, as a husband for Berenice. The princess, however, arranged Demetrius' murder and married Ptolemy about 245. When Ptolemy set forth to avenge the murder of his sister (the widow of Antiochus II) in Syria, Berenice dedicated a lock of her hair for his safe return. According to the court astronomer, it was transferred to heaven, where it formed a new constellation that was consequently named Coma Berenices, "Hair of Berenice." Berenice and Ptolemy had four children: the future Ptolemy IV Philopator, Arsinoe III, Magas, and Berenice, whodied as a child. The queen survived her husband, but her son Ptolemy IV linked her to a plot with her father, Magas, and had her poisoned.

Berenice II
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Berenice II (267 or 266 BC - 221 BC), was the daughter of Magas of Cyrene and Queen Apama, and the wife of Ptolemy III Euergetes I, the third ruler of the Ptolemaic dynasty of Egypt.

In about 249 BC, she was married to Demetrius the Fair, a Macedonian prince, soon after her father died. However after coming to Cyrene he became the lover of her mother Apama. In a dramatic event, She had him killed in Apamsa's bedroom, but Apama lived on afterwards. This happened around 255 or 250 BC. She had no children with Demetrius.

Afterwards she married Ptolemy III. They had at least 4 children: Ptolemy IV, Magas, Arsinoe III and Berenice. She was murdered by Ptolemy IV in 221, soon after he became pharaoh.

During her husband's absence on an expedition to Syria, she dedicated her hair to Venus for his safe return, and placed it in the temple of the goddess at Zephyrium. The hair having by some unknown means disappeared, Conon of Samos, explained the phenomenon in courtly phrase, by saying that it had been carried to the heavens and placed among the stars.

The name Coma Berenices or Berenice's hair, applied to a constellation, commemorates this incident. Callimachus celebrated the transformation in a poem, of which only a few lines remain, but there is a fine translation of it by Catullus. Soon after her husband's death (221 BC) she was murdered at the instigation of her son Ptolemy IV, with whom she was probably associated in the government.

The predecessor of the modern city Benghazi was refounded by her and received her name: Berenice.
[edit]

References

* This article incorporates text from the Encyclopædia Britannica Eleventh Edition, a publication now in the public domain.

Berenice II lived at around 273 B.C.E. and died at approximately 245 B.C.E. She participated in battles and killed several of her enemies. She also raised an army in rebellion against the man that she was betrothed to because she found him repellent.
[edit]

References

* Salmonson, Jessica Amanda.(1991) The Encyclopedia of Amazons. Paragon House. Page 33. ISBN 1-55778-420-5
* The House of Ptolemy, Ch. 3
* Berenice II

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]