== Notes for [[Item:Q83366|Q83366]] ==

Original name '''Hakam ibn Wa'il'''. Also known as '''al-Hakam ibn Abi al-'As'''.

Source 1: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Al-Hakam_ibn_Abi_al-%27As
--------------------
Al-Hakam ibn Abi al-`As ibn Umayyah (Arabic: الحكم بن أبي العاص‎ / ALA-LC: al-Ḥakam bin Abī al-‘As) was the father of the Umayyad Caliph Marwan I, and an uncle of Uthman. He is regarded as a Sahabi by Sunnis.

Hakam was the grandson of Umayya ibn Abd Shams, for whom the Umayyad clan is named. His father was Abu al-'As ibn Umayya. His brother was Affan ibn Abi al-'As the father of Uthman, the third Sunni Caliph, and his son Marwan ibn al-Hakam was the eighth Sunni Caliph.

Saffya bint abi al-A'as, al-Hakam's sister, is the aunt of Uthman ibn Affan, the wife of Abu Sufyan, and the mother of Ramlah bint Abi-Sufyan, a wife of Muhammad. He also had brother named Uthman ibn Abi al-'As.

Wikipédia : Al-Hakam ben Abî al-`Âs ben Umayya ou Al-Hakam ben Wa`il (arabe : &#1575;&#1604;&#1581;&#1603;&#1605; &#1576;&#1606; &#1571;&#1576;&#1610; &#1575;&#1604;&#1593;&#1575;&#1589; &#1576;&#1606; &#1575;&#1605;&#1610;&#1577;). Son père s'appelait Abû al-`Âs Wa'il d'où les deux noms sous lesquels on peut le trouver. <li>Il était un petit fils de l'éponyme de la dynastie omeyyade. <li>Il était le père du quatrième calife omeyyade de Damas et huitième calife Marwân Ier. <li>Il était un cousin germain de Abû Sufyân ibn Harb père du premier calife omeyyade Mu`âwîya Ier. <li>Il était l'un des oncles du troisième calife `Uthman.

Father of Uthman ibn Affan

Hakam ibn Wa'il
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Hakam ibn Wa'il [1] is also known as "Hakam Ibn Abi al-As Ibn Umayya" or "al-Hakam ibn Abi al-`As".[2] was a uncle of Uthman.

He is regarded as a Sahaba by Sunnis [1]

When his nephew Uthman ibn Affan converted to Islam, Hakam bound and beat him.

His son was Marwan ibn al-Hakam. Both Hakam and his son where sent to exile from Medina to Ta'if by Muhammad, saying they should never return. Uthman recalled Marwan or both of them when he became Caliph.[2]

[edit] Family tree

Hakam was the grandson of Umayya ibn Abd Shams, the for whom the Umayyad clan is named. His father was Wa'il ibn Umayya, also known as Abu al-As. His uncle was Affan ibn Wa'il the father of Uthman, the third Sunni Caliph, and his son Marwan ibn al-Hakam was the eight Sunni Caliph.

[edit] References

1. ^ http://www.abc.se/~m9783/n/shb_e.html
2. ^ http://www.dartabligh.org/books/ebooks/Role_vol1/page139.asp

[edit] External links

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]