== Notes for [[Item:Q86248|Q86248]] ==

=Pompeia Magna=

Pompeia Magna (born 80/75 BC - before 35 BC) was the only daughter and second child born to Roman triumvir Pompey the Great (Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus) from his third marriage, to Mucia Tertia. Her elder brother was Gnaeus Pompeius and her younger brother was Sextus Pompey.

Pompeia was born and raised in Rome. In 59 BC, her father Pompey married for a fourth time, to Julia Caesaris, the daughter of Julius Caesar. After their marriage, Pompeia was betrothed to Quintus Servilius Caepio, but she instead married Faustus Cornelius Sulla, a politician who was the son of Roman dictator Lucius Cornelius Sulla from his wife Caecilia Metella. Around 47 BC, Faustus died in the African War against Julius Caesar. Their two sons fell into the hands of Julius Caesar, however Caesar dismissed them as a danger and pardoned them.

After 46 BC, Pompeia married for a second time to politician Lucius Cornelius Cinna, who was brother of Julius Caesar’s first wife Cornelia, and thus the maternal uncle of Julia Caesaris, Pompeia's step-mother.

For a time Pompeia accompanied her younger brother Sextus Pompey to Sicily. It was in Sicily that Pompeia made various presents for the young future emperor, Tiberius, who had fled with his parents there from Octavian. Pompeia gave Tiberius such presents as a cloak, a brooch, and some gold plaques. The historian Suetonius states that these presents were preserved and were exhibited in Baiae in his time. Sextus Pompey survived Pompeia when she died, sometime before 35 BC.

Children[edit]
First marriage to Faustus Cornelius Sulla, a politician who was the son of Roman dictator Lucius Cornelius Sulla from his wife Caecilia Metella. Children: Faustus Cornelius Sulla (suffect consul)
Cornelia Sulla who married Lucius Scribonius Libo, a praetor in 80 BC.

Second marriage to politician Lucius Cornelius Cinna, which was the former brother-in-law of Julius Caesar. Pompeia’s children with Cinna were: Gnaeus Cornelius Cinna Magnus Cornelia Pompeia Magna who married Lucius Scribonius Libo, consul of 16

Sources[edit] Suetonius - The Lives of the Twelve Caesars - Tiberius Microsoft Encarta Encyclopaedia 2002 http://www.ancientlibrary.com/smith-bio/0764.html http://www.ancientlibrary.com/smith-bio/0763.html http://www.ancientlibrary.com/smith-bio/2806.html

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pompeia_Magna

---------------------------------------------------------

ID: I46326

Name: Pompeia Minor Pompeius

Given Name: Pompeia Minor

Surname: Pompeius

Sex: F

_UID: 103840CC36D0074CA3239024BB60B9A19CCE

Change Date: 3 Oct 2005

Death: deceased

Father: Geaus Pompeius b: 106 BC

Mother: Mucia Tertia

Marriage 1 Lucius Cinna

Children

Cornelia Cinna

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I46326
--------------------
'''
=Pompeia Magna=
'''

Pompeia Magna (born 80/75-before 35 BC) was the only daughter and second child born to Roman triumvir Pompey the Great (Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus) from his third marriage, to Mucia Tertia. Her elder brother was Gnaeus Pompeius and her younger brother was Sextus Pompey.

'''Biography'''

Pompeia was born and raised in Rome. In 59 BC, her father Pompey married for a fourth time, to Julia Caesaris, the daughter of Julius Caesar. After their marriage, Pompeia was betrothed to Quintus Servilius Caepio, but she instead married Faustus Cornelius Sulla, a politician who was the son of Roman dictator Lucius Cornelius Sulla from his wife Caecilia Metella. Around 47 BC, Faustus died in the African War against Julius Caesar. Their two sons fell into the hands of Julius Caesar, however Caesar dismissed them as a danger and pardoned them.

After 46 BC, Pompeia married for a second time to politician Lucius Cornelius Cinna, who was brother of Julius Caesar’s first wife Cornelia, and thus the maternal uncle of Julia Caesaris, Pompeia's step-mother.

For a time Pompeia accompanied her younger brother Sextus Pompey to Sicily. It was in Sicily that Pompeia made various presents for the young future emperor, Tiberius, who had fled with his parents there from Octavian. Pompeia gave Tiberius such presents as a cloak, a brooch, and some gold plaques. The historian Suetonius states that these presents were preserved and were exhibited in Baiae in his time. Sextus Pompey survived Pompeia when she died, sometime before 35 BC.

'''Children'''

* First marriage to Faustus Cornelius Sulla, a politician who was the son of Roman dictator Lucius Cornelius Sulla from his wife Caecilia Metella. Children: 1. Faustus Cornelius Sulla (suffect consul) & 2. Cornelia Sulla (who married Lucius Scribonius Libo, a praetor in 80 BC)
* Second marriage to politician Lucius Cornelius Cinna, which was the former brother-in-law of Julius Caesar. Pompeia’s children with Cinna were: 1. Gnaeus Cornelius Cinna Magnus & 2, Cornelia Pompeia Magna (who married Lucius Scribonius Libo, consul of 16)

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pompeia_Magna

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]