== Notes for [[Item:Q87102|Q87102]] ==

''Parents unknown, but he was a relative of Scipio Africanus, the Roman general who defeated Hannibal according to Cassius Dio.''

Publius Cornelius Scipio Salvito

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Publius Cornelius Scipio ‘Salvito’ (the cognomen Salvito is a nickname for ’Greetings’[citation needed]) was a consul who lived in the late Roman Republic.[citation needed] He was a member of the Cornelia gens and a relative of Scipio Africanus, the Roman general who defeated Hannibal.

Salvito married Pompey’s great-granddaughter Scribonia as her second husband.[citation needed] Through this marriage he became a relative of Pompey and an ally of his. Scribonia borne him children, including a son Cornelius Scipio and a daughter Cornelia Scipio who married Lucius Aemilius Paullus (who served as a censor).

Caesar replaced him with Tiberius Nero for the priesthood, because of Tiberius’ success in the Alexandrian War. Scipio never supported Julius Caesar, but was always in favour of Pompey. According to Suetonius, his character towards Caesar was ‘contemptible’.

During the Civil War between Pompey and Caesar, Salvito traveled to North Africa to assist another of Pompey’s allies, King Juba I of Numidia. There was a prophecy that Caecilius Metellus, Salvito's father, would become victorious over Caesar in Africa, however Caesar mocked this.

After the murder of Pompey in Egypt 48 BC, the civil war had reached its turning point. Caesar and his legions had begun to attack his remaining allies. In Thapsus (North Africa), King Juba and Scipio and their legions were defeated by Caesar and his legions. For this victory, Caesar received a military triumph in Rome.

After the defeat, King Juba committed suicide and Numidia in 46 BC became the Roman province of Africa Nova. Salvito was pardoned and he and his family returned to Rome. In 41/40 BC he was forced to divorce his wife Scribona in order so that her uncle Sextus Pompeius could make an alliance with the Julian family. Scribonia married Octavian (later Emperor Augustus) with whom she had a daughter, Julia the Elder. He later divorced her to marry Livia Drusilla. Salvito never remarried, he later became consul in 35 BC[citation needed] and died soon afterwards

Forrás / Source:

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Publius_Cornelius_Scipio_Salvito

See also / Lásd még:

http://www.thepedia.com/define/Publius_Cornelius_Scipio_Salvito

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]