== Notes for [[Item:Q88101|Q88101]] ==

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mithridates_I_of_Pontus

Mithridates I Ctistes (in Greek Mιθριδάτης Kτίστης; reigned 281–266 BCE), also known as Mithridates III of Cius, was a Persian nobleman and the founder (this is the meaning of the word Ctistes, literally Builder) of the Kingdom of Pontus in Anatolia.

Mithridates is said to have been of the same age as Demetrios Poliorketes, which means he was born in the mid-330s BCE. In 302 or 301 BC, shortly after having executed the young man's father and predecessor Mithridates II of Cius, the diadoch Antigonus became suspicious of the son who had inherited the family dominion of Cius, and planned to kill the boy. Mithridates, however, received from Demetrius Poliorketes timely notice of Antigonus's intentions, and fled with a few followers to Paphlagonia, where he occupied a strong fortress, called Cimiata. He was joined by numerous bodies of troops from different quarters and gradually extended his dominions in Pontus and created the foundations for the birth of a new kingdom, which may be judged to have risen about 281 BCE when Mithridates assumed the title of basileus (king). In the same year, we find him concluding an alliance with the town of Heraclea Pontica in Bithynia, to protect it against Seleucus[5]. At a subsequent period, Mithridates is found acquiring support from the Gauls (who later settled in Asia Minor) in order to overthrow a force sent against him by Ptolemy, king of Egypt.[6] These are the recorded events of his reign, which lasted for thirty-six years. He was succeeded by his son Ariobarzanes. He seems to have been buried in a royal grave near the kingdom's capital, Amasia. Next to him would be buried all the kings of Pontus until the fall of Sinope in 183 BCE.

According to Appian, he was eighth in descent from the first satrap of Pontus under Darius the Great and sixth in ascending order from Mithridates Eupator. However, this point is controversial since Plutarch[9] writes that eight generations of kings of Pontus stemmed from him before Roman subjection.

Pontus
In ancient times, Pontus was the name of the north-eastern province ofAsia Minor, a long and narrow strip of land on the southern coast of theBlack Sea (Pontus Euxinus), from which the designation was latertransferred to the country. Before this the province was calledCappadocia on the Pontus. The country was shut in by high and wildmountain ranges, but was exceedingly fertile in the lower parts on thecoast, in the interior, and on the plateaux. It yielded fruit of allkinds, especially cherries, which Lucullus is said to have brought intoEurope from Pontus 72 B. C.; also wine, grain, wood, honey, wax, etc.,besides iron, steel, and salt. It was inhabited by a number of pettytribes; among these were the Chalybes or Chaldæans, held in high reputeby the Greeks as the first smiths. All belonged to the Persian empire,but in Xenophon's day (about 400 B. C.) were to a considerable degreeindependent of the Persians. At this date, however, these differentcountries had no common name. Greeks settled early on the coast, andfounded flourishing commercial cities, as Trapezus (Trebizond), Cerasus,Side, later called Polemonium, Cotyora, Amisus, and Apsarus. The founderof the Kingdom of Pontus was Mithradates I, son of Prince Mithradates ofCius on the Propontis, who was murdered 302 B. C. Mithradates I, takingadvantage of the confusion caused by the Diadochian Wars, came to Pontuswith only six horsemen and was able to assume the title of king 296 B.C.; he died in 266 after a reign of thirty-six years. He was followed byAriobarzanes (died about 258 B. C.), Mithradates II (to about 210 B. C.),Mithradates III (to about 190 B. C.), Pharnaces (to 170 B. C.),Mithradates IV (to about 150 B. C.), Mithradates V (to 121 B. C.), andthen Mithradates VI Eupator, or the Great. The kings, Persian by descent,formed relations early with Greece and from the beginning Hellenisticculture found an entrance into Pontus. The religion was a mixture ofGreek worships with the old native cults. From the time of Pharnaces thekings were allied with the Romans. Mithradates VI became involved inthree wars with the Romans (88-84, 83-81, 74-64), and finally hiskingdom, which he had increased by the conquest of Colchis, the Crimea,Paphlagonia, and Cappadocia, was lost to the Romans (63). The territorywest of the River Halys, the coast of Paphlagonia, and the valley of theAmnias became a part of Roman territory and with Bithynia were unitedinto the double Province of Bithynia and Pontus. The other parts weremade into principalities and free cities, and it was not until 7 B.C., AD. 18, and A.D. 63 that they were gradually absorbed by Rome. UnderDiocletian (284-305) Pontus became a diocese of the empire. The Pontusmentioned in the Old Testament of the Vulgate in Gen., xiv, 1, 9, is amistaken translation, according to Symmachus, for the district of Ellasar(Larsa in southern Babylonia).

In Apostolic times Christianity found an entrance into Pontus. The FirstEpistle of Peter is addressed to the Christians in Pontus among others,showing that Christianity had spread to some extent in this province. Theauthor in his exhortations presupposes relations between the faithful andthe non-Christian population. For the years 111-13 we have the importanttestimony of Pliny, then Governor of Bithynia and Pontus (Ep. xcvi).Pliny did not mention the cities or villages, and it is uncertain whetherAmastris, or Amasia, or Comana, was the place where Christians were triedby him. As concerns Amisus, Ramsay has proved from Christian sources thatit contained Christians about the year 100. Later Amastris was the chiefChristian community. Eusebius mentions (IV, xxiii) a letter written byBishop Dionysius of Corinth (about 170) to Amastris, "and the otherchurches in Pontus". There was, therefore, at this era a metropolitanwith several churches. About 240 Gregory Thaumaturgus was consecratedBishop of Neo-Cæsarea by Phædimus, Bishop of Amasia. It is said that atthat time there were only seventeen Christians in the city and itsvicinity, and that at his death, shortly before 270, only the same numberof heathens could be found in the city. The able bishop converted thepeople by opposing Christian to heathen miracles and by changing the oldfeasts into Christian festivals. In the Decian persecution he madeconcessions to human weakness, advised the faithful to be lessaggressive, and fled himself. Comana received a bishop from Gregory.Christianity obtained a foothold also in the Greek cities of the coast ofeastern Pontus before 325. In or about the year 315 a great synod washeld at Neo-Cæsarea by Bishop Longinus. At the Council of Nicæa therewere present among others the Bishops of Amastris, Pompejopolis,Jonopolis, Amasia, Comana, Zela, Trebizond, and Pityus. Towards the endof the fourth century Neo-Cæsarea became itself a Church-province, havingas suffragans Trebizond, Cerasus, Polemonium, Comana, Rhizæum, and Pityus.

MEYER, Gesch. d. Konigreiches Pontos (Leipzig, 1879); KLEFFNER, D.Briefwechsel zwischen Plinius u. Trajan (Paderborn, 1907);PAPAMICHALOPULOS, Periegesis eis ton Ponton (Athens, 1903); LE QUIEN,Oriens christianus, I (Paris, 1740), 499-520; RAMSAY, The Church in theRoman Empire (London, 1893), 211, 235; HARNACK, Die Mission u.Ausbreitung d. Christentums in den ersten drei Jahrhunderten, II (2nded., Leipzig, 1906), 73, 157-8, 172-7.

KLEMENS LÖFFLER.
Transcribed by Douglas J. Potter
Dedicated to the Immaculate Heart of the Blessed Virgin Mary

The Catholic Encyclopedia, Volume XII
Copyright © 1908 by Robert Appleton Company
------------------
Pontus


Pontus was an ancient country in north-east Asia Minor (present dayTurkey). It was between Cappadocia in the south and the Black Sea to thenorth.. A Persian family taken over Pontus after the breakup ofAlexander's empire. Mithradates I of that family called himself King ofPontus in 281 BCE. Pontus expanded when Pharnaces I annexed Sinope andMithradates V gained Phrygia in a deal with the Romans. Pontus gainedprominence under its ruler Mithradates VI the Great. He conquered AsiaMinor, Crimea and threatened Roman rule in Greece. Pompey defeated him in65 BCE. Pharnaces II became the king in 63 BCE. Julius Caesar removedPharnaces II in 47 BCE ending the independent Pontic Kingdom. Pontus wasincorporated into the province of Galatia-Cappadocia.

Kings / Rulers of Pontus

Mithradates of Cius 337-302 BCE

Mithradates I 302-266 BCE

Ariobarzanes 266-255 BCE

Mithradates II 255-220 BCE

Mithradates III 220-185 BCE

Pharnaces I 185-170 BCE

Mithradates IV 170-150 BCE

Mithradates V Euergetes 150-121 BCE

Mithradates VI Eupater 121-63 BCE

Pharnaces II 63-47 BCE

Konge av Cius i Pontos.

RESEARCH NOTES:
King/Regent of Pontos; A-P gives Ariobarzanes of Persia as dad of Mithridates
(II?) of Pontus. I'm assigning his as mother. It's unclear which is father.
Ariobarzanes may be father's brother or merely an ally.

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Cius in Pontos; father of Mithridates Ctistes??

SOURCE NOTES:
FW10

He was King of Cius in Pontus.

He was King of Cius in Pontus.

SOURCE NOTES:
FW12; http://www.gbnf.com/genealogy/sahlin/html/d0002/I2247.HTM

KING OF PARTHIA ca. 171-138/7 BC

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per01134.htm#0

Konge av Pontos i Lilleasia.

parthia.com : Fifth king of Parthia, and the king who established Parthia as an ancient world power. He was the brother of Phraates I, and the son of Phriapatius. He was the father of Phraates II.
We do not know the exact date of his accession, but he is mentioned by Justin [XLI.6] as a contemporary of Bactria's Eucratides and Antiochus IV Epiphanes. Antiochus IV campaigned in Iran to return the territories lost by Arsaces II.
Mithradates I may have campaigned into Tapuria and Traxiana shortly after succeeding to the throne. The death of Antiochus IV in 164 B.C. would certainly have reduced pressure on Parthia from the west. From 161 - 155 B.C. Mithradates waged a long war with Media, the success of which was long unsure. The best account appears to be that Timarkhos, Seleucid satrap of Media lost some territory in the area of Rhagae and farther east, to Mithradates I, while the Seleucid reconquest did not recover this land but did recapture Ecbatana. According to Justin,1 Mithradates I had to fight many times in Media and Frye2 believes it conceivable that the Seleucids held only the city and the lowlands to the west of Ecbatana at the time the relief at Herakles was carved, approximately 148 B.C.
The acquisition of Media opened the door to Mesopotamia for Parthian expansion into that fertile territory.3 Mithradates entered the royal city of Seleucia and was recognized as King on or before July 8, 141 B.C. Before October 141 B.C., Mithradates sovereignty was acknowledged as far south as Uruk. But by December, incursions of the Sakae into Hyrcania forced him away to the east. Mithradates turned over military command to a Parthian commander and the remainder of his reign was occupied with campaigns in southern and central Parthia.4 Mithradates was no sooner gone than Demetrius returned to the attack, joined by Elymais and Persis (and perhaps Bactrian troops), but Demetrius was soon captured and sent to Mithradates in Hyrcania. He was well treated, however, and given Rhodogune, Mithradates' daughter, in marriage. As punishment for joining Demetrius against the Parthians, Elymais was looted, where the temples of Artemis and Athena yielded "ten thousand talents."5 Since the Parthians were established at Susa shortly after the death of Mithradates, that territory was probably added to the empire by him.6 At his death, the Parthian empire included Parthia proper, Hyrcania, Media, Babylonia, Assyria, Elymais, Persis (?), and the districts of Tapuria and Traxiana.
Scholars originally accepted Mithradates I died peacefully in 138/137 B.C., a date fixed by the date of his final tetradrachm (S13.5, dated 174 Seleucid era), and cuneiform evidence, but recent works by Dabrowa8 and others suggest the end of Mithradates I's reign was in 132 B.C.
With the name Mithradates, we may safely assume that worship of the god Mithra was officially sanctioned in Parthia.7

He reigned 171-138 BC.

PRINCE OF CIUS 302-266 BC; KING OF PONTUS 296-266 BC

KING OF PARTHIA 176-171 BC

PRINCE OF CIUS/CIOS; d. 363 BC

He ruled from 337 to 301 b.c.

He ruled from 337 to 301 b.c.

Mithradates I, also called ARSACES VI (fl. 2nd century BC), king of Parthia (reigned 171-138 BC); he succeeded his brother Phraates I.
Before 160 Mithradates I seized Media from the Seleucid ruler Timarchus. Turning to the east, he won two provinces, Tapuria and Traxiana, from the Bactrian king Eucratides. Mithradates then captured the province of Elymais (ancient Elam) and invaded Babylonia (142 or 141). The Seleucid king Demetrius II Nicator recaptured Babylon (141 or 140) but was defeated and held by Mithradates in honourable captivity. Generally, Mithradates was regarded as a mild ruler, and his epithet Philhellene ("Greek-loving") indicates that he tried to conciliate his Greek subjects.

Mithradates I, also called ARSACES VI (fl. 2nd century BC), king of Parthia (reigned 171-138 BC); he succeeded his brother Phraates I.
Before 160 Mithradates I seized Media from the Seleucid ruler Timarchus. Turning to the east, he won two provinces, Tapuria and Traxiana, from the Bactrian king Eucratides. Mithradates then captured the province of Elymais (ancient Elam) and invaded Babylonia (142 or 141). The Seleucid king Demetrius II Nicator recaptured Babylon (141 or 140) but was defeated and held by Mithradates in honourable captivity. Generally, Mithradates was regarded as a mild ruler, and his epithet Philhellene ("Greek-loving") indicates that he tried to conciliate his Greek subjects.

Mithradates I, also called ARSACES VI (fl. 2nd century BC), king of Parthia (reigned 171-138 BC); he succeeded his brother Phraates I.
Before 160 Mithradates I seized Media from the Seleucid ruler Timarchus. Turning to the east, he won two provinces, Tapuria and Traxiana, from the Bactrian king Eucratides. Mithradates then captured the province of Elymais (ancient Elam) and invaded Babylonia (142 or 141). The Seleucid king Demetrius II Nicator recaptured Babylon (141 or 140) but was defeated and held by Mithradates in honourable captivity. Generally, Mithradates was regarded as a mild ruler, and his epithet Philhellene ("Greek-loving") indicates that he tried to conciliate his Greek subjects.

Mithridates I of Pontus
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Mithridates I Ctistes (in Greek M????d?t?? ?' Kt?st??; reigned 302 BC - 266 BC) was the founder (this is the meaning of the word Ctistes) of the kingdom of Pontus in Anatolia.

In 302 or 301 BC, shortly after having executed his father Mithridates of Cius, the diadoch Antigonus became suspicious of the son who had inherited the family dominion of Cius. Antigonus was motivated to form a plan oriented on killing the boy. Mithridates Ktistes, however, received from Demetrius Poliorcetes timely notice of his father's intentions, and fled with a few followers to Paphlagonia, where he occupied a strong fortress, called Cimiata. He was joined by numerous bodies of troops from different quarters and gradually extended his dominions in Pontus and created the foundations for the birth of a new kingdom, which may be judged to have risen about 281 BC when Mithridates assumed the title of basileus (king).1 In the same year, we find him concluding an alliance with the town of Heraclea Pontica, in Bithynia, to protect them against Seleucus2. At a subsequent period, Mithridates is found acquiring support from the Gauls (who later settled in Asia Minor) in order to overthrow a force sent against him by Ptolemy, king of Egypt.3 These are the recorded events of his reign, which lasted for thirty-six years.4 He was succeeded by his son Ariobarzanes. He seems to have been buried in a royal grave near the kingdom's capital, Amasia. Next to him will be buried all the kings of Pontus until the fall of Sinope in 183 BC.

According to Appian,5 he was eighth in descent from the first satrap of Pontus under Darius the Great and sixth in ascending order from Mithridates Eupator. However, this point is controversial since Plutarch6 writes that eight generations of kings of Pontus stemmed from him before Roman subjection.
Preceded by:
Mithridates II of Cius King of Pontus
302 BC – 266 BC Succeeded by:
Ariobarzanes
[edit]

References

* Appian, The foreign wars, Horace White (translator), New York, (1899)
* Hazel, John; Who's Who in the Greek World, "Mithridates I" (1999)
* Memnon, History of Heracleia, Andrew Smith (translator), (2004)
* Plutarch, Parallel Lives, "Demetrius", John & William Langhorne (translator), (1770)
* Smith, William (editor); Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology, "Mithridates III", Boston, (1867)
* Strabo, Geography, H. C. Hamilton & W. Falconer (translators), London, (1903)

[edit]

Notes
1 Appian, The Foreign Wars, "The Mithridatic Wars", 9; Strabo, Geography, xii. 3; Plutarch, Lives, "Demetrius", 4
2 Memnon, History of Heraclea, 7
3 Stephanus, Ethnica, s. v. Ancyra
4 Diodorus Siculus, Histoire Universelle, xx. 111, pag. 457
5 Appian, 112
6 Plutarch, 4

This article incorporates text from the public domain Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology by William Smith (1867).

Mithridates I of Cius
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Mithridates (in Greek M????d?t??; lived 4th century BC), son of Ariobarzanes prince of Cius, is mentioned by Xenophon1 as having betrayed his father, and the same circumstance is alluded to by Aristotle2. It is possible that he is the same Mithridates who accom­panied the younger Cyrus, but there is no proof of this; also, he may be the same with the Mithridates mentioned by Xenophon3 as satrap of Cappadocia and Lycaonia. It appears that he was dead before 363 BC, when Ariobarzanes II made himself master of the family fiefdom of Cius in Mysia.4
[edit]

References

* Aristotle, Politics, H. Rackham (translator), Cambridge, MA - London, (1944)
* Diodorus Siculus, Bibliotheca, C. H. Oldfather (translator), Cambridge, MA - London, (1989)
* Smith, William (editor); Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology, "Mithridates I", Boston, (1867)
* Xenophon, Cyropaedia, Cambridge, MA - London, (1979-83)
* Xenophon, Anabasis, Cambridge, MA - London, (1980)

[edit]

Notes
1 Xenophon, Cyropaedia, viii. 8. 4
2 Aristotle, v. 10
3 Xenophon, Anabasis, vii. 8. 25
4 Diodorus, xv. 90

Mithridates II of Cius
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Mithridates of Cius (in Greek M????d?t?? or M???ad?t??; lived c. 386–302 BC, ruled 337–302 BC) succeeded his father Ariobarzanes II in 337 BC as ruler of the Greek town of Cius in Mysia (today part of Turkey).

Diodorus assigns him a rule of thirty-five years, but it appears that he did not hold uninterrupted possession of the sovereignty during that period1. What circumstances led to his expulsion or subjection we know not; nothing is heard of him till his death in 302, but it appears that he had submitted to the Macedonian Antigonus, who now, to prevent him from joining the league of Cassander and his confederates, procured his assassination in Cius.2 According to Lucian3, he was not less than eighty-four years of age at the time of his death, which renders it not improbable that he is the same as the Mithridates, son of Ariobarzanes, who in his youth circumvented and put to death Datames.
[edit]

References

* Appian, The foreign wars, Horace White (translator), New York, (1899)
* Diodorus Siculus, Bibliotheca, C. H. Oldfather (translator), Cambridge - London, (1989)
* Højte, Jacob Munte; The Date of the Alliance between Chersonesos and Pharnakes and its implications
* Smith, William (editor); Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology, "Mithridates II", Boston, (1867)

[edit]

Notes
1 Diodorus, xvi. 90
2 Appian, "Mithridatic Wars", 9; Diodorus, xx. 111, pag. 456
3 Lucian, Macrobioi, 13

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]