== Notes for [[Item:Q82817|Q82817]] ==

Utbah ibn Rabīʿah prominent leader of the Quraish tribe

ʿUtba b. Rabīʿa b. ʿabd s̲h̲ams b. ʿabd manāf, abu ’l-walīd, one of the chiefs of the Meccan tribe of Ḳurays̲h̲, who refused to follow Muḥammad. He met his death in the battle of Badr. His daughter Hind [q.v.] was the wife of Abū Sufyān [q.v.], and she avenged herself at Uhud on her father’s killer Ḥamza b. ʿAbd al-Muṭṭalib.

S̲h̲ocked by the number of adherents of Muḥammad, ʿUtba, having consulted the other chiefs of the Ḳurays̲h̲, went to the Prophet to offer him anything he would care to ask if he would only abandon his propaganda. According to the traditional story, Muḥammad in reply only repeated a part of sūra XLI, which made such an impression on him that the effect was still visible when he rejoined his friends, whom he advised not to importune Muḥammad any more.

Tradition puts him in a similar light when it represents him as one of those who, on the eve of the battle of Badr, endeavoured in vain to persuade the Ḳurays̲h̲ to withdraw by offering personally to pay blood-money for ʿAmr b. al-Ḥaḍramī, slain by the Muslims. ʿUtba himself was mortally wounded in the battle and his body was thrown into the common ditch (ḳalīb). Muḥammad is said to have thought highly of his gifts, and later tradition is perhaps slightly more favourable to him than otherwise because he was an ʿAbs̲h̲amī but not an Umawī.

(A.J. Wensinck*)

Bibliography

Ibn His̲h̲ām, Sīra, index

Muḥammad b. Ḥabīb, Muḥabbar, 160, 162, 175

Yaʿḳūbī, Taʾrīk̲h̲, ii, 6, 19, 36

Wāḳidī, tr. Wellhausen, 43, 45, 50-1, 70, 80, 82

Ṭabarī, i, index

F. Buhl, Dos Leben Muhammeds, Leipzig 1930, 183, 191, 242, 252

¶ H. Lammens, La Mecque à la veille de l’hégire, Beirut 1924, 69, 75

W.M. Watt, Muhammad at Mecca, Oxford 1953, 92-3, 121, 181

idem, Muhammad at Medina, Oxford 1956, 11, 14, 56, 263-4.

Citation Wensinck, A.J.. " ʿUtba b. Rabīʿa." Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition. Brill Online , 2013. Reference. Jim Harlow. 11 January 2013 <http://referenceworks.brillonline.com/entries/encyclopaedia-of-islam-2/utba-b-rabia-SIM_7768>
--------------------
Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Utba_ibn_Rabi%27ah
--------------------
ʿUtbah ibn Rabīʿah (Arabic: عتبة بن ربيعة‎) was one of the prominent Leaders of Quraish during the era of Muhammad. (The Quraysh (Arabic: قريش‎, Qurayš; other transliterations include Qureish, Quraish, Quresh, Qurish, Kuraish, and Coreish) were a powerful merchant tribe that controlled Mecca and its Ka'aba and that, according to Islamic tradition, descended from Ishmael.)

The Islamic prophet Muhammad was born into the Banu Hashim clan of the Quraysh tribe

Utbah's father was Rabi'ah ibn Abd Shams. Utbah's daughter, Hind bint Utbah, married Abu Sufyan ibn Harb, another of the Leaders of the Quraish and Muhammad's arch-enemy. Utbah had two sons, Abu Hudhayfah ibn Utbah and Walid ibn Utba, and a brother named Shaybah ibn Rabi'ah.

Utbah was killed in the battle of Badr

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]