== Notes for [[Item:Q112489|Q112489]] ==

--------------------
===Biography

Updated 11 March 2023

< [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andregoto_Gal%C3%ADndez '''Andregoto Galíndez'''] > of the County of Aragon, was the Queen of Pamplona by marriage to García Sánchez I, prior to being divorced by him before 940. She was the mother of Sancho II of Pamplona.

Andregoto was one of two daughters born to Galindo II Aznárez, Count of Aragon by his second wife, Sancha Garcés of Pamplona, a half-sister of king Sancho I of Pamplona. Her father's county of Aragon had been brought into the Kingdom of Pamplona realm under Sancho I, and following Galindo's 922 death was held by a count Guntislo, apparently her illegitimate half-brother, Guntislo Galíndez. Her father's other county of Sobrarbe went with Andregoto's half-sister, Toda Galíndez, in marriage with count Bernard I of Ribagorza. Likely sometime in the mid-930s, Andregoto married to Sancho's only son, then ruling Pamplona as García Sánchez I.

Prior to 940, García divorced Andregoto, presumably due to consanguinity since both were grandchildren of García Jiménez of Pamplona. Together they had a sole son, Sancho II of Pamplona, and she may also have been mother of García's two daughters, whose maternity is unknown or disputed: Toda, who is mentioned in 991 as sister of King Sancho, and Urraca, wife successively of Fernán González of Castile and William II Sánchez of Gascony.[1]

It has been suggested that Andregoto remarried and had further children, although the details have not been discovered. Endregota, wife of 11th-century nobleman Sancho Macerátiz and mother of his son Sancho Sánchez, calls Queen Andregoto avuncula ('maternal aunt'), probably indicating that Endregota descended from a sister of the queen. Ubierto Arteta suggested a descent from Andregoto's full-sister, Velasquita Galíndez.


===Notes
* Urraca is commonly given as daughter by García's second wife, Teresa. Gonzalo Martínez Díez in Sancho III el Mayor: rey de Pamplona, Rex Ibericus makes her daughter of Andregoto. Traditional chronology would require this to have been otherwise, as she is typically identified with Urraca, duchess of Gascony, who died in 1041. However Jaime de Salazar y Acha concluded that the Duchess Urraca who died in that year was a different woman, Urraca Sánchez of Castile, widow of Sancho VI William of Gascony, while Count William II's wife, Urraca Garcés of Pamplona, was dead by 1008. While this would remove the main chronological hurdle of the Martínez Díez reconstruction, Urraca still married Fernán González between 961 and 964, more than two decades after Andregoto's divorce, making Teresa more likely to have been her mother, as shown by Salazar y Acha.

===Family

< [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garc%C3%ADa_Sánchez_I_of_Pamplona Wikipedia] > García Sánchez I of Pamplona

García married his first cousin Andregoto Galíndez, daughter of Galindo Aznárez II, Count of Aragon and his wife Sancha Garcés.[g] Given that Galindo Aznárez II did not have any legitimate male heirs,[24] the rights to the County of Aragon passed down to Andregoto, and then to her first son with García Sánchez, as a county within the Kingdom of Pamplona.[h]

The following children were born of this marriage:
# Sancho II of Pamplona, King of Pamplona and Count of Aragon until his death in 994. He was married to his first cousin, Urraca Fernández, daughter of Fernán González of Castile, Count of Castile and his wife Sancha Sánchez, who was Sancho's paternal aunt.[25]
# Toda Garcés[i]


Andregoto was repudiated by her husband in 942.[25] She retired to her lands in Aibar where she died sometime after June 971.[j]

--------------------

ANDREGOTO Galíndez (-972). One manuscript of the Codex de Roda names "Aznarium Galindonis et domna Andregoto regina et domna Belasquita" as the children of "domno Galindo comes de Aragone" and his wife "domna Sanzia"[32]. She succeeded her father in 922 as Condesa de Aragon. As Andregoto is not named in her husband's charter dated 9 Mar 933[33], it is assumed that they married after that date. However, this charter, confirming donations to San Pedro de Siresa by Andregoto's ancestors, suggests that the marriage may have been planned already at that time. Caliph Abd al-Rahman III imposed the repudiation by King García III of his wife under the peace terms negotiated with Sunyer Conde de Barcelona in 940, as part of his strategy of dividing the alliances between the various Christian kingdoms and counties in the peninsula[34]. "Endregoto Galindonis et prole eius Sancio Garseanis rex et uxor eius Urraca Fredenandizi" donated property to the monastery of San Pedro de Siresa by charter dated 29 Jun 971[35]. m (repudiated 940) as his first wife, her first cousin, GARCÍA III Sánchez King of Navarre, son of SANCHO I García King of Navarre & his second wife Toda Aznárez de Larraún ([919]-[25 May/13 Oct] 970). He became Conde de Aragón by right of his wife, thus uniting Aragon with Navarre.

On his marriage to Andregoto Condesa de Aragón, García III King of Navarre also became Conde de Aragón by right of his wife, thus uniting Aragon with Navarre for about a century. The succeeding Condes de Aragón, also Kings of Navarre, are shown in outline form below to demonstrate how Aragon eventually regained its autonomy from Navarre. For full details see NAVARRE.


===Origins


Galindo Aznárez II (died 922) was Count of Aragon from 893 to 922. He was the son of Aznar Galíndez II and his wife Onneca Garcés, daughter of King García Íñiguez of Pamplona.[1].

Galindo was married twice. By his first wife, Acibella,[2] daughter of Count García II Sánchez of Gascony,[3] and his wife Amuna of Périgord, he had three children:
# Toda Galíndez, married to Bernat I, Count of Ribagorza,[4] to whom she brought Sobrarbe.
# Redemptus Galíndez, bishop.[3]
# Mirón Galíndez,[3] who probably died before his father since he did not inherit the county in spite of being a legitimate son

By his second wife, Sancha Garcés of Pamplona, daughter of García Jiménez and Onneca Rebelle of Sangüesa, and half-sister of Sancho I, he had:
# Andregoto Galíndez, who inherited the Aragonese county. She was queen of Pamplona by her marriage with her first cousin García Sanchez, king of Pamplona (925–970).[5]
# Velasquita Galíndez,[3] first married Íñigo López de Estigi y Ciligueta.[6] She could also have been the wife of Count Fortún Jiménez of Aragon (fl. 943–958).[7]


Galindo also sired several illegitimate sons: Guntislo, Sancho, Belasco, Banzo—father of a Galindo[8]—and Aznar.[9]




===References
* < [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galindo_Aznárez_II Wikipedia] > Galindo Aznárez II

443590981. Grevinne Endregote Galindez GALINDOSDTR av Aragonien was an Arvegrevinna in Aragon.

Condesa de Aragón
Reina de Navarra

Condesa de Aragón
Reina de Navarra

SOURCE NOTES:
www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal07675

RESEARCH NOTES:
Countess of Aragon (922-)

OR "TERESA ENDREGOTO"

Andregoto var arvegrevinne av Aragon.
Galindo Aznaréz var den annen greve av Aragon. Han ga mellom 795 og 815 Jaca
den første grunnlov. Det synes å være sikkert at far til Andregoto også het Galindo Aznaréz,
den her omtalte Galindo var muligens hennes fars farfar.

[Wikipedia, "Andregota Galíndez", retrieved 5 Oct 07]
Andregota Galíndez was Countess of Aragón from 922 to 925, being daughter of Count Galindo II Aznárez by his second wife, Sancha Garcés of Pamplona. She married García III, king of Pamplona. After 925, Aragón was added to the kingdom of Pamplona, until the later split that created the Kingdom of Aragón and the kingdom of Navarre. García, who was her first cousin, divorced Andregota due to consanguinity, and remarried. Andregota apparently remarried and had further children, although the details have not been discovered. Endregota, wife of 11th century count Sancho Maceratiz, was a descendant of this later marriage.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]