== Notes for [[Item:Q99886|Q99886]] ==

Jekuthiel ibn Ḥasan was a Jewish communal leader, statesman, philanthropist, and patron of the arts who served in the Muslim court of the Banū Tujīb in Saragossa during the period of the party kings (Ar. mulūk al-ṭawā’if). He may have been a member of the Ibn Qapron family from Cordova, and it seems very likely that he studied philosophy in addition to traditional Jewish learning; he even apparently wrote some poetry. One of the young Jewish poets and scholars he supported was Solomon ibn Gabirol. The esteem between the two men was mutual and very deep. Ibn Gabirol praised his benefactor in several panegyrics, giving him the title of nasi.

In the 1030s Jekuthiel held a high office in the court of the taifa monarch Yaḥyā ibn al-Mundhir II. He was killed in 1039, at an advanced age, during the turmoil in the city when the Banū Hūd took control of the kingdom. Ibn Gabirol lamented Jekuthiel’s death in three elegies. In a short, beautiful poem, Reʾeh Shemesh le-ʿEt ʿErev Adumma (Heb. See the Sun Red at Eventide), his personal sorrow is paralleled in the darkness of the skies, a reflection of the cosmic mourning. The longest of the elegies, Bime Yequti’el Asher Nigmaru (Heb. In the Days of Jekuthiel, Which Have Come to an End), has a more formal and national tone.

Angel Saénz-Badillos

Bibliography

Ashtor, Eliyahu. The Jews of Muslim Spain, 3 vols. (Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society, 1973–84), vol. 2, pp. 257, 348 ff.; vol. 3, pp. 33 f., 39.

Ibn Gabirol, Solomon. Secular Poems, ed. Ḥayyim Brody and Ḥayyim Schirmann (Jerusalem: Schocken Institute for Jewish Research, 1974) [Hebrew].

Schirmann, Ḥayyim. The History of Hebrew Poetry in Muslim Spain, ed., suppl., and annot.

Ezra Fleischer (Jerusalem: Magnes Press, 1995), pp. 273 ff. [Hebrew].

——–. Studies in the History of Hebrew Poetry and Drama (Jerusalem: Mosad Bialik, 1979), vol. 1, pp. 216 ff [Hebrew].

Citation Angel Saénz-Badillos. " Ibn Ḥasan, Jekuthiel ben Isaac." Encyclopedia of Jews in the Islamic World. Executive Editor Norman A. Stillman. Brill Online , 2012. Reference. Jim Harlow. 10 July 2012 <http://referenceworks.brillonline.com/entries/encyclopedia-of-jews-in-the-islamic-world/ibn-hasan-jekuthiel-ben-isaac-SIM_0010640>

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD76552F1EFBBFA9822EF79916CC8C2
geni:6000000017107838775

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]