== Notes for [[Item:Q114605|Q114605]] ==

*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ramiro_I_of_Aragon


Ramiro de Aragón, Rey de Aragón (1035 - 8 de mayo 1069), Conde de Ribagorza y Sobrarbe (1045 - 8 de mayo 1069) Ramiro I Sánchez de Aragón, rey de Aragón.

http://www.sologenealogia.com/gen/getperson.php?personID=I2556&tree=001https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ramiro_I_of_Aragon

http://www.friesian.com/perifran.htm#basque

http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ramiro_I_de_Arag%C3%B3n

http://real-aragon.org/wp/royalhouse/househistory/

http://genealogics.org/getperson.php?personID=I00093518&tree=LEO
----------

Chapter 2. KINGS of ARAGON 1035-1137


*https://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/ARAGON%20&%20CATALONIA.htm#RamiroIdied1063B

'''RAMIRO Sánchez''', illegitimate son of SANCHO III King of Navarre & his mistress Sancha de Aibar (Aibar [1008]-killed in battle Graus 8 May 1063, bur Monastery of San Juan de la Peña). “Ranimirus proles regis, Garseanes frater eius, Gundisaluus frater eius, Ferdinandus frater eius” confirmed the charter dated 17 Apr 1014 under which “Sancius…rex…cum coniuge mea regina domina Maiora” donated property to the monastery of Leire, although the absence of the brother Bernardo suggests that this charter should be redated to approximately ten years later[70]. "Sancius…rex" recommended the rule of St Benedict to the monastery of Leire by charter dated 21 Oct 1022, subscribed by "Eximina regina mater regis, Regina domna Muma, Garsia et Ranimirus, Gundesalbus et Fernandus"[71]. The Gestis Comitum Barcinonensium names "Raimirus filius Sancii Regis Navarrorum…ex…nobilissima domina de castro…Ayunarum" when specifying that he inherited Aragon on the death of his father[72]. The charter of "Sancius Hispaniarum rex" dated 26 Jun 1033 relating to concessions to the monastery of Oriense was confirmed by his sons (in order) "Ranimirus…Garsea…Fredinandus"[73]. Under the division of territories organised by his father prior to his death, Ramiro received Aragon, succeeding in 1035 as RAMIRO I King of Aragon. The Historia Silense records that King Sancho granted "Haragon" to "Raymiro quem ex concubina habuerat"[74]. Although considered "king" by contemporaries, he was named in documentation "Ranimirus Sancioni regis filius"[75], although this description was not consistently used as demonstrated by the charter dated 22 May 1035 [must be misdated, probably 22 May 1055], which records the king´s donation of the churches of San Martín de Arasanz, San Pedro de Tou, San Felix y San Juan de Aínsa to Sobrarbe San Victorián, the dating clause of which specifies "regnante me Ranimiro rege in Aragone et in Suprarbi et in Ripacurtia et ultra"[76]. He expanded his authority southwards to include territories formerly controlled by the kingdom of Navarre, in return for conceding Navarrese supremacy[77]. He defeated his half-brother Gonzalo and expanded Aragon eastwards by annexing Sobrarbe and Ribagorza in 1044. With this expansion, Ramiro I had assumed leadership in the struggle against the Moors on his frontiers[78]. King Ramiro I donated the church of San Miguel "prope Calonica Baasa" to Sobrarbe San Victorián by charter dated 1035 [must be misdated] "regnante Ranimiro rege in Ripacorza, in Suprarb et in Aragon", subscribed by "Ermesenda regina…Sancio Ranimiri regis filio primogenito, Sancio Ranimiri regis filio proles Ermesendis regina…Senior Sancio Galinz in Boltania, Senior Ennecho Lobez in Buil, Senior Guelmi Serui Dei in Toleto, Senior Fortung Blaschez in Elesone"[79]. In 1054, he is alleged to have fled the battle of Atapuerca, in which his half-brother García V King of Navarre was killed by his other half-brother Fernando I King of Castile, "having lost his boots, on a horse guided only by a halter"[80]. The testament of King Ramiro I, dated 29 Jul 1059, bequeathed property to “filio meo Sancio filius Ermesendis...Sancio primogenito meo, Garsea filio meo, filia mea Taresa”, and to “domina mea Sancta Maria...super Sancte Cruçe filia mea Urraka”[81]. The testament of King Ramiro I, dated 15 Mar 1061, bequeathed property to “Sancio filio meo filius Ermisindis qui vocata est per baptismum Gilberga...Aibar et Exabirri Iateri [ad] filio meo Sancio...filia mee Urraka cui est in Sancta Cruce...Garsea filio meo”[82]. He died in battle against the Moors near Barbastro. The Crónica de San Juan de la Peña records that King Ramiro was killed aged 63 in 1062 and was buried in "el monasterio de Sant Iohan de Peña" after reigning for thirty eight years[83]. The "Corónicas" Navarras record that "el rey don Romiro" died "en Grados", in 1107[84].

'''m''' firstly (Jaca 22 Aug 1036) GERBERGE de Foix, daughter of BERNARD ROGER de Carcassonne Comte de Cousserans, de Foix et de Bigorre & his wife Gersende Ctss de Bigorre ([1015]-1 Dec 1049, bur Monastery of San Juan de la Peña). ... ... ... ... ..

'''m''' secondly ([1054]) AGNES d’Aquitaine, daughter of [GUILLAUME VI "le Gros" Duke of Aquitaine, GUILLAUME IV Comte de Poitou & his wife Eustachie de Montreuil-Berlay]. ... .... .... ..

Mistress ('''1'''): MUNIA, daughter of ---. Her name is confirmed by the charter dated 1067 under which “Sancio Ranimiri, Ranimirus regis filio et domna Amunna” donated property to San Andrés de Fanlo[93].

King Ramiro I & his first wife had five children:

King Ramiro I had one illegitimate son by Mistress (1):



--------------

Ramiro I de Aragón (h. 1006/7 - 8 de mayo de 1063/9) fue el primer rey de Aragón (1035-1063/9) y conde de Sobrarbe y Ribagorza (1045-1063/9).

Hijo natural de Sancho Garcés III de Pamplona, rey de Pamplona, y una joven llamada Sancha de Aibar o Aybar, de la nobleza de las tierras de Aibar.

Ramiro I contrajo dos matrimonios sucesivos:

* Con Gisberda (hija del conde Bernardo Roger de Foix) el día 22 de agosto de 1036, quien en el bautizo pasó a llamarse Ermesinda. De este matrimonio nacieron

o Sancho Ramírez

o El obispo García de Jaca

o La condesa Sancha de Aragón casada con Ermengol III de Urgel a quien su abuela Sancha de Aibar dona el 27 de octubre de 1070 el Monasterio de Santa Cecilia de Aibar, la villa de Miranda, y bienes en San Pelayo de Ates[2]

o Urraca, que fue monja en Santa Cruz de la Serós

o Teresa

* Con Inés de Aquitania se casó en fecha desconocida y no se conoce descendencia.

Fuera de matrimonio, y antes de contraerlo, tuvo de doña Amuña de Barbenuta un hijo natural llamado Sancho Ramírez (igual que su hermano el rey) a quien su padre, en su testamento definitivo en 1061, le confirió los lugares de Aibar y Javierrelatre con todas sus villas. Fue, en diferentes fechas, tenente en Aibar, Sos, Benabarre, Fantova, Monzón, y Javier (Navarra). Dispuso de la construcción de una capilla en la Catedral de San Pedro de Jaca donde eligió sepultura. Fue padre, entre otros, de Talesa de Aragón quien casó con el conde Gastón IV de Bearne.

--------------------

Ramiro I of Aragon

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Ramiro I (died 8 May 1063) is usually credited with being the first King of Aragon. He was the natural son of Sancho III of Navarre by his mistress Sancha de Aybar[1]. Ramiro was reputed to have been adopted by his father's wife Mayor after he was the only of his father's children to come to her aid when needed, although there is no surviving record of these events, and the story is probably apocryphal.

During his father's reign, he was given numerous properties in the county of Aragon, and by the division of Sancho's realm on the latter's death in 1035, the county of Aragon fell to Ramiro with the title of baiulus or steward. The foundation traditions of the Kingdom of Aragon would make him the first king, (he is, on account of the small size of his Pyrenean kingdom with its capital at Jaca, sometimes called a "petty king") and he was called king by his vassals, neighbors, the church and even his sons, yet he referred to himself always as simply Ranimiro Sancioni regis filio (Ramiro, son of King Sancho). Likewise, in his wills, he refers to his lands as simply having been given him in stewardship by his half-brother García and by God. He is likewise called regulus (rather than rex used for García) and quasi pro rege (acting as if king) in charters from Navarre[2].

Ramiro sought to enlarge his lands at the expense of both Moor and brother. His reign was uneventful until 1043, when he invaded the Kingdom of Navarre of his brother García. He was defeated in the Battle of Tafalla. In 1045, he annexed Sobrarbe and Ribagorza, held by his youngest legitimate half-brother, Gonzalo. Ramiro was claiming lordship over these lands prior to Gonzalo's death[3].

Before he was married, Ramiro had a mistress named Amuña with whom he had a natural son, Sancho Ramírez, in whom he confided the government of the county of Ribagorza.[4]

Ramiro wed his first wife, Gisberga, daughter of Bernard Roger of Bigorre, on 22 August 1036. She changed her name to Ermesinda on marrying him. Together the couple had five children:

Sancho Ramírez, his successor

García, Bishop of Jaca

Sancha, married Armengol III of Urgel

Urraca, nun in Santa Cruz de la Serós

Theresa, married William Bertrand

Ramiro's second wife was Agnes (Inés), a daughter of the Duke of Aquitaine. Ramiro set the advance from Aragon toward Huesca and Zaragossa,after annexation of Ribagorza and Sobrarbe. To him is due the first Chart for the Royal town of Jaca,that will set the example of an ideal Community (included well defined laws of protection even to non residents) for later urban rights until late in the Middle Ages.

Ramiro died at the Battle of Graus in 1063 while trying to take the city.

[edit]Sources

Ballesteros y Beretta, Antonio. Historia de España y su Influencia en la Historia Universal. Barcelona: Salvat, 1920.

Chaytor, H. J. A History of Aragon and Catalonia. London: Methuen, 1933.

Lourie, Elena. "The Will of Alfonso I, 'El Batallador,' King of Aragon and Navarre: A Reassessment." Speculum, Vol. 50, No. 4. (Oct., 1975), pp 635–651.

Ubieto Arteta, Antonio. "Estudios en torno a la división del Reino por Sancho el Mayor de Navarra", Príncipe de Viana, vol. 21, pp. 5–56, 163–236.

[edit]References

^ The Crónica de Aragón, produced in 1499, names her Doña Caya, but she is named Sancha in a contemporary donation. Ballesteros y Beretta, v. 2, pp. 319–320.

^ Ubieto Arteta, pp. 175–178.

^ Ubieto Arteta, pp. 169–173

^ An origin legend of the house of Ayala gives him another son, Velasgutto de Ayala, by a Lady described as resident or member of the House of Barcelona. However, this story appears to be without solid foundation, and earlier versions of the legend make this Vela on of Sancho Ramírez.

--------------------
Hijo natural ya que el Rey Sancho nunca se casó con Doña Sancha de Aybar. Primer Rey de Aragón 1035-1063/1064. "Auxiliado por los Tojibies, gobernadores de Zaragoza desde últimos del siglo noveno y por los de Huesca y Tudela, invadió los estados de su hermano García, que lo derrotó en Tafalla. Por muerte de su otro hermano Gonzalo, asesinado en la puente de Monclús, se apoderó de Sobrarbe y Rivagorza, sobre el año 1037. Ahmed I, gobernador de Zaragoza, cuyo padre Suley-mán había fundado en esta ciudad la dinastía de los Beni-Hud, sostenía guerra con su hermano Almudafar de Lérida: aprovecháronse los príncipes cristianos de estas desavenencias para aumentar su poderío, y Ahmed, vencedor de su hermano, tuvo que pagar tributo á Ramiro. Poniendo este sitio á Graus, fué acometido por Ahmed, quien viendose vencido, hizo asesinar á Ramiro, por medio de una traición, el año 1063. Con la debilidad de los muslimes mejoró la situación de los cristianos, ó mozárabes, de Zaragoza. cuyo Obispo Paterno asistió en 1063 al concilio de Jaca, donde se reunieron los de Urgel, Bigorra, Olorón, Calahorra, Jaca y Roda, y los Abades de Leire, San Andrés y San, Victorián, determinando entre otras cosas. que hasta la reconquista de Huesca el Obispo de Jaca se llamara Obispo de Aragón.
--------------------
En mi nuevo libro LA SORPRENDENTE GENEALOGÍA DE MIS TATARABUELOS, encontrarán a este y muchos otros de sus ancestros con un resumen biográfico de cada uno. El libro está disponible en: amazon.com barnesandnoble.com palibrio.com. Les será de mucha utilidad y diversión. Ramón Rionda

In my new book LA SORPRENDENTE GENEALOGÍA DE MIS TATARABUELOS, you will find this and many other of your ancestors, with a biography summary of each of them. The book is now available at: amazon.com barnesandnoble.com palibrio.com. Check it up, it’s worth it. Ramón Rionda

I Rey de Aragón (1035-1063)
Hijo natural

I Rey de Aragón (1035-1063)
Hijo natural

Son of Sancha the Great of Navarre. Father of Ramiro II o

--Other Fields

Ref Number: 4267

SOURCE NOTES:
www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal07688

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Aragon (1035-1064/9) Count of Ribagorza and Sobrarbe

Ramiro I de Aragão foi o primeiro rei de Aragão, seu reinado foi de 1035 até 1063. Era filho de Sancho III o Grande, rei de Navarra, fora do casamento e de uma jovem chamada Sancha de Aibar, da nobreza das terras de Aibar. Há uma história que diz que Ramiro foi o único filho de Sancho que ajudou sua mulher, incluindo os filhos dela. Agradecida, ela então teria o adotado como seu próprio filho.

Depois da morte de morte de Sancho, Ramiro herdou o condado de Aragão, que em 1035 fundou um reino independente, sendo que o trono de Navarra ficou com o filho primogênito legítimo, García de Nájera. Em 1043 guerreou contra seu irmão e, mesmo sendo vencido por ele em Tafalla, conseguiu incorporar a seu reino os castelos de Sos, Uncastillo, Luesia e Biel. Com a morte de seu irmão Gonzalo de Sobrarbe e Ribagorza, assassinado na ponte de Monclús pelo seu próprio vassalo Ramonet de Gascunha, foram incorporados Sobrarbe e Ribagorza ao reino de Aragão.

Ramiro se casou com Gisberga - chamada também de Ermesinda, filha de Bernardo Roger, conde de Bigorra - em 1036 e tiveram cinco filhos: Sancho Ramírez, que herdou o trono, García, que foi bispo de Jaca, a condessa Sancha casada com Ermengol III, conde de Urgel, Urraca que foi freira em Santa Cruz de la Serós e Teresa. Ele também se casou com Inés de Aquitania que não se sabe a existência ou não se conhece a descendência, alem de um filho com uma senhora chamada Amuña.

Segundo http://br.geocities.com/famiglia_reccanello/pafg185.htm#4196, entre Ramiro e Sancho teria havido outro Sancho, tendo o mais novo sido conhecido como Senhor de Aybar e o mais velho Rei de Aragão (e posteriormente, de Navarra). Essa informação não pode ser confirmada, e preferi seguir a linha genealógica histórica, seguindo a wikipédia como guia, inclusive porque no estudo genealógico citado, o Senhor de Aybar teria se casado com Felicia de Roucy e, fora do casamento, tido Fernando Sanches. Segundo a Wikipédia, quem se casou com Felicia (2o matrimonio) e com Isabel (1o matrimonio) foi o rei de Aragão, tendo tido Fernando Sánchez de Aragão com a 2a esposa em 1078.

OR "RAMIREZ"; NATURAL SON; KING OF ARAGON 1035-1063

867789496. Kong Ramiro I N.NSON Aragon (20673) was born in 1000. He was a Konge in 1035 in Aragon. (20674) He was a Konge in 1045 in Suprarbien. (20675) overtok da hans bror døde. He died on 8 May 1063. (20676) Han var sin fars uekte sønn He was married to Grevinne Gerberga (Gilberga) BARNHRDSDTR av Bigorre, Varacasona og Foix in Aug 1036.(20677)

He ruled from 1035 to 1063.

First King of Aragon. Son of Sancho III Garces of Navarre and Sancha de Aybar.
Killed in the battle of Graus which involved E, Cid.
He became bailus or steward of Jaca which was the Pyrenean kingdom whose capital was Jaca.
He referred to himself in documents as: "Ranimiro Sancioni Regis filio", Ramiro son of King Sancho.

ES.28079.AHN/1.3.1.2.3.281//CLERO-SECULAR_REGULAR,CAR.785,NUM.5
Donacion de bienes de la condesa Sancha.
Fecha Creacion:
1076-10-sd -
La condesa Sancha, hija de Ramiro I y de Ermesinda, dona al monasterio toda una serie de bienes en diferentes lugares y villas, confirmandolo posteriormente Sancho I y Pedro I.
ES.28079.AHN/1.3.1.2.3.281//CLERO-SECULAR_REGULAR,CAR.785,NUM.14
Donacion de diferentes, bines, casas y villas.
Fecha Creacion:
1095-10-sd -
La condesa Sancha, hija de Ramiro I y de la reina Ermesinda, dispone de sus bienes dando al monasterio y a San Poncio una camara, un celario con su alodio y la mitad de un trigal, dejando ademas a dicho monasterio de Santa Cruz unas casas situadas en Montearagon y las villas de Molinos, Lascasas, Colinena, Ayerbe, Belcasa, Luna, Miranda, Arresella y Banaguas.
ES.28079.AHN/1.3.1.2.3.281//CLERO-SECULAR_REGULAR,CAR.785,NUM.11
Donacion de diversoso bienes.
Fecha Creacion:
1077 - 1078
Urraca, hija del rey Ramiro I, dona al monasterio tras su muerte, de los bienes que recibio de su padre y que posteriormente confirmo su hermano Sancho Ramirez, la villa de Arrienda ingenua, la iglesia de Arresella, un tercio del resto de sus bienes y algunas cosas más como ovejas, vacas y unos vasos de plata.
Research Copyright 2008, John J. Browne Ayes

This unnamed son of Sancho III The Great must have been the fourth son who inherited part of his father's kingdom in 1035. This son evidently died about 1037, and his part was then taken over by his brother Fernando the Great.

Name Prefix:<NPFX> King Name Suffix:<NSFX> I, Of Aragon

He succeeded to Aragon upon partition of his father's territories. He died in battle against the Muslims. Some sources say killed 8 May 1064 at Graus.

Ramiro I (d. May 8, 1063), first king of Aragon, who reigned from 1035. He was the illegitimate son of King Sancho III of Navarre. During his father's lifetime he governed this territory and was made king of it by his father's will. In 1045 he annexed the territories belonging to his brother Gonzalo upon the latter's death. Ramiro later conqueredsome territory from the Moors and made the Moorish kings of Huesca, Saragossa, and Lérida his tributaries. [

Ramiro I (d. May 8, 1063), first king of Aragon, who reigned from 1035. He was the illegitimate son of King Sancho III of Navarre. During his father's lifetime he governed this territory and was made king of it by his father's will. In 1045 he annexed the territories belonging to his brother Gonzalo upon the latter's death. Ramiro later conqueredsome territory from the Moors and made the Moorish kings of Huesca, Saragossa, and Lérida his tributaries. [

Konge av Aragon 1035 - 1063.
Ramiro var en ?uekte? sønn til Sancho III den Store av Navarra-Aragon.
Han ble i 1035 konge i Aragon og etter sin brors død i 1045 også i Suprarbien.
Aragonslekten, som er en sidegren til Navarraslekten, var konger av Aragon fra 1035 til
1410. Aragon ble skilt ut fra Navarra i 1035, men landene var i personalunion fra 1076 til 1134.
Etter Petronillas ekteskap ble Barcelona innlemmet i riket, og Aragon la senere under seg det
østlige Spania og øyene i det vestlige Middelhavet. Sidegrenen var grever av forskjellige
grevskaper i Sør-Frankrike.

Ramiro I (d. May 8, 1063), first king of Aragon, who reigned from 1035. He was the illegitimate son of King Sancho III of Navarre. During his father's lifetime he governed this territory and was made king of it by his father's will. In 1045 he annexed the territories belonging to his brother Gonzalo upon the latter's death. Ramiro later conqueredsome territory from the Moors and made the Moorish kings of Huesca, Saragossa, and Lérida his tributaries. [

The illegitimate son of Sancho III of Navarre, he became the first King of
Aragon on the death of his father, property annexed from brother Gonzalo and
conquered from Moors the additional territory, making tributaries of Moorish
kings Huesca, Saragossa and Lerida.

Ramiro I of Aragon
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.
Jump to: navigation, search

Ramiro I of Aragon (died 1063) was king of Aragon from 1035 until 1063. He was the natural son of King Sancho III of Navarre and was the first king of Aragon proper.

In 1035, he inherited the small valley of the River Aragón in the northwest corner of the modern province of Huesca with the title of 'king'. After the death of his brother, Gonzalo, in 1038, he incorporated into his lands the kingdoms of Sobrarbe in the central north strip of the modern province of Huesca, and Ribagorza in the northeast corner of that province.

He died at the siege of Graus in 1063.

The illegitimate son of Sancho III of Navarre, he became the first King of
Aragon on the death of his father, property annexed from brother Gonzalo and
conquered from Moors the additional territory, making tributaries of Moorish
kings Huesca, Saragossa and Lerida.

The illegitimate son of Sancho III of Navarre, he became the first King of
Aragon on the death of his father, property annexed from brother Gonzalo and
conquered from Moors the additional territory, making tributaries of Moorish
kings Huesca, Saragossa and Lerida.

The illegitimate son of Sancho III of Navarre, he became the first King of
Aragon on the death of his father, property annexed from brother Gonzalo and
conquered from Moors the additional territory, making tributaries of Moorish
kings Huesca, Saragossa and Lerida.

In 1035, he inherited the small valley of the River Aragón in the northwest corner of the modern province of Huesca with the title of 'king'. After the death of his brother, Gonzalo, in 1038, he incorporated into his lands the Counties of Sobrarbe in the central north strip of the modern province of Huesca, and Ribagorza in the northeast corner of that province.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]