== Notes for [[Item:Q88539|Q88539]] ==

http://www.livius.org/ap-ark/ariaramnes/ariaramnes.html

Ariaramnes (Old Persian: Ariyâramna): name of the great-grandfather of the Persian king Darius I the Great.

-----------------------------------------

ID: I82378

Name: Ariyaramna of Parthia

Given Name: Ariyaramna

Surname: of Parthia

Sex: M

_UID: 357B3B2E3806AF46AD231C81D4E017DA5EC5

Change Date: 26 Nov 2005

Death: Y

Marriage 1 Spouse Unknown

Children

Arshames of Parthia

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I82378
--------------------
Birth: 662 B.C. General Notes
King of Persia Ariaramnes Achaemenid was the son of King of Persia Teïspes Achaemenid.2 He was living 0640-0615 B.C.1 King of the Persians, Parsa, 0640-0615 B.C.. Found on a golden tablet in Hamadan (ancient Ecbatana): "Ariaramnes, the great king, king of kings, king in Persia, son of king Teispes, grandson of Achaemenes. King Ariaramnes says: This country Persia which I hold, which is possessed of good horses, of good men, the great god Ahuramazda bestowed it upon me. By the favor of Ahuramazda, I am king in this country. King Ariaramnes says: May Ahuramazda bear me aid."3 Also called Ariyâramna old-Persian.3 Also called Ariaramnes Greek.
Child of King of Persia Ariaramnes Achaemenid:
King of Persia Arsames Achaemenid+ b. 0585 B.C.
[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, Royalty for Commoners: The Complete Lineage of John of Gaunt, Son of Edward III, Kings of England, and Queen Philippa (.: ., 3rd Ed., 1998), 414-91. Hereinafter cited as RfC.
[S723] Herodotus of Halicarnassus, The History of Herodotus (London and New York: MacMillan and Co., 1890), 7.11. Hereinafter cited as Herodotus' History.
[S583] Ancient Persia, online . Hereinafter cited as Ancient Persia.

--------------------
Birth: 662 B.C.

General Notes

King of Persia Ariaramnes Achaemenid was the son of King of Persia Teïspes Achaemenid.2 He was living 0640-0615 B.C.1 King of the Persians, Parsa, 0640-0615 B.C.. Found on a golden tablet in Hamadan (ancient Ecbatana): "Ariaramnes, the great king, king of kings, king in Persia, son of king Teispes, grandson of Achaemenes. King Ariaramnes says: This country Persia which I hold, which is possessed of good horses, of good men, the great god Ahuramazda bestowed it upon me. By the favor of Ahuramazda, I am king in this country. King Ariaramnes says: May Ahuramazda bear me aid."3 Also called Ariyâramna old-Persian.3 Also called Ariaramnes Greek.

Child of King of Persia Ariaramnes Achaemenid:

King of Persia Arsames Achaemenid+ b. 0585 B.C.

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, Royalty for Commoners: The Complete Lineage of John of Gaunt, Son of Edward III, Kings of England, and Queen Philippa (.: ., 3rd Ed., 1998), 414-91. Hereinafter cited as RfC.

[S723] Herodotus of Halicarnassus, The History of Herodotus (London and New York: MacMillan and Co., 1890), 7.11. Hereinafter cited as Herodotus' History.

[S583] Ancient Persia, online . Hereinafter cited as Ancient Persia.

--------------------
•ID: I82378 •Name: Ariyaramna of Parthia •Given Name: Ariyaramna •Surname: of Parthia •Sex: M •_UID: 357B3B2E3806AF46AD231C81D4E017DA5EC5 •Change Date: 26 Nov 2005 •Death: Y

Marriage 1 Spouse Unknown Children 1. Arshames of Parthia

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp%2Dfam&id=I82378

Konge av Parthia.

SOURCE NOTES:
FW3; http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per00552.htm#0
http://www.gbnf.com/genealogy/sahlin/html/d0087/I2121.HTM

OR "ARIARAMNES"

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Anshan/Persis (Persia) c.640-615 BCE

Name Suffix:<NSFX> Of Parthia

Ariaramnes of Persia
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.

Ariaramnes (Old Persian Ariyâramna, "Peace of the Aryans") was an uncle of Cyrus the Great, probably a great-uncle and the king of Persia.

Ariaramnes was most likely the brother of Cyrus I of Anshan and son of Teispes but this is not certain. In any case, he was a member of the Achaemenid House and served as co-ruler with Cyrus in the early 6th century BCE.

His English name is derived - via Latin - from the Greek ???a??µ???. In Modern Persian, it is spelled ????????.

Preceded by:
Teispes King of Persia Succeeded by:
Arsames

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]