== Notes for [[Item:Q118899|Q118899]] ==

Señor de Morales, Mayordomo Mayor de Fernando II

Facts: Mayordomo of Alfonso VII. Paternal Ancestry, Osorio family of Castile. His maternal ancestry is from Cabrera and Trava of Leon and Galicia and Dukes of Urgell and Catalunia related to Nunez de Guzman the house of Toral.
Source:
Nobilario das Familias de Portugal, Felgueiras Gayo Carvalhos de Basto 2a Edizao Braga 1989
Vol III pg 584 Ponces.
Source II, Charles Arade his book, Tequesta.
Digital collections at:
http://digitalcollections.fiu.edu/tequestafiles/1967/67_1_04.pdf pp1-28
Murga Sanz, Vicente, Juan Ponce de Leon, 1959 pp 385
Tio Aurelio, Fundacion de San German, San Juan (1956- 274 pp)
Tio Aurelio, Fuentes Para la Historia de Puerto Rico, San German, PR. 1961, pp 653
Note: A lot of work that Murga Sanz did wasn't acknowledged by Tio.
In the same light, a lot of work that Tio did wasn't acknowledged by Murga.
They do agree on some points without agreeing or referencing one another.
Each had documents that were important. Unfortunately, one important document wasn't included in the book by Tio. I have used these sources to work on the family tree's of Juan Ponce de Leon born 1400, Died: 1469 downward from him.
Families that preceded him are from my own research within the book by Felgueiras Gayo listed above to fill in missing birth datesand persons throughout the tree.
Source: PARES Ministerio de Cultura Spain for all Ponce de Leon

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]