== Notes for [[Item:Q115092|Q115092]] ==

=Beatriz Anes Redondo=

* Daughter of João Pires Redondo and Gontinha Soares de Melo
* Origem: Wikipédia, a enciclopédia livre [http://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rodrigo_Martins_de_Nom%C3%A3es PT]:

=Married=

*Married: (1) '''Pedro Soares Coelho,''' son of Dom Soeiro Viegas Coelho and Dona Mayor Mendes de Candarei . No children from this marriage. After Pedro's death, Beatriz married for the second time

* Married: (2) '''D. Rodrigo Martins de Nomães''' (1215 -?) foi um nobre e Cavaleiro medieval do Reino de Portugal, foi senhor de Nomães, actual Numão.

=Children with D. Rodrigo Martins de Nomães=

* 1.1. '''Dona Joanna Rodrigues de Nomamas,''' married to Martim vasques da Cunha, the old, son of Vasco Lourenço da Cunha and Theresa Pires Portugal. Martim passed away in 1305, and Joanna passed away before 1308.

* 1.2. '''Dona Maria Rodrigues De Nomamas,'''Married To Martim Affonso de Resende.

* 1.3. '''Dona Urraca Rodrigues De Nomamas'''

=Links=

* https://www.familiasdeleiria.com/p481.htm
* https://pt.linkfang.org/wiki/Jo%C3%A3o_Pires_Redondo
* https://ler.letras.up.pt/uploads/ficheiros/6490.pdf
* http://www.asbrap.org.br/documentos/revistas/rev24_art4.pdf
* https://charters.one-name.net/p445.htm
* https://repositorio.ul.pt/bitstream/10451/23960/1/ulfl200608_tese.pdf

=Sources=

* Genealogy of the Liberator, Ramón Darío Suárez, (Mérida, Venezuela, July 1983, Second Edition Augmented and Corrected. Official Printing. Mérida State Executive. Legal Deposit: If 83-0415), LAT AM 929.28 B638d/G.S.., Page: 361 (Reliability: 3).
* Genea Portugal, http://genealogia.netopia.pt (Reliability: 3).
* FamÍlia ( 3 ) Beraldo By Wanderley - https://books.google.com/books?id=0SZ6DwAAQBAJ&pg=PA1252&lpg=PA1252&dq=Rodrigo+Martins+de+Nomães&source=bl&ots=iGkFlUQ5wt&sig=ACfU3U16G70FURyxmdLA1MXQg7_Jgxmz-g&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjBicmf7KjhAhX1On0KHZtMDlI4ChDoATACegQIBRAB#v=onepage&q=Rodrigo%20Martins%20de%20Nomães&f=false
* Nobiliario de D. Pedro, Conde de Bracelos, hijo del rey D. Dionis de Portugal, By João Baptista Lavanha - https://books.google.com/books?id=2kw3dDk9Ub4C&pg=PA230&lpg=PA230&dq=Beatriz+Anes+Redondo&source=bl&ots=9mv9Ehvkp5&sig=ACfU3U20K5oXawTbPJy_AhZWes9prSQPuQ&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjCiZG2-KjhAhUkHDQIHTiTCR84ChDoATABegQIBRAB#v=onepage&q=Beatriz%20Anes%20Redondo&f=false
* Portugaliae monumenta historica: a saeculo octavo post Christum usque ad ...By Academia das Ciências de Lisboa - https://books.google.com/books?id=4p2uV9QNPDIC&pg=PA225&lpg=PA225&dq=Beatriz+Anes+Redondo&source=bl&ots=w72X3kUfCf&sig=ACfU3U12Rou55pg9BesU8MYfRGvihx_rxQ&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjK5rqO-qjhAhUcJTQIHQhpC5w4ChDoATAPegQIBRAB#v=onepage&q=Beatriz%20Anes%20Redondo&f=false
* Portugaliae monumenta historica: Scriptores 1856-61, By Academia das Ciências de Lisboa - https://books.google.com/books?id=XZNIAQAAMAAJ&pg=PA207&lpg=PA207&dq=Beatriz+Anes+Redondo&source=bl&ots=pZsPni04Y3&sig=ACfU3U2B3S8TL1aZA6jsLWDQQRNzwsgpFQ&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjl7pm5gczvAhXyN30KHTtOAow4FBDoATACegQIBRAC#v=onepage&q=Beatriz%20Anes%20Redondo&f=false
* NOBILIARIO DEL CONDE D. PEDRO, By João Baptista Lavanha - https://books.google.com/books?id=gHFmAAAAcAAJ&pg=PA230&lpg=PA230&dq=Beatriz+Anes+Redondo&source=bl&ots=X_O59NZIs1&sig=ACfU3U2g0VX1t4cvoaaKJM66Is4ZTblyBw&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjl7pm5gczvAhXyN30KHTtOAow4FBDoATAHegQICRAC#v=onepage&q=Beatriz%20Anes%20Redondo&f=false
* Descendants of Señor de Ribera - https://geneaminas.com.br/genealogia-mineira/descendentes.asp?codpessoa=287491&codenlace=1405488&genero=1&expandir=183359

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]