== Notes for [[Item:Q114529|Q114529]] ==

===Genealogy
==== Chapter 11. FAMILY of PEDRO ANSÚREZ

https://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/SPANISH%20NOBILITY%20LATER%20MEDIEVAL.htm#AnsurDiazdied1047B

ANSUR Díaz, son of conde DIEGO Fernández de Saldaña & his wife Marina --- (-after 29 Sep 1047). “...Fernando Didaz comes...Ansur Didaz, Gomez Didaz...” subscribed the charter dated 17 Feb 1035 under which King Vermudo III recognised the church of Palencia and made donations[904]. "Fernando Didaz comes…Assur Diaz, Gomez Didaz" subscribed the charter dated 1036 under which Vermudo III King of León donated property[905]. “...comite Fredinando Didaz, Asurz Didaz” witnessed the charter dated 24 May 1038 under which Fernando I King of Castile granted “castellum...Vierbele” to “Garcia Eneconis”[906]. Conde [Apr/Oct] 1042. "Assur Diaz et uxor mea Iusta" donated property in León to León Cathedral by charter dated 29 Sep 1047[907].
* [m firstly ---. The name of Ansur´s first wife is not known. Ansur & his [first/third] wife had three children:
**1. PEDRO Ansúrez (-9 Sep 1119). The Chronicon Mundi of Lucas Tudensis names "tres fratres nobiles…Petrus Ansuri, Gundisaluus Ansuri et Fernanduss Ansuri"[916]. Mayordomo of Alfonso VI King of León 24 Jul 1067 to 3 Sep 1067. Conde [1071]. - see below.
* m [secondly] --- Ovéquiz, daughter of OVECO Téllez & his wife Elvira - Ansur & his [second] wife had one child:
**2. GONZALO Ansúrez (-after 1075).
* [m thirdly ---. The identity of the mother of Ansur´s son, Fernando, has not been ascertained with certainty. Ansur & his [third] wife had one child:
**3. FERNANDO Ansúrez (-after 20 Jan [1096/98]).
*m [fourthly] '''JUSTA Fernández''', daughter of [conde FERNANDO Flaínez & his wife Elvira Peláez] (-after 29 Mar 1085). Ansur & his [fourth] wife had one child:
**4. DIEGO Ansúrez (-18 Jul 1084, bur León Cathedral). Diego & his wife had one child:
***a) ELVIRA Díaz (-18 Jul --).

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]