== Notes for [[Item:Q91293|Q91293]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cleopatra_I

Cleopatra I Syra (in Greek, Κλεοπάτρα Σύρα), c. 204–176 BC was a princess of the Seleucid Empire and by marriage, Queen of Ptolemaic Egypt.

Cleopatra I was the daughter of Antiochus III the Great, King of the Seleucid Empire, and Queen Laodice III. She married Ptolemy V, King of Egypt, in 193 BC. They had at least three children:

*Ptolemy VI born in 186 BC
*Cleopatra II born ca 187 - 185 BC
*Ptolemy VIII born ca 184 BC

--------------------
'''
=Cleopatra I Syra=
'''

Cleopatra I Syra (Greek: Κλεοπάτρα Σύρα; c. 204-176 BC) was a princess of the Seleucid Empire and by marriage, Queen of Ptolemaic Egypt.

'''Family'''

Cleopatra I was the daughter of Antiochus III the Great, King of the Seleucid Empire, and Queen Laodice III. She married Ptolemy V, King of Egypt, in 193 BC. They had at least three children:
* Ptolemy VI born in 186 BC
* Cleopatra II born ca 185 BC
* Ptolemy VIII born ca 184 BC

'''Biography'''

In 197 BC Antiochus III had captured a number of cities in Asia Minor previously under the control of the Ptolemaic kingdom of Egypt. The Romans supported the Egyptian interests, when they negotiated with the Seleucid king in Lysimachia in 196 BC. In response, Antiochus III indicated his willingness to make peace with Ptolemy V and to have his daughter Cleopatra I marry Ptolemy V. They were betrothed in 195 BC and their marriage took place in 193 BC in Raphia. At that time Ptolemy V was about 16 years and Cleopatra I about 10 years old. Later on, Egypt's Ptolemaic kings were to argue that Cleopatra I had received Coele-Syria as her dowry and, therefore, this territory again belonged to Egypt. It is not clear if this was the case. However, in practice, Coele-Syria remained a Seleucid possession after the Battle of Panium in 198 BC.

In Alexandria, Cleopatra I was called the Syrian. As part of the Ptolemaic cult she was honoured with her husband as Theoi Epiphaneis. In line with ancient Egyptian tradition, she was also named adelphe (= sister) of Ptolemy V. A synod of priests held at Memphis in 185 BC transferred all honours that Ptolemy V had received in 196 BC (written on the Rosetta stone) to his wife.

In 187 BC, Cleopatra I was appointed vizier and upon her husband's death in 180 BC, she ruled on behalf of her young son, Ptolemy VI. She was the first Ptolemaic queen to be a sole ruler of Egypt. This can be concluded from date formulas on the papyri written in the years from 179 BC to 176 BC, where Cleopatra I is called Thea Epiphanes and her name is written before that of her son. She also minted her own coins, which also bear her name before that of her son.

On June 22, 2010, archaeologists uncovered a gold coin bearing her image at Tel Kedesh in Israel near the Lebanon border. It was reported to be the heaviest and most valuable gold coin ever found in Israel.

Just before his death, Ptolemy V had planned to conduct a war against the Seleucid kingdom but when Cleopatra I became sole ruler, she immediately ended the war preparations directed against her brother Seleucus IV Philopator. Cleopatra I died around 176 BC.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cleopatra_I_Syra

House of ptolmey p 270,p276, arranged 195/6 BC p 269 footnote he aged 16

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per01321.htm#0

RESEARCH NOTES:
Princess of Syria, Queen of Egypt

Name Prefix:<NPFX> Queen Name Suffix:<NSFX> I, of Syria

Name Prefix:<NPFX> Queen Name Suffix:<NSFX> I, of Syria

Cleopatra I SYRA (d. 176 BC), queen of Egypt (193-176 BC), wife of Ptolemy V Epiphanes and regent for her minor son, Ptolemy VI Philometor.
Daughter of Antiochus III the Great of the Syrian Empire, Cleopatra was married to Ptolemy V in 193 as part of the Peace of Lysimacheia, concluding warfare and border conflicts between Syria and Egypt. She brought as her dowry the revenues (but apparently not the ownership) of Coele-Syria, a land that Egypt had long sought to recover; and the total agreement helped to ensure Egypt's neutrality in Syria's continuingstruggles with the Romans. When Ptolemy V died (180), Cleopatra became the true ruler of Egypt as regent for her young son, and she ruled equitably, keeping peace with Syria while doing nothing to alienate Rome, and thereby kept Egypt free of invasion.

Cleopatra I SYRA (d. 176 BC), queen of Egypt (193-176 BC), wife of Ptolemy V Epiphanes and regent for her minor son, Ptolemy VI Philometor.
Daughter of Antiochus III the Great of the Syrian Empire, Cleopatra was married to Ptolemy V in 193 as part of the Peace of Lysimacheia, concluding warfare and border conflicts between Syria and Egypt. She brought as her dowry the revenues (but apparently not the ownership) of Coele-Syria, a land that Egypt had long sought to recover; and the total agreement helped to ensure Egypt's neutrality in Syria's continuingstruggles with the Romans. When Ptolemy V died (180), Cleopatra became the true ruler of Egypt as regent for her young son, and she ruled equitably, keeping peace with Syria while doing nothing to alienate Rome, and thereby kept Egypt free of invasion.

Cleopatra I SYRA (d. 176 BC), queen of Egypt (193-176 BC), wife of Ptolemy V Epiphanes and regent for her minor son, Ptolemy VI Philometor.
Daughter of Antiochus III the Great of the Syrian Empire, Cleopatra was married to Ptolemy V in 193 as part of the Peace of Lysimacheia, concluding warfare and border conflicts between Syria and Egypt. She brought as her dowry the revenues (but apparently not the ownership) of Coele-Syria, a land that Egypt had long sought to recover; and the total agreement helped to ensure Egypt's neutrality in Syria's continuingstruggles with the Romans. When Ptolemy V died (180), Cleopatra became the true ruler of Egypt as regent for her young son, and she ruled equitably, keeping peace with Syria while doing nothing to alienate Rome, and thereby kept Egypt free of invasion.

Cleopatra I of Egypt
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Cleopatra I Syra ( Greek: ??e?p?t?a S??a, c. 215-176 BC) was a queen of Ptolemaic Egypt, the daughter of Antiochus III and Laodice. She married Ptolemy V in 193 BC. They had two sons and a daughter, Ptolemy VI of Egypt, Cleopatra II of Egypt, and Ptolemy VIII of Egypt. In 187 BC, she was appointed Vizier. When her husband died in 180 BC, she ruled on behalf of her son Ptolemy VI until her death.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]