== Notes for [[Item:Q111971|Q111971]] ==

https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ordo%C3%B1o_III_de_Le%C3%B3n

Ordoño III de León (?, c. 925 - Zamora, 956) fue rey de León desde 951 hasta su muerte. Hijo y sucesor de Ramiro II (931-951) e Adosinda Gutiérrez, se enfrentó a navarros y castellanos, que apoyaban a su hermanastro Sancho en su disputa por el trono. Éste estaba apoyado por el reino de Navarra y el conde castellano Fernán González. Sancho finalmente perdió en su disputa por el poder en 953, teniendo como segunda consecuencia el sometimiento del conde castellano a Ordoño.

Éste no fue el único problema que Ordoño III tuvo durante su reinado, pues además soportó numerosas rebeldías internas, ataques de al-Ándalus y una sublevación en Galicia. En respuesta a los musulmanes, Ordoño envió gran número de tropas, que consiguieron llegar hasta Lisboa (955). Ante semejante demostración de fuerza, se firmó un tratado de paz entre el rey y el califa Abd al-Rahman III (912-961).

Ordoño III llevó a cabo una exhaustiva reorganización de sus territorios y continuó con el proceso de fortalecimiento de las instituciones reales que inició su padre.

Matrimonio y descendencia

Casó con Urraca, hija de Fernán González, conde de Castilla. Descendencia con Urraca Fernández:

* Bermudo, rey de León.
* Gonzalo.

--------------------
Ordoño III (c. 926–Zamora, 956) was the king of León from 951 to 956, son and successor of Ramiro II (931-951). He confronted Navarre and Castile, who supported his half-brother Sancho the Fat in disputing Ordoño's claim to the throne.

This was not the only problem of his reign, however, he had to deal with internal rebellion, attacks from the Muslims of al-Andalus, and the rebellion of Galicia. In response to the Muslims, Ordoño III sent troops as far as Lisbon (955). Before this great show of force, the Muslims had nothing to do but ask for peace. Negotiations ended with a treaty between the king of León and the caliph of Córdoba Abd al-Rahman III (912-961).

He tried to continue the actions of his father in fortifying the land and the royal authority in the face of the contumacious and secessional Count Fernán González. He even married Fernán's daughter Urraca and later repudiated her over her father's alliance with Sancho.

Urraca bore him at least two children: a son named Ordoño who died young and a daughter named Theresa who became a nun. Ordoño III was also father of Bermudo II, but opinion is divided as to whether he was son of Urraca, or of a mistress, one of the daughters of Count Pelayo Gonzalez.

[source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ordo%C3%B1o_III_of_Le%C3%B3n]
--------------------
FUENTES: -http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ramiro_II_de_León
--------------------

--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ordono_III_of_Leon

55448872. Kong Ordongo III RAMIROSON av Leon(7315) was a Konge in 950 in Leon.(7316) He died in Aug 955.(7317) Han kunne ikke hindre Maurerne fra å herje i Kastiljen helt frem til Burgos. He was married to Grevinne Urraca N.NSDTR av Kastiljen in 936.(7318) Hun ble forskutt, men senere gjenintatt

Infante de León

Rey de León (951-955)

Infante de León

SOURCE NOTES:
www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal10128

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Leon (951-956)

Ordonho III de Leão (falecido em Zamora, em 956), foi rei de Leão desde 951 até à sua morte. Filho de Ramiro II de Leão, sucedeu-lhe no trono após a sua morte; o seu reinado pautou-se pelas constantes revoltas dos condes castelhanos (mormente Fernando Gonzalez), os quais, em conjunto com o seu meio-irmão Sancho procuraram destroná-lo, bem como pela insubmissão dos nobres galegos e ainda os ataques dos muçulmanos.
Para fazer face a estes problemas, organizou uma grandiosa expedição que logrou alcançar Lisboa, mas que não chegou a tomar, tendo estabelecido uma trégua com o califa de Córdova Abd al-Rahman III. Pouco depois, quando regressava a Leão, faleceu permaturamente em Zamora, sem filhos, deixando assim o trono ao seu meio-irmão, Sancho I.

Succeeded Ramiro II. he was forced to deal with Muslims, Castile and Navarre who supported Sancho the Fat, his step brother who had challenged Ordono's royal claim.
He later repudiated his marriage to Urraca over her father, Fernando's, alliance with Sancho.

When Ramiro II of Leon died in 951 he was succeeded by his son, Ordono III also called El Bueno (The Good). Ordono III ruled until 956, and was succeeded by Sancho I.

At some time during his reign as King of Leon, Ordoni III was at war with his father-in-law, Fernan Gonzalez of Castile.

Konge av Leon 951 - 955.
Ordoño kunne ikke hindre maurerne fra å herje i Castilla helt frem til Burgos.
Han var gift annen gang i 952 med Elvira.

He was at war with his father-in law, Fernan Gonzales, Count of Castile.

He was at war with his father-in law, Fernan Gonzales, Count of Castile.

He was at war with his father-in law, Fernan Gonzales, Count of Castile.

He was at war with his father-in law, Fernan Gonzales, Count of Castile.

Name Suffix:<NSFX> King Of Leon

-- MERGED NOTE ------------

Wikidata: https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q333627 | Geni: https://www.geni.com/people/6000000004052699411

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]