== Notes for [[Item:Q2494|Q2494]] ==

SOURCE NOTES:
<p>http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per00730.htm#0</p>
<p>Mursili II</p>
<p>From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 [[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]] 
 
 </p>
<p>Mursili II was a king of the Hittite Empire (New kingdom) from ca. 1322 BC to ca. 1295 BC. He was the younger son of Suppiluliuma I. RH Beal believes that before his accession, his name was written in Luwian hieroglyphic seals with the combined Sumerian and Akkadian glyphs, GAL-MEŠEDI (NABU 2001/4); which elsewhere is understood as the title, "chief of the bodyguards".
<p>This prince assumed the throne after the premature death of his elder brother Arnuwanda II, like their father victim to the plague ravaging the empire in the 1320s; and likely took the name "Mursili" afterward. He faced numerous rebellions early in his reign, the most serious of which were by the Kaskas in the mountains of Anatolia. The annals for the first ten years of his reign have survived, and they reveal that an "omen of the sun," or solar eclipse, occurred in his tenth year as king, just as he was about to launch his campaign against the Kaska peoples. While Mursili II's highest confirmed year date was his twenty-second, it is believed that he enjoyed a reign of around 25-30 years. He was succeeded by Muwatalli.
<p>Contents</p>
<p>[hide]</p>
<p> * 1 The eclipse</p>
<p> * 2 Mursili II in fiction</p>
<p> * 3 References</p>
<p> * 4 External links</p>
<p>[edit]</p>
<p>The eclipse</p>
<p> Main article: Mursili's eclipse</p>
<p>Mursili's eclipse is of great importance for the absolute dating of the Hittite Empire within the chronology of the Ancient Near East. There are only two possible dates for the eclipse: 13 April 1308 BC or 24 June 1312 BC. The 1312 date is accepted by most Hittitologists, e.g. Trevor Bryce (1998), while Paul Astrom (1993) suggested the 1308 date.
<p>[edit]</p>
<p>Mursili II in fiction</p>
<p>A fictionalized version of Mursili II appears in the Japanese manga Red River. He is "Kail Mursili", which according to Beal would be an anachronism - since he is not named "Mursili" in any texts prior to those of his own reign, and was likely named something else. Kail is one of the comic's main protagonists and is portrayed as noble and brave, as well as a playboy.
<p>[edit]</p>
<p>References</p>
<p> * Paul Astrom, 'The Omen of the Sun in the Tenth Year of the Reign of Mursilis II', in Horizons and Styles: Studies in Early Art and Archaeology in Honour of Professor Homer L. Thomas (1993)</p>
<p> * Trevor Bryce, The Kingdom of the Hittites (1998)</p>
<p>Preceded by:</p>
<p>Arnuwanda II Hittite king Succeeded by:</p>
<p>Muwatalli</p>
<p>RESEARCH NOTES:</p>
<p>King of the Hittites 1321-1297 BCE</p>
<p>{geni:about_me} [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mur%C5%A1ili_II Muršili II.]
<p>Mursili II (also spelled Mursilis II) was a king of the Hittite Empire (New kingdom) c. 1321–1295 BC (short chronology).[1]</p>
<p>Family</p>
<p>Mursili was the third born son of King Suppiluliuma I, one of the most powerful men to rule over the Hittite Empire, and Queen Henti . He was the younger brother of Arnuwanda II, he also had a sister and one more brother. Mursili is known to have had several children with his first wife Gassulawiya including three sons named Muwatalli, Hattusili III and Halpasulupi. A daughter named Massanauzzi (referred to as Matanaza in correspondence with the Egyptian king Ramesses II) was married to Masturi, a ruler of a vassal state. Mursili had further sons with a second wife named Tanuhepa. The names of the sons of this second wife have not been recorded however.[2] Through his son Muwatalli he had a grandson who also ruled the kingdom, Mursili III, Queen Maathorneferure and Tudhaliya IV were also grandchildren of Mursili II.
<p>Mursili assumed the Hittite throne after the premature death of Arnuwanda II who, like their father, fell victim to the plague which ravaged the Hatti in the 1320s BC. He was greeted with contempt by Hatti's enemies and faced numerous rebellions early in his reign, the most serious of which were those initiated by the Kaskas in the mountains of Anatolia, but also by the Arzawa kingdom in southwest Turkey because he was perceived to be an inexperienced ruler who only became king due to the early death of Arnuwanda. Mursili records the scorn of his foes in his Annals: “ You are a child; you know nothing and instill no fear in me. Your land is now in ruins, and your infantry and chariotry are few. Against your infantry, I have many infantry; against your chariotry I have many chariotry. Your father had many infantry and chariotry. But you who are a child, how can you match him? (Comprehensive Annals, AM 18-21)[3]”
<p>While Mursili was a young and inexperienced king, he was almost certainly not a child when he took the Hittite throne and must have reached an age to be capable of ruling in his own right.[3] Had he been a child, other arrangements would have been made to secure the stability of the Empire; Mursili after all had two surviving elder brothers who served as the viceroys of Carchemish (i.e.: Sarri-Kush) and Aleppo respectively.[3] Mursili II would prove to be more than a match for his successful father, in his military deeds and diplomacy. The Annals for the first ten years of his reign have survived and record that he carried out punitive campaigns against the Kaska tribes in the first two years of his reign in order to secure his kingdom's northern borders. The king then turned to the West to resist the aggression of Uhhaziti, king of Arzawa, who was attempting to lure away Hittite allies into his camp. The Annals also reveal that an "omen of the sun," or solar eclipse, occurred in his tenth year as king, just as he was about to launch his campaign against the Kaska peoples. While Mursili II's highest confirmed date was his twenty-second year,[4] he is believed to have lived beyond this date for a few more years and died after a reign of around 25 to 27 years. He was succeeded by his son Muwatalli II.


[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]