== Notes for [[Item:Q102692|Q102692]] ==

The Neṭīra family was an influential family of banker notables (Ar. jahābidha; sing. jahbadh) in Baghdad roughly contemporaneous with Saʿadya Gaon, from the end of the ninth century. Neṭīra and his sons, Sahl and Isḥāq, successfully appealed to the Abbasid caliph on a number of occasions on behalf of various gaonic figures and against the exilarch. Nathan the Babylonian (see Nathan ha-Bavlī) reports that Neṭīra personally appealed to al-Muʿtaḍid on behalf of Kohen Ṣedeq Gaon of Pumbedita in the latter’s conflict with the exilarch ʿUqba, who had diverted income ordinarily due the academy of Pumbedita to his own pockets. Nathan also reports that the leaders of the community met in Neṭīra’s house when choosing a new exilarch. According to a narrative published by Harkavy from an unidentified manuscript, Neṭīra actually assured the security of the Jews of al-Muʿtaḍid’s caliphate by rejecting his offer to renounce the jizya due him following a dream in which the prophet Elijah revealed an assassination plot to the caliph. A similar story appears in al-Masʿūdī’s contemporaneous chronicle, Murūj al-Dhahab . Neṭīra seems to have died in 916. His sons Sahl and Isḥāq, equally important to the caliphate as a source of financing for the caliph’s military ventures, later emerge as supporters of Saʿadya Gaon in his dispute with the exilarch David ben Zakkay I. The dispute was an offshoot of Saʿadya’s refusal to confirm one of David’s judicial decisions; the exilarch had then rejected Saʿadya’s authority, and he in turn had rejected the exilarch’s. Sahl and Isḥāq appealed to Caliph al-Muqtadir on Saʿadya’s behalf, but this did not resolve the crisis. Saʿadya, who had been Sahl’s teacher, made use of his connections with the sons of Neṭīra to petition the caliph on behalf of constituents throughout the Diaspora. Sahl was notable for his charitable support of Muslims and Jews alike.

Phillip Ackerman-Lieberman

Bibliography

Brody, Robert. The Geonim of Babylonia and the Shaping of Medieval Jewish Culture (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1998).

Fischel, Walter. Jews in the Economic and Political Life of Mediaeval Islam. 2nd rev. ed. (New York: Ktav, 1969).

Friedlander, Israel. “The Arabic Original of the Report of R. Nathan HaBabli.” Jewish Quarterly Review, o.s. 17, no. 4 (July 1905): 753–754.

Harkavy, Alexander. “Netira und seine Söhne, eine angesehene jüdische Familie in Baghdad am Anfang des X. Jahrhunderts,” in Berliner Festschrift, ed. A. Freimann and M. Hildesheimer (Frankfurt a.M.: J. Kaufmann, 1903), pp. 34–43.

Neubauer, Adolf. Mediaeval Jewish Chronicles (Oxford, 1887–95; repr. New York, 1959).

Phillip Ackerman-Lieberman. " Neṭīra Family." Encyclopedia of Jews in the Islamic World. Executive Editor Norman A. Stillman. Brill Online , 2012. Reference. Jim Harlow. 10 July 2012 <http://referenceworks.brillonline.com/entries/encyclopedia-of-jews-in-the-islamic-world/netira-family-SIM_0016760>

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000017152664752

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]