== Notes for [[Item:Q89828|Q89828]] ==

Titus Flavius Titianus,n en Roma hacia el 95 Ad. fue Prefecto de Egipto, perteneciente al Gens Flavio
( Rubio) El Flavius Titiani descendiente de los Flavios Sabini .

http://fabpedigree.com/s008/f744382.htm [???]

“Fab Pedigrees" provide no sources of historical merit. Here are two sources, though the second one isn’t utterly convincing:

'''From a preview snippet''' from "Rocznik Papirologii Prawniczej", ''The Journal of Jusristic Papyrology'' Volume 35 page 102:
"Though the name of the praefect was not preserved, there is no doubt that is was Titus Flavius Titianus . Titus Flavius titianus was Praefecuts Aegypti for an unusually long time in the middle part of Hadrian's reign. The earliest attestation of him in office is his inscription on the memnon Colossus, IColosse 24, from 20 March, AD 126 (10th year of Hadrian), the latest one -- p.Berol. 1164, from 27 March, AD AD 133 (17th year of Hadrian). For Titus Flavius Titianus, sse A. Stein "Die Präfekten von Ägypten in der römishen Kiserzeit [=Dessertationes Bermenses. Ser. i. Fasc. I]...." [https://www.google.com/books/edition/Rocznik_Papirologii_Prawniczej/5jhJAAAAYAAJ?hl=en&gbpv=1&bsq=Titus+Flavius+Titianus&dq=Titus+Flavius+Titianus&printsec=frontcover]

Lady M. R. M Amherst of Hackney's ''A Sketch of Egyptian History'' provides a pithy appendix entry:
"Titus Flavius Titianus -- March 126-August 131."
The book is not a grand historical book of merit. [https://www.google.com/books/edition/A_Sketch_of_Egyptian_History_from_the_Ea/wltFAAAAYAAJ?hl=en&gbpv=1&dq=Titus+Flavius+Titianus&pg=PA423&printsec=frontcover]

===List of governors of Roman Egypt===
Showing on a Wikipedia webpage is this: "126–133: Titus Flavius Titianus". The hyperlink of his name on the page shows little more: "Titus Flavius Titianus, governor of Egypt from AD 126 to 133."
# [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_governors_of_Roman_Egypt#Prefects_during_the_Principate]
# [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flavia_gens#Flavii_Titiani]

'''Other sources found in internet and Google Books searches''' for a Titus Flavius Titianus are these, but they do '''not''' mesh with dates and relationships:
* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Titus_Flavius_Titianus_(consul)
* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Titus_Flavius_Postumius_Titianus
* "The Histories" by Tacitu. Entering ‘Titus Flavius’ brings up one paragraph, which does not apply. See Book I, paragraph 9; January - March, A.D. 69. http://classics.mit.edu/Tacitus/histories.1.i.html
* The book “Empire X: The Scorpion’s Strike” by Anthony Riches is historical fiction. With the story is set in 189 AD, the Titus Flavius Titianus in the book doesn’t fit.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]