== Notes for [[Item:Q57735|Q57735]] ==

Provincial Mayor of the Santa Hermandad. He was the owner of Hato Grande or Villa de Santa Ana until his death in 1718. Hato Grande or Villa de Santa Ana later became San Francisco de Macoris in 1778 when the city was founded there. By that time those lands where in the hands of the Tejeda and De Jesus families according to historian Manuel Vicente Hernandez Gonzalez

Hernandez Gonzalez, Manuel Vicente. "Expansion fundacional y desarrollo en el norte dominicano (1680-1795) (p.154)".https://en.calameo.com/read/00034521460b5fbedbe91

http://eljaya.com/opinion/14498-la-historia-de-la-parroquia-santa-ana-2da-parte
--------------------
=== GEDCOM Source ===
2 JAN 2019 10:28:38 GMT -0500 Árbol familiar Geni World MyHeritage El Árbol Familiar Geni World se encuentra en el sitio <A href="http://www.geni.com" target="_blank">www.Geni.com</a>. Geni es propiedad de MyHeritage, quien se encarga de su operación. Collection 40000 https://www.myheritage.es/research/collection-40000/arbol-familiar-geni-world?itemId=291227706&action=showRecord 4 Francisco Ravelo Polanco&amp;lt;br&amp;gt;Género: Masculino&amp;lt;br&amp;gt;Nacimiento: Aprox. 1625 - Santiago De Los Caballeros, Santiago Province, Dominican Republic&amp;lt;br&amp;gt;Fallecimiento: 1718 - Santiago De Los Caballeros, Santiago Province, Dominican Republic&amp;lt;br&amp;gt;Padre: Juan Sanchez de Onsijera (Hinojeda) Polanco&amp;lt;br&amp;gt;Madre: Ana Ravelo&amp;lt;br&amp;gt;Esposa: Luisa de Mena y Almonte Pichardo&amp;lt;br&amp;gt;Hermanos: V. G. Garcia Polanco, Luis Polanco, Pbr. Juan Ravelo Polanco Record 40000:291227706:

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]