== Notes for [[Item:Q2992|Q2992]] ==

According to the Tapestry: "Don David, a scholar and wealthy died in Lisbon and had three daughters and four sons".

Reference: "Divrei ha-Yamim le-Bnei Yahya,( דברי הימים לבני יחייא )", by Eliakim Carmoly, Printed in Frankfort am Main/Rodelheim, Published by: Isak Kaufman, 1850. Genealogy of, and biographical work on, the Yahya family by Eliakim Carmoly. There is an introduction from Carmoly, in which he informs that the Yahya family is one of distinction from the time of Maimonides. Originally achieving greatness in Portugal and Spain, they after settled in Italy and Turkey. The text is preceded by a chart of the family, beginning with the Nasi, Don Yahya, and concluding with Don Gedalia. The text, in seven chapters, is set in a single column, primarily in rabbinic type although there are instances of vocalized square letters, and is accompanied by extensive footnotes. The final page is an announcement of the forthcoming publication of seven minor Yerushalmi tractates by Carmoli. The text of this book was compared to the "bin Yahya Family Tapestry", currently stored in the antiquity archives of Jewish Theological Seminary in New York City, by Abraham Greenstein - grandson of Abraham Gindi HaKohen. The text matches the Tapestry.

--------------------
David ibn Yaḥya Negro ben Gedaliah (ha-Rab shel Sefarad):

A prominent figure during the war between the kings of Castile and Portugal. By divulging a secret he succeeded in frustrating the plot of Queen Leonora to murder her son-in-law, and as a reward he was appointed chief rabbi of Castile, while King João of Portugal disposed of his estates in that country. At the time of his death, which occurred at Toledo in Oct.; 1385, he held the post of "almoxarife" for King Ferdinand of Castile. His tombstone has been preserved. http://www.jewishencyclopedia.com/articles/15051-yahya#anchor6

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051ADA323C81EFBBFA9822EF79916C1233
geni:6000000014745924327


[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]