== Notes for [[Item:Q117613|Q117613]] ==

The Nobiliario of Pedro Conde de Barcelos names "D. Rodrigo Alonso, D. Aldonça Alonso, D. Teresa Alonso" as the children of King Alfonso IX and "D. Aldonça Martinez de Silva"[761].
--------------------
Señora de Almuria y Villanueva de Carno, fue prima hermana del Rey Alfonso X el Sabio.
--------------------
Teresa Alfonso de Molina (1225-¿?). Según algunos autores, contrajo matrimonio con Nuño González de Lara "el Bueno", señor de la Casa de Lara.[16] No obstante, existe controversia entre los genealogistas sobre la identidad de la esposa de Nuño González de Lara, pues mientras que Luis de Salazar y Castro señaló que su esposa fue Teresa Alfonso, hija de Pedro Alfonso de León, Maestre de la Orden de Santiago y supuesto hijo ilegítimo del rey Alfonso IX de León, el conde Pedro de Barcelos señaló que su esposa fue Teresa Alfonso de León, hija ilegítima de Alfonso IX de León y de Aldonza Martínez de Silva.[17] Por su parte, Julio González González señaló que Teresa Alfonso podría haber sido hija de Urraca Alfonso de León, hija ilegítima de Alfonso IX de León, y de Lope Díaz II de Haro, señor de Vizcaya. Su esposo falleció en 1275, luchando contra los musulmanes, y ambos recibieron sepultura en el convento de San Pablo de Palencia.

----------

Don NUÑO González de Lara "el Bueno", son of conde don GONZALO Núñez de Lara & his second wife doña María Díaz de Haro (-killed in battle Éjica May 1275, bur monasterio de San Pablo de Palencia).

Governor of Castilla-la-Vieja.

m doña TERESA Alfonso, illegitimate daughter of [1075]don ALFONSO Infante de Castilla Señor de Molina & his mistress --- ([1225]- ---, bur Monasterio de San Pablo de Palencia).

Infante don ALFONSO de León, son of don ALFONSO IX King of León & his second wife Infanta doña Berenguela de Castilla (Autumn 1202-Salamanca 6 Jan 1272, bur Ciudad Real, castle of Calatrava-la-Nueva). The Chronicon de Cardeña names “Infant D. Alfonso…de Molina…hermano del Rey D. Ferrando”[584]. The cartulary of Tulle St Martin records the donation of "Ferrandus…rex Castellæ et Toleti cum fratre meo Infante domno Alfonso" with the consent of "dominæ Berengariæ genitricis meæ" dated 1217, which also names "avus meus dominus Allefonsus", subscribed by "Rodericus Didaci, comes Ferrandus, Alvarus Didaci, Alfonsus Talli, Rodericus Ruderici, Iohannes Gonçalvi, Suepius Telli, Gonçalvus Petri de Arnellis, maior merinos in Castella, Gonçalvus Roderici maior domus curiæ regis, Lupus Didaci de Faro Alferiz domini regis"[585]. Señor de Soria 1223. Señor de Molina y Mesa in 1240, by right of his first wife. Señor de Cigales 1255. Knight of the Order of Calatrava 15 Mar 1254. He took part in the conquests of Córdoba (1236), Murcia (1242), and Seville (1248).

Infante Alfonso had two illegitimate children by Mistress (1):

6. don JUAN Alfonso ([1225]-Palencia 1290). Legitimated 14 Oct 1243 by Pope Innocent IV. Dean at Burgos. He received a dispensation 24 Jan 1259 from Pope Alexander IV to become a bishop. Bishop of Palencia 1279-1290.

7. doña TERESA Alfonso (bur Palencia, Monasterio de San Pablo). Szabolcs de Vajay highlights the indication of her paternity provided by a missive from King Alfonso X to her future husband[593]. m don NUÑO González de Lara “el Bueno” Señor de Lara, son of conde don GONZALO Núñez de Lara & his second wife doña María Díaz de Haro (-killed in battle Éjica May 1275, bur Palencia, monastery of San Pablo). Governor of Castilla-la-Vieja.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]