== Notes for [[Item:Q111036|Q111036]] ==

'''Consul in 119 BC.'''
=Lucius Aurelius Cotta=
Lucius Aurelius Cotta (fl. 2nd century BC) was a Roman Senator and military commander who was elected Roman consul in 119 BC.

'''Biography'''
Not much is known about the early career of Cotta, who was born into the Plebeian gens Aurelia. By 122 BC had been elected to the rank of Praetor, and this was followed by his election as consul in 119 BC.

During his tenure in office, he, along with his colleague Lucius Caecilius Metellus Dalmaticus, opposed the passage of a law proposed by Gaius Marius, then a Plebeian tribune, which was meant to reform the configuration of the voting booths, thereby reducing the influence of the so-called Optimates. He asked the Senate to order Marius to present himself before them; when they did so, Marius responded by threatening to have Cotta imprisoned. After Cotta’s colleague Metellus was imprisoned on Marius’ orders, Cotta and the Senate backed down and allowed the passage of Marius’ law.

During his year in office, Cotta may have fought alongside Metellus in the campaign against the Dalmatians; the remaining sources are unclear if he actually participated or not.

'''Family'''
His father of the same name was consul in 144 BC. He had at least two children: one son with the same name who then become the consul in 65 BC and one daughter Aurelia Cotta, who later was married to Gaius Caesar the Older and bore him three children, two of which was the dictator Gaius Caesar the Younger and Julia the Younger, the first Roman emperor Augustus's maternal grandmother.

'''Source : '''
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Aurelius_Cotta_(consul_119_BC)

=Aurelii Cottae=
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aurelia_gens#Aurelii_Cottae

Lucius Aurelius Cotta
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.
Jump to: navigation, search
Lucius Aurelius Cotta, when praetor in 70 BC brought in a law for the reform of the jury lists, by which the judices were to be eligible, not from the senators exclusively as limited by Sulla, but from senators, equites and tribuni aerarii.

One-third were to be senators, and two-thirds men of equestrian census, one-half of whom must have been tribuni aerarii, a body as to whose functions there is no certain evidence, although in Cicero's time they were reckoned by courtesy amongst the equites. In 66 Cotta and Lucius Manlius Torquatus accused the consuls-elect for the following year of bribery in connection with the elections; they were condemned, and Cotta and Torquatus chosen in their places.

After the suppression of the Catilinarian conspiracy, Cotta proposed a public thanksgiving for Cicero's services, and after the latter had gone into exile, supported the view that there was no need of a law for his recall, since the law of Clodius was legally worthless.

He subsequently attached himself to Caesar, and it was currently reported that Cotta (who was then quindecemvir) intended to propose that Caesar should receive the title of king, it being written in the books of fate that the Parthians could only be defeated by a king. Cotta's intention was not carried out in consequence of the murder of Caesar, after which he retired from public life.

See Cicero, Orellis Onomasticon; Sallust, Catiline, 18; Suetonius, Caesar, 79; Livy, Epit. 97; Vell. Pat. ii. 32; Dio Cassius xxxvi. 44, xxxvii. I.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]