== Notes for [[Item:Q88503|Q88503]] ==

'''General Notes'''

Birth: 550 B.C.
Death: 488 B.C.

King of Macedonia Amyntas I Argaead was the son of King of Macedonia Alcetas I Argaead.2,3 He died 0498 B.C..1 King of Macedonia, circa, Persian Empire, 0540-0495 B.C..4 He was a tributory vassal to the Persian sovereign, Darius, 0547-0498 B.C.. He established good relations with the Athens of Pisistratus, albeit under his reign Macedon was subjected to Persia.5

>Children of King of Macedonia Amyntas I Argaead:
'''1.''' King of Macedonia Alexander I Philhellene Argaead +
'''2.''' N. N. Argaead +

# Roderick W. Stuart, Royalty for Commoners: The Complete Lineage of John of Gaunt, Son of Edward III, Kings of England, and Queen Philippa (.: ., 3rd Ed., 1998), 413-85. Hereinafter cited as RfC.
# Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 413-86.
# Herodotus of Halicarnassus, The History of Herodotus (London and New York: MacMillan and Co., 1890). Hereinafter cited as Herodotus' History.
# M. B. Sakellariou, Macedonia, 4000 Years of Greek History and Civilization, Greek Lands in History (8, Philadelphias Street, Athens, Greece: Ekdotike Athenon S.A., 1983/1988). Hereinafter cited as Sakellariou.
# Plato and his dialogues, online . Hereinafter cited as Plato and his dialogues.

--------------------

Amyntas I, King of Macedonia was the son of Alcetas I, King of Macedonia. Amyntas I, King of Macedonia died 498 B.C. The Persian Wars: Persia conquers Asia Minor (513-477 B.C.).King of Macedonia at circa, Persian Empire (540-495 B.C). He was a tributory vassal to the Persian sovereign, Darius (547-498 B.C.). He established good relations with the Athens of Pisistratus, albeit under his reign Macedon was subjected to Persia.
--------------------
Amyntas, I.- Fue soberano macedonio. 547 ac.. Dio refugio al Tirano Psistrato e Hipias debido a la expanción persas tuvo que reconocer a Dario I Rey Aquemenida. Falleció el 498 AC.
--------------------
Amyntas II (o III.), hijo de Arrideo, bisnieto de Alexander I., rey de Macedonia desde 393 (o 389) a 369 aC Llegó al trono después de los diez años de confusión que siguieron a la muerte de Arquelao , el mecenas del arte y la literatura, y mostró el mismo gusto por la cultura griega y de sus representantes. Pero tenía muchos enemigos en su casa; en 383 fue expulsado por los ilirios, pero en el año siguiente, con la ayuda de los Thessalianos, recuperó su reino. Llegó a la conclusión de un tratado con los espartanos, que asistió a él para reducir Olinto (379). También entró en una alianza con Jasón de Feres, y asiduamente cultivado la amistad de Atenas. Con su esposa, Eurídice, que tenía tres hijos, el menor de los cuales era el famoso Filipo de Macedonia.

Fuente Enciclopedia Britanica - 1911

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per01303.htm#0
http://www.gbnf.com/genealogy/sahlin/html/d0115/I8051.HTM

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Macedonia

KING OF THE MACEDONIANS 540 BC-498 BC

Ruled 6th Century BC, King of Macedonia 2
Note: Tributary vassal to the Persian sovereign, Darius Hystaspes. Bythe reign of Amyntas I (6th century BC) Macedonian power extended eastward beyond the Axius (Axiós) River to dominate the neighbouring Thracian tribes.

Ruled 6th Century BC, King of Macedonia 2
Note: Tributary vassal to the Persian sovereign, Darius Hystaspes. Bythe reign of Amyntas I (6th century BC) Macedonian power extended eastward beyond the Axius (Axiós) River to dominate the neighbouring Thracian tribes.

Ruled 6th Century BC, King of Macedonia 2
Note: Tributary vassal to the Persian sovereign, Darius Hystaspes. Bythe reign of Amyntas I (6th century BC) Macedonian power extended eastward beyond the Axius (Axiós) River to dominate the neighbouring Thracian tribes.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]