== Notes for [[Item:Q83253|Q83253]] ==

'''Ruqaiyah bint Muhammad''' Banu Hâshim1

There is a dispute about her father. Sunni Muslims believe she was Muhammad's biological daughter. Shi'a Muslims believe she was Muhammad's stepdaughter, daughter of Khadijah by her second marriage.

She had one son, 'Abdullah, who died in childhood. She had no further children.

>"Who were Khadijah's children by her second husband? This is another controversy that revolves round the other daughters or step-daughters of the Prophet (ص) besides Fatima (ع). These daughters, chronologically arranged, are: Zainab, Ruqayya, and Ummu Kulthoom. Some historians say that these were Khadijah's daughters by her second husband, whereas others insist they were her daughters by Muhammad (ص). The first view is held by Sayyid Safdar Husayn in his book The Early History of Islam in which he bases his conclusion on the contents of al-Sayyuti's famous work Tarikh al-Khulafa wal Muluk (history of the caliphs and kings; do not confuse it with Tabari's Tarikh; both books bear the same title, and this is not uncommon at all)." (Al-Jibouri)

b. circa 598, d. 623

Father: [http://www.geni.com/people/Prophet-Muhammad-of-Islam-PBUH/6000000000388939419 Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet2] b. 9 May 570, d. 8 June 632

Mother: [http://www.geni.com/people/Khadijah-al-Kubra-r-a/6000000000737643783 Khadîjah bint Khuwaylid banu As'sad al-Qurayshiyya2] b. circa 555, d. between 619 and 620

Ruqaiyah bint Muhammad Banu Hâshim was the daughter of Muhammad and Khadijah.1 She was the mother of 'Abd Allâh ibn 'Uthman Banu 'Abd Shams; the son of Ruqaiyah, daughter of the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him).3 Ruqaiyah bint Muhammad Banu Hâshim was born circa 598. She was the daughter of Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet and Khadîjah bint Khuwaylid banu As'sad al-Qurayshiyya.2 Ruqaiyah bint Muhammad Banu Hâshim married `Utbah ibn Abu Lahab Banu Hâshim, son of Clan Chief Abu Lahab ibn 'Abd al-Muttalib Banu Hâshim, before 610; Her 1st. Married in the pre-Islamic period.4,1 Ruqaiyah bint Muhammad Banu Hâshim and `Utbah ibn Abu Lahab Banu Hâshim were divorced circa 612; When Islam emerged and the Qur'anic verse "May the hands of Abu Lahab perish! May he himself perish" (Surah Al-Masad, Verse 1) was revealed, Abu Lahab told his son to divorce her, the daughter of the Prophet himself.1 Ruqaiyah bint Muhammad Banu Hâshim married 'Uthman ibn 'Affan al-Qurayshi, 3rd Rightly Guided Caliph of Islam, son of 'Affan ibn Abûl 'Âs, circa 613; Her 2nd (divorcee).1 Ruqaiyah bint Muhammad Banu Hâshim migrated with her 2nd husband to Abyssinia at Africa.1 She died in 623 at 2 A.H., Medina.1

Family 1

`Utbah ibn Abu Lahab Banu Hâshim b. circa 580

Family 2

'Uthman ibn 'Affan al-Qurayshi, 3rd Rightly Guided Caliph of Islam b. circa 593, d. 17 June 656

Children

'Abd Allâh ibn 'Uthman Banu 'Abd Shams b. c 615

Citations

[S469] Al-Islam.com, online http://www.al-islam.com/, The Prophet's daughters.

[S653] PoH, online http://www.friesian.com/

[S469] Al-Islam.com, online http://www.al-islam.com/, The Prophet's grandchildren.

[S954] Esq., Bengal Civil Service William Muir Muir on Mahomet, Vol. 2, Chap. 2

--------------------

Ruqayyah is viewed as the daughter of Muhammad and Khadijah bint Khuwaylid by Sunni Muslims[citation needed], other Muslim sects such as Shia Muslims debate her being daughter of Muhammed (or even of Khadijah) (see Genealogy of Khadijas daughters). She died in 2 AH (624 CE).[citation needed]

Contents [hide]

1 Marriage & children

2 Migration to Abyssinia

3 Dispute over being daughter of Muhammad &/or Khadijah

4 See also

5 References

[edit] Marriage & children

She was first married to Utbah ibn Abu Lahab. His father, Abu Lahab, forced Utbah to repudiate Ruqayyah due to Abu Lahab's opposition to Muhammad and his teachings. Muslim convert Uthman ibn Affan had long admired Ruqayyah and was then able to ask for her hand in marriage.[1] Ruqayyah's son was Abd-Allah ibn Uthman, who died when he was 2 years old.[citation needed]

[edit] Migration to Abyssinia

She participated in the Migration to Abyssinia.[citation needed]

[edit] Dispute over being daughter of Muhammad &/or Khadijah

Main article: Genealogy of Khadijah's daughters

The daughters attributed to Muhammad are;

Zainab bint Muhammad, married to her maternal cousin Abu al-Aas ibn al-Rabee before al-Hijra

The daughters attributed to Muhammad are;

Zainab bint Muhammad, married to her maternal cousin Abu al-Aas ibn al-Rabee before al-Hijra

Ruqayyah bint Muhammad, was first married to Utbah ibn Abu Lahab & then to Uthman ibn Affan

Umm Kulthum bint Muhammad, was first married to Utaybah bin Abu Lahab & then to Uthman ibn Affan after the death of her sister Ruqayyah

Fatimah, was married to Ali ('Ali bin Abi Talib)

According to some Shia Muslim sources she only had one daughter, Fatimah. The others either belonged to her sister[2] or were orphaned girls raised by her[3]. Possibly, all of them were Khadijah's but only Fatimah was born to Muhammad.[citation needed] Sunni Muslims however do not contest the parentage of her daughters.[citation needed] They affirm what the Qur'an states, "O Prophet! Tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believers..."[4].[citation needed]

The famous Sunni scholar Yusuf ibn abd al-Barr says: "His children born of Khadīja are four daughters; there is no difference of opinion about that".[5]

Marriage rules

Based on narrations found even in Sunnī[6] sources, Muhammad said that daughters of his household could only marry those who were from Banū Hāshim.[6].

But(if it is assumed that Zainab, Ruqayyah and Umm Kulthum were daughter of Muhammed and Khadijah) this argument does not seem to be correct as:

Zainab was married to Abu al-Aas ibn al-Rabee who belonged to Banu Abd Shams clan of the tribe Quraish.

Ruqayyah and after her death Umm Kulthum were married to Uthman bin Affan who belonged to Banu Umayya clan of the tribe Quraish[7].

== Sources ==

* Yasin T. Al-Jibouri, ''Khadijah, Daughter of Khuwaylid, Wife of Prophet Muhammad'' at al-Islam.org

* http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ruqayyah_bint_Muhammad
--------------------
uqayyah bint Muhammad (Arabic: رقية بنت محمد‎, Ruqayyah bint Muḥammad) (c.601 - 624) is regarded as the daughter of the Islamic prophet Muhammad and Khadija.

She was born in Mecca, apparently the fourth child of Muhammad and Khadija, so probably in 601 or 602.

She was married before August 610 to her cousin, Utbah ibn Abu Lahab, but the marriage was never consummated.[3] Ruqayyah became a Muslim when her mother did.

When Muhammad began to preach openly in 613, the Quraysh reminded Muhammad that they had "relieved him of his care for his daughters" and decided to return them so that he would have to support them at his own expense. They told Utbah that they would give him "the daughter of Aban ibn Sa'id ibn Al-As or the daughter of Sa'id ibn Al-As" if he divorced Ruqayyah.[6] After Muhammad warned Abū Lahab that he would go to Hell, Abu Lahab said he would never speak to his son again unless he divorced Ruqayyah, which Utbah accordingly did.

By 615 Ruqayyah was married to a prominent Muslim, Uthman ibn Affan. She accompanied him on the first Migration to Abyssinia,[9][10][11] where she suffered a miscarriage. They returned to Abyssinia in 616, and there Ruqayyah gave birth to a son, Abdullah, in 619. Abdullah died when he was six years old in Medina. She had no further children.

Uthman and Ruqayyah were among those who returned to Mecca in 619. Uthman emigrated to Medina in 622, and Ruqayyah followed him later.

Ruqayyah was said to be extremely beautiful. When Usama ibn Zayd was sent on an errand to their house, he found himself staring at her and at Uthman in turns. Muhammad asked Usama, "Have you ever seen a more handsome couple than those two?" and he agreed that he had not.

Ruqayyah fell ill in March 624. Uthman was excused from his military duties in order to nurse her. She died later in the month, on the day when Zayd ibn Harithah returned to Medina with news of their victory at the Battle of Badr.

When Muhammad returned to Medina after the battle, the family went to grieve at her grave. The women wept noisily, and Umar hit them with his whip; but Muhammad said: "Let them weep, Umar; but beware of the braying of Satan."

In several prominent Shia accounts Uthman is accused of beating Ruqayyah to death


•Khadijah bint Khuwaylid had two children named Hind, one with her first husband, Abu Hala, and one with her second husband, 'Atiq ibn 'Abid:
Hind bint Abi Hala: The son of Khadija and Abu Hala
Hind bint 'Atiq: The daughter of Khadija and 'Atiq ibn 'Abid

•google source: "Khadija bint Khuwaylid child hind"

•To help resolve dispute.

•how many marriages did Khadija bint Khuwaylid have?

•Khadija bint Khuwaylid was married three times and had children from all of her marriages:
Atiq ibn 'A'idh ibn' Abdullah Al-Makhzumi: Khadija's first husband, to whom she had a daughter named Hindah
Malik ibn Nabash ibn Zargari ibn at-Tamimi: Khadija's second husband, to whom she had two sons named Hala and Hind
The Prophet Muhammad: Khadija's third and final husband, to whom she had at least six children
Khadija was a wealthy businesswoman and the first follower of Islam. She was often called the First Believer or the Mother of Believers.

Born when Muhammad was 33 years of age.

Wikipédia fr : Rukayya (arabe ruqayya : élevée), deuxième des quatre filles de Mahomet et Khadija, morte avant son père. Le calife Uthman fut successivement époux et veuf d'elle et de sa soeur Umm Kulthum. On trouve la forme Rokia en Afrique noire. <li>Wikipédia anglaise : Ruqayyah is a daughter of the Muslim Prophet Muhammad. There are different beliefs as to her biological parents. Some Sunnis and some Shi'a view her as the daughter of Muhammad himself and his first wife Khadijah bint Khuwaylid, but some Shia and non-Muslims view her as the daughter of Khadijah's assumed previous husband. See Genealogy of Khadijas' daughters. Ruqayyah's first marriage was to Utbah ibn Abu Lahab, the son of Prophet Muhammad's paternal uncle Abu Lahab, who turned out to be a fierce enemy of Prophet Muhammad from the beginning of his public mission. (ref) Ruqayyah's second marriage was to Uthman ibn Affan, one of Prophet Muhammad's closest companions. Ruqayyah had a son from her second marriage, Abd-Allah ibn Uthman, who died when he was 2 years old. Ruqayyah died in 2 AH (624 CE). [edit] Contradictory beliefs Sunnis believe the she is Muhammad's biological daughter. Shi'as believe that she is Muhammad's stepdaughter since at the time of her birth Khadija should not have married Prophet Muhammad yet, or that she could not have given birth to all the five children she purpotedly shared with Prophet Muhammad during the time they were married. (Shi'a Ref) She was born three years after the birth of Zainab, when Muhammad was 33.(ref)

-- MERGED NOTE ------------

Wikidata: https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q2300129 | Geni: https://www.geni.com/people/6000000001694449866

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]