== Notes for [[Item:Q87228|Q87228]] ==

Marcus Junius Brutus the Elder From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Marcus Junius Brutus known by modern historians as Marcus Junius Brutus the Elder, was a Roman man who lived in the 1st century BC. He was tribune in 83 BC[1] and was the founder of the colony in Capua.[2] He was the first husband to Servilia Caepionis who was the elder half-sister of Cato the Younger. His son by Servilia is the more celebrated Marcus Junius Brutus who was one of the chief assassins of Julius Caesar.

In 77 BC Brutus was placed in command of the forces in Cisalpine Gaul following the death of Lucius Cornelius Sulla who had been dictator. He also placed in command at Mutina where he withstood the attacks from Pompey the Great for a while. For reasons unknown, he put himself and his troops in the power of Pompey, on the understanding that their lives should be spared. Nonetheless, Pompey ordered his death and forwarded to Rome the news of his surrender and execution. The senate blamed Pompey for the perfidious act.[3][4][5] He is quoted by Cicero to have been well skilled in public and private law.[6]

Forrás / Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Junius_Brutus_the_Elder

--------------------

Brutus is best known for his role in the assasination of Julius Caesar.

The historian Plutarch noted that Julius Ceasar believed Brutus to have been his illegitimate son, as his mother Servilia had been Caesar's lover during their youth.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Junius_Brutus

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]