== Notes for [[Item:Q114044|Q114044]] ==

Dª Maria Pais Ribeira, a Ribeirinha (* c. 1170 + &l 1258), Senhora de Vila do Conde, Portugal

Pai D. Paio Moniz de Ribeira * c. 1140

Mãe: Urraca Nunes Bragança * c. 1150

Fontes:

HGCRP-Tomo I-pg. 55

LMP-vol. 1-pg. 168

NFP-vol. VI-pg. 361 (Limas)

PMG-

PMG-pg. 183

PMG-pg. 201

(http://www.geneall.net/P/per_page.php?id=157)

I) Figura histórica e designada por "fogo", pois muitos se queimaram nas chamas que ela ateava!

Dona Maria Pais Ribeiro, Senhora de Vila do Conde, adoptara o apelido (Ribeiro), pela sua ascendência Galega, da Casa dos Condes da Ribeira. Maria Pais Ribeiro, teve acesso à Corte do Rei Dom Sancho I, através de uma cunhada. D. Sancho I, segundo Rei de Portugal, tinha no seu "Curriculum", diversos romances, sendo talvez o mais conhecido, o que o ligava a Dona Maria Pais Ribeiro, por quem se apaixonara anos mais tarde, por volta de 1257 Dom Sancho I, seu filho Afonso, e sua esposa Dona Urraca, doaram a Dona Maria Pais Ribeiro, (A Ribeirinha), uma extensa herdade, que hoje constitui grande parte da freguesia de Maçãs de Dona Maria, concelho de Alvaiázere, distrito de Leiria, Portugal. Deste enlace nasceu a sua filha; Dona Teresa Sanches. Tem uma rua com o seu nome na cidade de Vila do Conde Portugal.
--------------------
Children out of wedlock[edit] With Maria Aires de Fornelos, daughter of Aires Nunes de Fornelos and Maior Pais, who was buried at the Monastery of Santo Tirso in accordance with her last will, Sancho had two children, both born before his marriage to Dulce of Aragon:[22][23][d]

Martim Sanches (born before 1175)[25][23] Count of Trastámara. Martim married Elo Pérez de Castro, daughter of Pedro Fernández de Castro, with no issue from this marriage;[26] Urraca Sanches[16] (born before 1175),[27][26] was married to Lourenço Soares, son of Soeiro Viegas and Sancha Bermúdez de Traba.

After Dulce's death, he had an affair with María Pais de Ribeira "a Ribeiriña" for whom he wrote and dedicated a cantiga de amigo, A Ribeirinha, composed in 1199, the oldest text known in Portuguese poetry.[23] At least six children were born of this relationship:[28][29]

Rodrigo Sanches (died 1245), had a bastard son with Constança Afonso de Cambra called Afonso Rodrigues, a Franciscan friar and the "Guardian of the Convent of Lisbon";[26][30] Gil Sanches (died on 14 September 1236), a cleric and troubadour, his father left him 8,000 morabetinos in his will. Gil granted fueros to the settlers of Sardezas in 1213;[26][31] Nuno Sanches, he died in his childhood on a 16 of December in an unknown year. He could also have been the son of Maria Aires de Fornelos;[32] Maior Sanches, also died at an early age on 27 of August of an unknown year;[33] Teresa Sanches, her father left her 7,000 morabetinos in his will. She was the second wife of Alfonso Téllez de Meneses whom she married before 1220 and with whom she had issue;[26] Constança Sanches (1204-8 August 1269). Her father left her 7,000 morabetinos in his will. She was the God-mother of her grand-niece, Infanta Sancha and left her half of Vila do Conde, Avelaneda, Pousadela, Parada and Maçãs. She also owned estates in Torres Vedras.[34]
******************************************************************* D. Maria Pais Ribeira , also referred to by the nickname the riverfront (c. 1170 - Grijó , 1258 ), it was a noble Portuguese . He was distinguished by being concubine of Sancho I of Portugal .

Index [ Show ] Biography [ edit | Edit source-code ] She was the first daughter of D. Paio Moniz de Ribeira and D. Urraca Nunes de Bragança . [ 1 ]

It is said that she was " white skinned, hairless, beautiful, seductive," qualities that charmed the ruler and captivated the nobles of his Court. In 1198 , he inspired Paio Soares de Taveiros to compose the Cantiga da Ribeirinha , the first literary text in Galician-Portuguese language to be recorded. [ 2 ]

As a troubadour , D. Sancho I dedicated the following song to him of friend :

Oh my god How I live in great care By my friend, I am stretched! It takes me too long My friend in Guarda! Ay, I'm poor How do I live in gram desire? For my friend it takes time and I do not see! It takes me too long My friend in the Guard. " [ 3 ] With the sovereign, of whom he had been a lover since before 1200 and until his death, he had three daughters and three sons:

" A son was named Don Gil Sanches , and it was an honorable clergyman who was in Spain, and there was the name of Don Maria Garcia, and another son was Don Rodrigo Sanches, who was not married or had children, and one daughter was named Dona Constança Sanches , who was professed in Santa Cruz de Coimbra and had no children, another daughter named Teresa Sanches and was married to Dom Afonso Teles de Meneses and had children: Dom João Afonso and Dom Martim Afonso and Dona Maria Afonso who was abbess of Gradefes . " The other two children, D. Nuno Sanches and D. Major Sanches, died at an early age.

Lady of great beauty, and " for the reasons of conversation that she had with ... ", she and the couple's children received from the sovereign the Vila do Conde praying the donation:

" In the name of God, I Sancho, by the grace of God King of Portugal ... and give firmly impart to my sons and daughters who have to D. Maria Pais, Vila do Conde which is located at the mouth of river Ave . We gave Firmly that they should take it as their own, by hereditary right, forever. It is lawful for them, their children, and descendants to make it ever their own as their own inheritance. Therefore, whoever accepts this decision is blessed by God, Amen. But whosoever believeth in it shall be cursed and excommunicated, and the wrath of God come upon him. Lamego, July of the 1209 era . The king gives him and his children several donations, namely Parada and Pousadela (April 23, 1200) and Vila do Conde (July 1207). In the testament of King are also referred to Maria Paes and his children.

After the death of the king, in Coimbra, on March 26 , 1212 , he retired to his lands in Vila do Conde. During the journey, dressed in a white color of mourning at the time, when passing near Hazels of the Way , Gomes Lourenço Viegas came to meet him , whom she had fallen in love with when, still in the king's life, he had seen her in the Coimbra Paços. After fighting with Martim Pais Ribeiro , brother of D. Maria, and with other horsemen who accompanied her, he managed to seize her, taking refuge in the Kingdom of Leon .

At the request of Martim Pais Ribeiro, Afonso II of Portugal wrote a letter to Fernando I of Leon asking him to have Gomes Lourenço return to Portugal. Faced with the refusal of Gomes Lourenço, on the grounds that he could become the victim of D. Maria's relatives, if he did so. D. Maria, however, deftly persuaded Gomes Lourenço that he too had fallen in love and that upon returning to Portugal he would obtain the pardon of the sovereign, since he would marry him.

However, upon returning to the Portuguese Court, D. Maria urged the king to do justice and to be ruthless. In this way, the sovereign ordered the execution of Gomes Lourenço.

It was later espoused by the noble Galician João Fernandes de Lima , the Good, who also had offspring.

He will have come to collect himself at the Monastery of Grijó , where he died at an advanced age of over ninety. It was buried in the monastery of Bouro .

Their landlords were inherited by their daughters with the sovereign, D. Teresa and D. Constança Sanches (1204-1269). This last one, in turn, left expressive legacies to the Monastery of Grijó. [ 4 ]

References Go to top ↑ Urraca Nunes, cf. PARDINHAS, 1997: 14-17 Go to top ↑ Your text is part of the Help Songbook . Go to top ↑ D. Sancho I. " Songbook of the National Library ". Apud: FERREIRA, Carlos Aparecido. The Woman in Portuguese Literature: its image and its questions through the epistolary literary. (Master thesis presented to USP). Go to top ↑ PARDINHAS, 1997: 14-17 Bibliography [ edit | Edit source-code ] PARDINHAS, Albertino Alves. Monograph of Cortegaça: Notes for History of the Honor, Couto and County (extinct) of this millenarian settlement and other more recent memories (3rd ed.) . Oliveira de Azeméis (Portugal): Junta de Freguesia de Cortegaça, 1997. 312p.

--------------------
Maria Moniz de Ribeira was a lady of the medieval nobility of the Kingdom of Portugal and concubine of King D. Sancho I of Portugal , with whom she had children.

Family relationships [ edit | Edit source-code ] Was the daughter of D. MONIO Osórez Cabrera , lieutenant in Cabrera and Ribera in the Kingdom of Leon , and Maria Nunes de Grijó, [ 1 ] daughter of Nuno Soares Grijó and Elvira Gomes. [ 2 ] She did not marry, but a relationship with King D. Sancho I had:

Pedro Moniz also called Pero Moniz that gave origin to the Machado family . [ 3 ] References Go to top ↑ Sotto Mayor Pizarro 1987 , pp. 168 and 261. Go to top ↑ Sotto Mayor Pizarro 1987 , p. 167. Go to top ↑ Sotto Mayor Pizarro 1987 , p. 168. Bibliography [ edit | Edit source-code ] Manuel José da Costa Felgueiras Gayo , Nobiliário da Familias de Portugal, Carvalhos de Basto, 2nd Edition, Braga, 1989. vol. VII-pg. 61 and vol. X-pg. 64. Sotto Mayor Pizarro, José Augusto (1987). The Patrons of the Monastery of Grijó . Port: [sn] ISBN 978-0883-1886-37
--------------------
D. Maria Pais de Ribeira, A Ribeirinha (como também é conhecida) (c. 1170 - Grijó, 1258), foi uma nobre portuguesa. Destacou-se por ser concubina de Sancho I de Portugal.

Foi a primeira filha de D. Paio Moniz de Ribeira e D. Urraca Nunes de Bragança.

Afirma-se que era "branca de pele, de fulvos cabelos, bonita, sedutora", qualidades que encantaram o soberano e cativaram os nobres de sua Corte. Em 1198, inspirou Paio Soares de Taveirós a compor a Cantiga da Ribeirinha, primeiro texto literário em Língua galego-portuguesa de que se tem registo.

Enquanto trovador, D. Sancho I dedicou-lhe a seguinte cantiga de amigo:

"Ay eu coitada Como vivo em gran cuidado Por meu amigo que ei alongado! Muito me tarda O meu amigo na Guarda!

Ay eu coitada Como vivo em gram desejo Por meu amigo que tarda e não vejo! Muito me tarda O meu amigo na Guarda."[3] Com o soberano, do qual foi amante desde antes de 1200 e até à sua morte, teve três filhas e três filhos:

"Um filho houve nome Dom Gil Sanches, e foi chus honrado clérigo que houve na Espanha, e houve por barregam dona Maria Garcia; e outro filho houve o nome Dom Rodrigo Sanches que nom foi casado nem houve filhos; e uma filha houve nome Dona Constança Sanches, que foi professa em Santa Cruz de Coimbra e nom houve filhos; outra filha houve nome Teresa Sanches e foi casada com Dom Afonso Teles de Meneses e houve filhos: Dom João Afonso e Dom Martim Afonso e Dona Maria Afonso que foi abadessa de Gradefes." Os outros dois filhos, D. Nuno Sanches e D. Maior Sanches, faleceram em tenra idade.

Senhora de grande beleza, e "pelas razões de conversação que com ela teve…", ela e filhos do casal receberam do soberano a Vila do Conde rezando a doação:

"Em nome de Deus, Eu Sancho, pela graça de Deus Rei de Portugal… dou e firmemente concedo aos meus filhos e filhas que tenho de D. Maria Pais, a Vila do Conde que fica situada junto à foz do rio Ave. E concedemos firmemente que a tomem como sua, por direito hereditário, para sempre. É-lhes lícito a ela, aos filhos e descendentes para fazer dela sempre o que quiserem como sua própria herança. Portanto, todo aquele que aceitar esta decisão seja abençoado por Deus, Amen. Porém aquele que a desvirtuar, seja amaldiçoado e excomungado e a ira de Deus venha sobre ele. Lamego, mês de Julho da era de 1209. O rei faz-lhe, e aos seus filhos, várias doações, nomeadamente Parada e Pousadela (23 de Abril de 1200) e Vila do Conde (Julho de 1207). No testamento do rei são também referidos D. Maria Paes e os seus filhos.

Após a morte do rei, em Coimbra, a 26 de Março de 1211, retirou-se para as suas terras de Vila do Conde. Durante a viagem, trajada de branco cor do luto à época, ao passar perto de Avelãs de Caminho, saiu-lhe ao encontro Gomes Lourenço Viegas, que por ela se apaixonara quando, ainda em vida do rei, a vira nos Paços de Coimbra. Após lutar com Martim Pais Ribeiro, irmão de D. Maria, e com outros cavaleiros que a acompanhavam, logrou apossar-se dela, refugiando-se no Reino de Leão.

A pedido de Martim Pais Ribeiro, Afonso II de Portugal redigiu uma carta para Afonso IX de Leão rogando-lhe que fizesse com que Gomes Lourenço retornasse a Portugal. Diante da recusa de Gomes Lourenço, sob a alegação de que poderia vir a ser vítima dos parentes de D. Maria, caso assim o fizesse. D. Maria, entretanto, habilmente convenceu Gomes Lourenço que também por ele se apaixonara e que, ao retornarem a Portugal conseguiria obter o perdão do soberano, uma vez que com ele se casaria.

Entretanto, ao retornarem à Corte Portuguesa, D. Maria instou o rei a que fizesse justiça e que fosse implacável. Deste modo, o soberano ordenou a execução de Gomes Lourenço.

Mais tarde foi desposada, pelo fidalgo galego João Fernandes de Lima, o Bom, com quem também teve descendência.

Terá vindo a recolher-se ao Mosteiro de Grijó, onde veio a falecer com a avançada idade de mais de noventa anos. Foi sepultada no mosteiro de Bouro.

Os seus senhorios foram herdados por suas filhas com o soberano, D. Teresa e D. Constança Sanches (1204-1269). Esta última, por sua vez, deixou expressivos legados ao Mosteiro de Grijó.

in Wikipedia

Paramour of the king.

-- MERGED NOTE ------------

Wikidata: https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q10326043 | Geni: https://www.geni.com/people/6000000010782427706

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]