== Notes for [[Item:Q87638|Q87638]] ==

Glaphyra's mother, the first wife of Archelaus, was an Armenian Princess whose name is unknown and who died by 8 BCE.[7] She may have been a daughter of King Artavasdes II of Armenia, son of Tigranes the Great and Cleopatra of Pontus, a daughter of Mithridates VI from his first wife his sister Laodice.[6] If so, Glaphyra’s parents may have been distant relatives. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glaphyra

--------------------------------------

Laodice (sister-wife of Mithridates VI of Pontus)

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Laodice (130/129 BC-about 90 BC) was a beautiful Pontian Princess and Queen who was first wife and sister-wife to King Mithridates VI of Pontus.[1]

She was a monarch of Persian and Greek Macedonian ancestry. Laodice was the second daughter and among the children born to the Pontian Monarchs Laodice VI and Mithridates V of Pontus (reigned 150 BC-120 BC), thus she was born and raised in the Kingdom of Pontus.

Her father was assassinated in about 120 BC in Sinope poisoned by unknown persons at a lavish banquet which he held.[2] In the will of her father, Mithridates V left the Kingdom to the joint rule of her mother and her brothers: Mithridates VI and Mithridates Chrestus. The brothers of Laodice were both under aged to rule and their mother retained all power as regent.[3] Laodice VI’s regency over Pontus was from 120 BC-116 BC (even perhaps up to 113 BC). Laodice VI favored Mithridates Chrestus over Mithridates VI. During her mother’s regency, Mithridates VI had escaped from the plotting of their mother and had gone into hiding.

Mithridates VI between 116 BC-113 BC returned to Pontus from hiding and was hailed King. He was able to remove their mother and brother from the Pontian throne, thus Mithridates VI became the sole ruler of Pontus. Mithridates VI showed clemency towards their mother and brother, by imprisoning them both.[4] Laodice VI died in prison of natural causes, however Mithridates Chrestus could have died in prison from natural causes or was tried for treason and was executed on his orders.[5] When they died, Mithridates VI gave his mother and brother a royal funeral.[6]

When Mithridates VI became the sole ruler of Pontus, Laodice and her brother were practicable strangers. The last time Mithridates VI saw Laodice, she was a little girl in the nursery who was spoiled. Sometime after Mithridates VI became sole King of Pontus, Mithridates VI had married his sister Laodice. Mithridates VI married Laodice to preserve the purity of their blood-line; as a wife to rule with him as a sovereign over Pontus; to be the mother of his legitimate children to ensure their succession and to claim his right as a ruling monarch. Through marriage, Laodice became a Queen of Pontus and Mithridates VI gave her the title of Queen.

Laodice bore her brother four sons: Mithridates, Arcathius, Machares, Pharnaces II of Pontus and two daughters: Cleopatra of Pontus and Drypetina (a diminutive form of "Drypetis"). Drypetina was Mithridates VI’s most devoted daughter. Her baby teeth never fell out, so she had a double set of teeth[7].

At some point Laodice and Mithridates VI, set about to establish good relations with the citizens of Athens and the Greek island of Delos. Laodice and her brother-husband made benefactions to the Athenians and the Delians. The exact nature of their benefactions and their voluntary donations are unknown. On Delos, honorific statues have survived that have been identified to be of Mithridates VI and Laodice.[8]

During one time of the absence of Mithridates VI, Laodice began to have affairs with the friends of her brother-husband. Through one of his friends, Laodice became pregnant and gave birth to her son. To conceal her unfaithfulness to Mithridates VI, Laodice deceived a report of his death and on his return, plotted to have Mithridates VI’s life taken by poison.[9]

At this time Mithridates VI, returned to Pontus without warning and suddenly; and caught Laodice with her lovers. Her brother-husband and his companions were shocked and distressed to see this at Sinope. The child that Laodice gave birth too was not his and he had been gone for too long for the child to be his. He hid his rage and embraced Laodice and visited his harem nursery to count his children. Festive banquets were prepared to welcome him back.[10]

Prior to the feast, Mithridates VI’s servants warned him of Laodice’s plots, at the feast and they also named Laodice’s co-conspirators. Feeling betrayed, he cursed his late mother for raising such a treacherous daughter, so he had Laodice and her collaborators executed immediately. Laodice’s new born son was spared by Mithridates VI and allowed him to live. After the execution of Laodice, Mithridates VI never wanted to marry a Queen by that name which spelt trouble.[11] Laodice’s fate was common knowledge and due to her treachery, Mithridates VI found it very difficult to make any future wife his official queen.[12]

[edit] Arts & Literature

There is a painting on display at the Bibliothèque nationale de France of Laodice and Mithridates. The painting is titled Mithridates poisons Laodice, his wife/sister; Mithridates wins a duel.

In The Grass Crown, the second in the Masters of Rome series, Colleen McCullough, the Australian writer, describes in detail the various aspects of his life - the murder of his sister-wife Laodice, his experiments with poison, and his fear and hatred of Rome. The aging Gaius Marius meets Mithridates in the palace of Ariarathes in Eusebeia Mazaca, a city in Cappadocia, and the former Roman Consul, quite alone and surrounded by the Pontic army, orders Mithridates to leave Cappadocia immediately and go back to Pontus - which he does.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laodice_(sister-wife_of_Mithridates_VI_of_Pontus)
--------------------
'''
=Laodice of Cappadocia=
'''

Laodice of Cappadocia, also known as Laodice (Ancient Greek: Λαοδίκη Laodíkē; flourished 95 BC) was a Princess from the Kingdom of Pontus.

'''Early life'''

Laodice was a monarch of Persian and Greek Macedonian ancestry. She was the daughter; first born child of the Pontian Monarchs Laodice VI and Mithridates V Euergetes who reigned 150-120 BC. Among her siblings, was King Mithridates VI Eupator Dionysius who reigned 120–63 BC. She was born and raised in the Kingdom of Pontus.

Between 130-126 BC, her paternal aunt the Pontian Princess; the Queen and Regent Nysa of Cappadocia had died. Nysa was the wife and later widower of the previous Cappadocian King Ariarathes V Eusebes Philopator. Their son and youngest child Ariarathes VI Epiphanes Philopator, became sole ruler of Cappadocia.

Laodice’s father Mithridates V was aware of the turbulent political situation in Cappadocia, which ended in the death of his sister, Nysa. In the mids 120’s BC, Mithridates V became interested in Cappadocia and wanted to expand Pontian foreign policy in the country. Mithridates V decided to invade Cappadocia as a foreign country, in order control and overrun Cappadocia.

'''Queen consort'''

Ariarathes VI, in order to beat off any Pontian invasion and to defeat his opponent, arranged with Mithridates V to marry Laodice. There is a possibility that the invasion of Mithridates V was in fact friendly on behalf of Ariarathes VI to settle internal Cappadocian strife and help him to establish himself as a ruler. The marriage that occurred with Ariarathes VI and Laodice marked a cessation of hostilities between Cappadocia and Pontus. Through this arranged marriage, Mithridates V was able to keep a close check on Ariarathes VI and thus through his daughter was able to control Cappadocia indirectly and Laodice could act presumably in her father’s interests. Through marriage to her paternal cousin, Laodice became Queen of Cappadocia who wielded considerable power. Laodice bore Ariarathes VI one daughter and two sons: Nysa who married King Nicomedes III Euergetes of Bithynia; Ariarathes VII Philometor and Ariarathes VIII Epiphanes.

Mithridates V had died in 120 BC and her first brother Mithridates VI had succeeded their father as King of Pontus. Ten years later Laodice may have found it much harder to exert control over Ariarathes VI. There could be a possibility that the Pontian political influence in Cappadocian affairs may have declined, as Ariarathes VI became independent minded and began to assert himself.

A Greek nobleman called Gordius of Cappadocia was a member of the court of Laodice and Ariarathes VI, who was a good friend to Mithridates VI. Laodice’s brother had continued the Pontian foreign policy in Cappadocia where their father had left off. Mithridates VI had plotted with Gordius to assassinate Ariarathes VI between 116 BC-111 BC. When Mithridates VI and Gordius successful assassinated Ariarathes VI, there is a possibility Laodice wasn’t involved in the murder of Ariarathes VI.

'''Regency'''

After the death of Ariarathes VI, Laodice became a powerful widow and monarch in Cappadocia who acted as a regent for her first young son Ariarathes VII. Laodice’s former son-in-law and widower King Nicomedes III Euergetes, wanted to take advantage of the political situation in Cappadocia, so he without informing anyone suddenly invaded Cappadocia with his army as the Cappadocian throne was empty after the death of Ariarathes VI.

When Nicomedes III invaded Cappadocia, Laodice decided to support him. In order to preserve Cappadocia, her sovereignty and the succession of her sons, Laodice married Nicomedes III and her life would have better opportunities with him. Through her second marriage, she also became Queen of Bithynia. When Mithridates VI had heard about the Cappadocian invasion, he hurried with his army to help his sister, but instead helped Ariarathes VII.

'''Later life'''

With the help of his maternal uncle Ariarathes VII, expelled his mother and her new husband back to Bithynia and was restored to his throne, which at this time was old enough to rule as King. At this time, Mithridates VI had plans of his own; to force Gordius back into the Cappadocian court in expelling his nephews from the throne in order to rule Cappadocia for himself which in the end failed. After the death of her second son in 95 BC, Laodice and Nicomedes III attempted to establish an impostor upon the Cappadocian throne as King, claiming he was her third son with Ariarathes VI. They travelled to Rome to bear witness for this person to state their claim, by their claim was rejected by the Roman Senate.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laodice_of_Cappadocia
--------------------
'''
=Laodice=
'''

Laodice (130/129 BC – about 90 BC) was a Pontian Princess and Queen who was first wife and sister-wife to King Mithridates VI of Pontus. She was a monarch of Persian and Greek ancestry.

'''Early life'''

Laodice was the second daughter and among the children born to the Pontian Monarchs Laodice VI and Mithridates V of Pontus (reigned 150–120 BC), thus she was born and raised in the Kingdom of Pontus.

Her father was assassinated in about 120 BC in Sinope poisoned by unknown persons at a lavish banquet which he held. In the will of her father, Mithridates V left the Kingdom to the joint rule of her mother and her brothers: Mithridates VI and Mithridates Chrestus. The brothers of Laodice were both under aged to rule and their mother retained all power as regent. Laodice VI’s regency over Pontus was from 120–116 BC (even perhaps up to 113 BC). Laodice VI favored Mithridates Chrestus over Mithridates VI. During her mother’s regency, Mithridates VI had escaped from the plotting of their mother and had gone into hiding.

Mithridates VI between 116–113 BC returned to Pontus from hiding and was hailed King. He was able to remove their mother and brother from the Pontian throne, thus Mithridates VI became the sole ruler of Pontus. Mithridates VI showed clemency towards their mother and brother, by imprisoning them both. Laodice VI died in prison of natural causes, however Mithridates Chrestus could have died in prison from natural causes or was tried for treason and was executed on his orders. When they died, Mithridates VI gave his mother and brother a royal funeral.

'''Queen of Pontus'''

When Mithridates VI became the sole ruler of Pontus, Laodice and her brother were practicable strangers. The last time Mithridates VI saw Laodice, she was a spoiled little girl in the nursery. Sometime after Mithridates VI became sole King of Pontus, he married her. This was for several reasons – to preserve the purity of their blood-line; as a wife to rule with him as a sovereign over Pontus; to be the mother of his legitimate children to ensure their succession and to claim his right as a ruling monarch. Through marriage, Mithridates VI gave Laodice the title of Queen and she became a Queen of Pontus.

Laodice bore her brother four sons: Mithridates, Arcathius, Machares, Pharnaces II of Pontus and two daughters: Cleopatra of Pontus and Drypetina (a diminutive form of "Drypetis"). Drypetina was Mithridates VI’s most devoted daughter. Her baby teeth never fell out, so she had a double set of teeth.

At some point Laodice and Mithridates VI set about to establish good relations with the citizens of Athens and the Greek island of Delos. Laodice and her brother-husband made benefactions to the Athenians and the Delians. The exact nature of their benefactions and their voluntary donations are unknown. On Delos, honorific statues have survived that have been identified to be of Mithridates VI and Laodice.

'''Death'''

During one time of Mithridates' absence, Laodice began to have affairs with his friends. Through one of his friends, Laodice became pregnant and gave birth to a son. To conceal her unfaithfulness to Mithridates VI, Laodice deceived a report of his death and on his return, plotted to have her King poisoned.

However, at this time Mithridates returned to Pontus suddenly and without warning, catching Laodice with her lovers. Her brother-husband and his companions were shocked and distressed to see this at Sinope. The child that Laodice gave birth to was not his and he had been gone for too long for that to happen. He hid his rage and embraced Laodice and visited his harem nursery to count his children. Festive banquets were prepared to welcome him back.

Prior to the feast, Mithridates VI’s servants warned him of Laodice’s plots, at the feast they also named Laodice’s co-conspirators. Feeling betrayed, he cursed his late mother for raising such a treacherous daughter, so he had Laodice and her collaborators executed immediately although he spared Laodice’s new born son.

After the execution of Laodice, Mithridates VI never wanted to marry a Queen by that name which spelt trouble. Laodice’s fate was common knowledge and due to her treachery, Mithridates VI found it very difficult to make any future wife his official queen.

'''Arts & literature'''

There is a painting on display at the Bibliothèque nationale de France of Laodice and Mithridates. The painting is titled Mithridates poisons Laodice, his wife/sister; Mithridates wins a duel.

In The Grass Crown, the second in the Masters of Rome series, Colleen McCullough, the Australian writer, describes in detail the various aspects of Mithridates VI’s life - the murder of his sister-wife Laodice, his experiments with poison, and his fear and hatred of Rome. The aging Gaius Marius meets Mithridates in the palace of Ariarathes in Eusebeia Mazaca, a city in Cappadocia, and the former Roman Consul, quite alone and surrounded by the Pontic army, orders Mithridates to leave Cappadocia immediately and go back to Pontus - which he does.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laodice_(sister-wife_of_Mithridates_VI_of_Pontus)

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]