== Notes for [[Item:Q87534|Q87534]] ==

Sames Samos II Theosebes Dikaios, King of Commagene, died circa 109 BC.
--------------------
ID: I82408

Name: Samus I of Commagene

Prefix: King

Given Name: Samus I

Surname: of Commagene

Nickname: Theosebes Dikaios

Sex: M

_UID: C0A4084E31C91641AFD13328968CB80DCDB8

Change Date: 26 Nov 2005

Death: Y

Father: Ptolemy I of Commagene

Marriage 1 Isias Philostorgos

Married:

Children

Mithridates I of Commagene

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I82408

--------------------------------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sames_II_Theosebes_Dikaios

Sames II Theosebes Dikaios

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopediaJump to: navigation, search

Sames or Samos II Theosebes Dikaios (Greek: Σάμος Θεοσεβής Δίκαιος, died 109 BC) was the second king of Commagene. Of Armenian[1] descent, he was the son and successor of Ptolemaeus of Commagene.

Sames reigned as king between 130 BC-109 BC. During his reign, Sames ordered the construction of the fortress at Samosata which is now submerged by water from the Atatürk Baraji Dam[2]. Sames died in 109 BC. His wife was Pythodoris, daughter of the Kings of Pontus, his son and successor was Mithridates I Callinicus.

--------------------
'''
=Sames II Theosebes Dikaios=
'''

Sames or Samos II Theosebes Dikaios (Greek: Σάμος Θεοσεβής Δίκαιος – died 109 BC) was the second king of Commagene. Of Armenian descent, he was the son and successor of Ptolemaeus of Commagene.

Sames reigned as king between 130-109 BC. During his reign, Sames ordered the construction of the fortress at Samosata which is now submerged by water from the Atatürk Dam. Sames died in 109 BC. His wife was Pythodoris, daughter of the Kings of Pontus, and his son and successor was Mithridates I Callinicus.

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Commagene 130-96 BCE

OR "SAMUS""THEOSEBES DIKAIOS"; KING OF COMMAGENE ca. 130BC-ca. 100BC

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per01066.htm#0

Ruled c. 130 - 96 BC, King of Commagene

Ruled c. 130 - 96 BC, King of Commagene

Ruled c. 130 - 96 BC, King of Commagene

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]