== Notes for [[Item:Q89324|Q89324]] ==

He was Corrector Apuliae et Calabriae, Proconsul, and Praefectus Urbis Romae (351). The Clodii Celsini continued to practice the traditional religions of antiquity in the face of Christian hegemony through at least the 4th century, when Clodius Celsinus Adelphius converted.
--------------------
'''
=Clodius Celsinus Adelphius=
'''

Clodius Celsinus Adelphius or Adelfius (fl. 333–351) was a politician of the Roman Empire.

'''Life'''

He was married to the poet Faltonia Betitia Proba, and they had two sons, Quintus Clodius Hermogenianus Olybrius (consul in 379) and Faltonius Probus Alypius. His wife converted to Christianity after 353, and later Celsinus probably converted too; he probably dedicated a column ad altare majus S. Anastasiae, near the main altar of the church of Sant'Anastasia, or that was his and his wife's funerary inscription.

Before 333, Adelphius was corrector of Apulia et Calabria, with the see of his office at Beneventum, where he was a patron too. In 351 he was proconsul of an unknown province, probably Africa, and he was already married to Proba. From 7 June to 18 December 351 he is attested as praefectus urbi of Rome, under the usurper Magnentius. In this period he was accused by some Dorus of conspiring against Magnentius; it is probable that this accusation was true, as shown by the fact that Proba wrote a poem celebrating Emperor Constantius II's victory over the usurper.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clodius_Celsinus_Adelphius

RESEARCH NOTES:
Prefect of Rome 351

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per04550.htm#0

Prefect of Rome

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]]


{{q|Q154056|Q154054}} is a relative of Charlemagne. We need to check this page to see if they have proper wikidata links.
 
This page contains source notes and references for this entity.

==Source Notes==

==Note 1==
This [[Category:Charlemagne dfa notes]]
entry is derived from https://www.reddit.com/r/UsefulCharts/comments/1hzt99c/project_settipanicharlemange_pt2_from_charlemagne/#lightbox unless it already is in [ [:Category:Part 1 derived]] at which point it is only derived from part 1. Later once this code gets into the notes pages remove [[:Category:Part 2 or 1 derived]] from all of the pages in that categor y using Catalot

==Note 2==
This tree portion [[Category:Part 1 derived]]
has been made from the work of Settipani with an intermediate reference of a diagram created by Redditor Lower_Gift_1656 here https://www.reddit.com/r/UsefulCharts/comments/1hvsqm7/project_settipanicharlemange_pt1_from_charlemagne/  https://drive.google.com/file/d/1L03SSL-ag5dUPm56Hhxd4r5-TbNH3qt-/view

==Note 3==
This tree portion [[Category:Part 1 derived]]
has been made from the work of Settipani with an intermediate reference of a diagram created by Redditor Lower_Gift_1656 here https://www.reddit.com/r/UsefulCharts/comments/1hvsqm7/project_settipanicharlemange_pt1_from_charlemagne/  https://drive.google.com/file/d/1L03SSL-ag5dUPm56Hhxd4r5-TbNH3qt-/view

==Note 4==
<p style="text-align: left;" dir="ltr"><a href="[[Category:Wikipedia links]]https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clodius_Celsinus_Adelphius">[[Category:Wikipedia links]]
[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clodius_Celsinus_Adelphius</a></p>
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]