== Notes for [[Item:Q1876|Q1876]] ==

{geni:about_me} Vasudeva was the father of Lord Krishna. Devaki , daughter of the Yadava chieftain Ugrasena and sister of Kamsa was his mother. Please note that Krishna's father was called Vasudeva (with Va pronounced as V-uh). Krishna was called Vasudeva ( with Va pronounced as Vaa) , which indicated his father's name (Vaasudeva means "of Vasudeva" per Sanskrit rules).May 17, 2015
<p>===Devaki</p>
<p>.</p>
<p>Krishna and Balarama meet their parents. Painting by Raja Ravi Varma In Hinduism, Devaki (देवकी) is the wife of Vasudeva and biological mother of Krishna.[1] She was the daughter of Devaka, the younger brother of KingUgrasena of Mathura. She was a partial incarnation of Aditi, the mother of the Devas. • Imprisonment
<p>Vasudeva and Devaki traveling in a carriage. Devaki and Vasudeva were imprisoned by her brother, Kamsaor Kansa, due to a prophecy that her eighth son would kill him. Kansa then killed six of their sons. The seventh, Balarama, escaped death by being transferred to the womb of Vasudeva's other wife, Rohini, while a female child (an incarnation of the goddess Yoga-Nidra or Maya) was placed in Yashoda's womb. The eighth son, Krishna (who was actually an Avatar of Vishnu), was born at midnight and taken by Vasudeva across the Yamuna river to be raised by Nanda and Yasoda in the neighboring village ofGokul. In place of Krishna, Vasudeva took Yashoda's just born child (the incarnation of Yogmaya). After Vasudeva's return to Mathura with the baby girl (yog-maya), Kansatried to destroy her. Then she flew out of his hands, turned into an eight-armed goddess and warned him: "fool, the agent of your death has already been born on this earth." Lord Krishna and Balarama returned to Mathura as adolescent boys and killed the despotic Kansa. Subsequently, Krishna freed his parents, and his grand-uncle Ugrasena (who had also been locked up). Post Kansa's death Vasudeva and Devaki moved to Dwaraka with the rest of Mathura's population.
<p>--------------------</p>
<p>ADOPTED (FOSTER) MOTHER</p>
<p> Yashoda (Sanskrit: यशोदा) was wife of Nanda within thePuranic texts of Hinduism. Within the Bhagavata Puranait is described that Yasoda later became the foster-mother to Krishna, who was born to Devaki but was given to Yashoda and Nanda in Gokul, by Krishna's fatherVasudeva on the night of his birth, for his protection from Devaki's brother, the king of Mathura, Kansa. • Yasoda and Krishna[edit]
<p> illustration of a Bhagavata Puranamanuscript, ca. 1500 A.D., Yashoda bathing the child Krishna.</p>
<p>. Yashoda Ties Krishna to a Mortar, Page from a dated Rasikapriya Series, 1634 Various childhood episodes orLilas of Krishna, growing in Yashoda's household abound in Hindu religious texts, important amongst them are, Krishna giving darshan to Yashoda with his Vishwaroopa or his Divine Form. Also it is stated byVed Vyasa in Mahabharata, the main Epic which portrays Lord Krishnaas principal hero, that venerable sage Maharishi Narada once visited Lord Krishna at Brindavan. Lord Krishna as usual was playing in sand and was swallowing it. Mother Yashoda, upon seeing it, was furious with Krishna for disobeying her and punished Krishna by tying him to a grinding stone. Upon witnessing this act a couplet broke forth Sage Narada "Enna Thavam Saidhanai, Yashoda" which in Tamil literally means: "What penance have You (Mother Yashoda) undertaken to be bestowed with the powers to punish the supreme Lord (Narayana)". And also seen as a question to the Lord himself as to how he accepts all this. It literally means what penance Yashoda had undertaken in her previous birth to be bestowed upon with the powers to punish, love, and care for the SupremeLord Vishnu (Lord Satyanarayana also known as Emperor of Gods in Hindu Scriptures). Upon this request it is said that Lord Krishna opens his mouth in front of Yashoda who sees the Seven Oceans, the entire Universe with its vast expanse and also Lord Narayana seated upon Adishesha (The Divine Snake), attended upon by his beloved consort Mahalakshmi. Upon this divine intervention, Mother Yashoda faints only to be revived by Lord Krishna and attended by Sage Narada, who explains to her about Krishna's Life.,[1] Krishna stealing the butter, Krishna tied to mortar [2] especially in couplets written by poet-saint Surdas,[3] where her deep affection for Krishna becomes an epitome of 'Vatsalya Prema', Mother's Love and even 'Vatsalya Bhakti’, Mother's Devotion,.[4][5] Yashoda and Balarama[edit] Yasoda also played an important role in the upbringing of Balarama (the son of Rohini) and his sisterSubhadra. She is also sometimes described as having her own daughter, known as Ekānaṅgā. Separation from Krishna[edit] With the discovery of Krishna's real parents as well as the public knowledge that he is the heir apparent of Mathura, Yashoda had to let go of her son in the end. This episode and pain of separation of adopted son and foster mother has been depicted in several folk tales, songs and films. While leaving Nandgram, Krishna declares that Yashoda would always be designated as his de factomother.
<p> • </p>
<p> • • • </p>

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]