== Notes for [[Item:Q114436|Q114436]] ==

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oliba_Cabreta

http://genealogics.org/getperson.php?personID=I00197490&tree=LEO

Count of Cerdanya with the pagus of Berga and of Conflent (965-988) and Count of Besalú with the pagus of Vallespir (984-988). Third male child of Count Miró II the Younger and of Countess Ava. Upon his father's death (927), it appears that the planned mode of succession was undivided inheritance and the joint government of the four sons (Sunifred, Guifré, Oliba, and Miró), but, since the latter were not of legal age, Countess Ava acted as their guardian and managed the earldoms for a few years, in which Oliba appears documented for the first time in 936, buying some lands of Vallespir with his mother. Upon reaching majority, Oliba had to collaborate with Sunifred in the government of Cerdanya (both attended the consecration of the church of Sant Germà de Cuixà in 953) while Guifré took charge of the county of Besalú i Miró, called Bonfill, and dedicated himself to an ecclesiastical career. Despite their areas of influence, it appears that the four brothers were united in fundamental matters; thus, in 952, they received collectively a precept from King Louis granting them the assets that had belonged to Viscount Unifred, guilty of treason. All four participated in the foundation of Saint Peter's Benedictine monastery of Camprodon (952). After the violent death of Guifré II de Besalú (957) (Counts Sunifred II and Oliba I and Countess Ava acted as executors of the deceased's will in 958), Sunifred governed with the aid of Oliba and of Miró Bonfill the entirety of the paternal honours until 965, when he died without descendants. During these years, in which Countess Ava also died (961), Sunifred II and Oliba I made donations to Viscount Isarn of Conflent (959) and, together with Miró Bonfill, exchanged assets with Abbess Fredeburga of Sant Joan de les Abadesses (964). Oliba, who succeeded Sunifred II as head of the lineage, assigned the government of the Besalú lands to his younger brother Miró II Bonfill, a task that Miró II accomplished under Oliba's authority (in a document, Miró described him as seniore meo et fratris) from 965 until his death (984), even while being Bishop of Girona. During this time, Oliba I and Abbot Garí of Cuixà made a trip to Rome (968), where Pope John XIII granted them two papal bulls, one for the Arles monastery, and another for the Cuixà monastery. Oliba and his brother Miró II, among other magnates, presided in 974 over the consecration ceremony of the seven altars of the new church of Sant Miquel de Cuixà that Sunifred II had already begun to construct. Both also made donations to Ripoll (975 and 981), founded the monastery of Saint Mary's and Sant Urbici de Serrateix (977) in the pagus of Berga. They attended the consecration of the new basilica of Ripoll (977) with Count Borrell II of Barcelona and other noblemen and prelates, founding the monastery of Saint Peter in Besalú (977). Around 979, Oliba, who must have been an ambitious and violent man, invaded the lands of his neighbour, Count Roger I of Carcassona (French: Carcassonne), perhaps alleging certain rights of sovereignty as descendant of the former counts of Carcassona-Rasès-. It appears, however, that the conflict was resolved by the surrender of Capcir to Cerdanya. A short time afterwards, in the region near the mark of Solsona, in south Berguedà, the vicars of the castles of Viver and Estela directed an uprising which was quickly crushed. After the transfer from Miró II (984), and until 988, Oliba governed all the counties by himself. Around 966, he had married Ermengarda, by whom he had four sons and a daughter. They often presided together with their offspring over religious solemnities, such as the consecration of the monastic church of Sant Llorenç prop Bagà (983). He had an illegitimate daughter, Ingilberga, by a noblewoman, wife of Ermemir of Besora, who was to be the sixth and last abbess of Saint John. It appears that the influence of Saint Romuald and the Venetians, who lived the hermit life near Cuixà that by February 988, Oliba renounced his honours, and retired to the Italian monastery of Montecassino, where he had to live the monastic life and where he probably died.
--------------------
Conde de Cerdaña y Besalú nacido hacia 923 y muerto en Montecassino en 990. También fue señor de Berga, Conflent y Vallespir. Gobernó en colaboración con sus tres hermanos: Sunifredo, conde de Cerdaña; Wifredo, que fue conde de Besalú; y Miró, llamado Bonfill, que ejerció la carrera eclesiástica. Los cuatro hermanos desarrollaron una política solidaria donde se conjugaban sus respectivas esferas de poder. Durante aquella época fue la familia más importante de Cataluña, junto a los condes de Barcelona, con cuyo linaje compartían parentesco.

Fue el tercer varón del conde Miró II el Joven y de la condesa Ava. Su padre había previsto una modalidad de sucesión en la que gobernaran los cuatro hijos, pero a su muerte en 927 eran todos menores de edad y doña Ava se hizo cargo de su tutela y de la administración de los condados. La primera vez que Oliba aparece mencionado en los documentos es en 936, con motivo de la compra, junto a su madre, de unos terrenos en Vallespir.

Cumplió su mayoría de edad hacia 938 y comenzó a colaborar con su hermano Sunifredo en el gobierno de la Cerdaña. En 952 recibió solidariamente con sus hermanos un precepto de Luis IV de Francia, por el que pasaban a su poder los bienes expropiados al vizconde Sunifredo, acusado de traición; aquel mismo año los cuatro participaron en la fundación del monasterio de Sant Per de Camprodon. Un año después asistió junto al conde de Cerdaña a la consagración de la iglesia de Sant Germán de Cuixá. En 957 Oliba y Sunifredo tomaron el control de Besalú tras el asesinato de Wifredo II. Juntos hicieron en 959 unas donaciones al vizconde Isarn de Conflent y, junto con Miró permutaron bienes con la abadesa Fredeburga de Sant Joan de les Abadesses.

En 965 Oliba quedó al frente del linaje tras la muerte de Sunifredo de Cerdaña, al haber muerto su madre Ava en 961. Encargó a Miró el gobierno de Besalú, aunque en algunos documentos siguió firmando como conde de Besalú, si bien Miró, que desde 965 era obispo de Girona, gobernó bajo la autoridad de su hermano. En 984 Oliba viajó a Roma junto con el abad Garí de Cuixá para solicitar del papa Juan XIII dos bulas, una para el monasterio de Arlés y otra para el de Cuixá. En 974 presidió junto al obispo de Girona y otros magnates la consagración de la iglesia de Sant Miquel de Cuixá, comenzada a construir por Sunifredo II. Oliba y Miró hicieron donaciones al monasterio de Ripoll en 957. En 977 fundaron el monasterio de Sant Pere de Besalú y aquel mismo año acudieron, junto con Borrell II de Barcelona y otros nobles, a la consagración de la nueva basílica de Ripoll. También en 977 fundaron el convento de Santa María i Sant Urbici de Serrateix. Cuatro años después hicieron una nueva donación a Ripoll.

En 979 Oliba devastó y saqueó las tierras de Carcassona, sin que haya podido ser documentada la razón que alegó el conde de Cerdaña para hacerlo. El resultado de la superioridad militar del conde Oliba fue la entrega por parte de Roger I de Carcassona de la comarca del Capcir junto con las tierras de Sault, Fenolleda, Donzan y Parapetusa, que desde entonces quedaron adheridas al patrimonio de la casa condal de Cerdaña. Sobre aquellas fechas Oliba se vio obligado a sofocar un levantamiento contra él de los señores de los castillos de Viver y Estela, en la zona cercana a la marca de Solsona.

Oliba, que fue llamado Cabreta por una dificultad física que le impedía expresarse, gobernó la totalidad de los condados desde la muerte de Miró II Bonfil en 984 y hasta 988. De su matrimonio con Ermengarda, que tuvo lugar hacia 966, tuvo cuatro hijos y una hija, Oliba, que tomó la carrera eclesiástica; Bernat, que heredó el condado de Besalú; Wifredo II, conde de Cerdaña; Berenguer y Adelaida. También tuvo una hija ilegítima de Ingilberga, esposa de Emenir, veguer de Besora, que recibió el mismo nombre que su madre y fue la última abadesa de Sant Joan de les Abadesses.

El conde Oliba llevó una azarosa vida, cargada de crímenes. Al final de sus días buscó la confesión de Romualdo, un eremita con fama de santo, al no encontrar otro camino de salvación que abandonar el mundo y tomar los hábitos monásticos. En febrero de 988, con una recua de quince mulas cargadas de riquezas, tomó el camino de Italia para ingresar en el monasterio de Montecasino, donde se ordenó monje y residió hasta su muerte. Tras su marcha a Italia se ocupó de todos los condados su esposa Ermengarda durante la minoría de sus hijos. Incluso en sus primeros años de viudedad, permitió a éstos participar en el gobierno de sus estados. (Fuente: texto extraído de www.mcnbiografias.com)

Oliba Cabreta (c.920 - 990) was the count of Cerdanya from 965 and count of Besalú from 984 until his abdication in 988. He was the fourth son of Miró II and Ava. He inherited Cerdanya from his eldest brother Sunifred II and Besalú from his elder brother Miró III. He was originally under the tutelage of his mother from his father's death in 927.

During his tenure he added Berga and Ripoll to his domains. In 979, Roger I of Carcassonne ceded Capcir to him. In 984, he assumed the direction of all his father's counties when his last brother died withour heirs.

Oliba travelled twice to Rome, first in 968 with the Abbot Garin of Cuixà and second in 988 on his journey to Montecassino, the monastery to which he retired. He divided his lands betwixt his three eldest sons: Bernard received Besalú and Ripoll, Wilfred received Cerdanya, and Oliba received Berga. His fourth son, Berengar, became bishop of Elne. He also had a legitimate daughter named Adelaide, who married John d'Oriol, lord of Sales. By his mistress, Ingeberga de Besora, he had a daughter named Ingeberga who became abbess of Sant Joan de Ripoll. His wife Ermengard of Empúries, daughter of Count Gausbert, acted as regent for his sons and he lived out his days in Italy until 990.

Count of Cerdanza and Besalu

Name Prefix:<NPFX> Count

Name Prefix:<NPFX> Count

-- MERGED NOTE ------------

Wikidata: https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q2499376 | Geni: https://www.geni.com/people/5096010198730109069

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]