== Notes for [[Item:Q86220|Q86220]] ==

* from Wikipedia

'''Lucius Quintus Volusius Saturninus''',[1] also known as '''Lucius Volusius Saturninus'''[2] (about 60 BC[3]-20 AD[4]) was a notable Roman Senator.

Volusius came from an ancient and distinguished Senatorial family, that never rose above the Praetorship.[5] He was of eques status.[6] Volusius was the son born to Quintus Volusius a Prefect who served under Cicero in 51 BC to 50 BC in Cilicia[7] and was a pupil of his in oratory.[8] The mother of Volusius was a woman called Claudia, who was the daughter of Pompey’s officer Drusus Claudius Nero, sister of Praetor Tiberius Claudius Nero who was the aunt of the Roman emperor Tiberius[9] and his brother, the Roman General Nero Claudius Drusus. His sister was Volusia Saturnina.[10][11]

Volusius served as a suffect consul in 12 BC.[12] He held censorial functions for the selection of knights as members of the judicature and became the first person in his family to amass his wealth, for which his family became greatly conspicuous.[13]

Volusius served on the staff of Publius Quinctilius Varus when he served as a Roman Governor of the Africa Province at an unknown date from approximately 9/8 BC to 4 BC. From 4 to 5, Volusius served as a Roman Governor of Syria.[14] Based on inscriptional evidence, the Horrea Volusiana was either built by Volusius or his grandson Quintus Volusius Saturninus, consul in 56.[15]

Volusius married Nonia Polla the daughter of the consul, Lucius Nonius Asprenas. Polla bore Volusius a son, Lucius Volusius Saturninus and a daughter, Volusia who married a certain Cornelius.[16]

=References & Sources=

* for a full list of sources, please see: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Volusius_Saturninus_(suffect_consul_12_BC)
--------------------
'''
=Lucius Volusius Saturninus=
'''

Lucius Quintus Volusius Saturninus, also known as Lucius Volusius Saturninus (about 60 BC-20 AD) was a notable Roman Senator.

Volusius came from an ancient and distinguished Senatorial family, that never rose above the Praetorship. He was of eques status. Volusius was the son born to Quintus Volusius a Prefect who served under Cicero in 51 BC to 50 BC in Cilicia and was a pupil of his in oratory. The mother of Volusius was a woman called Claudia, who was the daughter of Pompey’s officer Drusus Claudius Nero, sister of Praetor Tiberius Claudius Nero who was the aunt of the Roman emperor Tiberius and his brother, the Roman General Nero Claudius Drusus. His sister was Volusia Saturnina.

Volusius served as a suffect consul in 12 BC. He held censorial functions for the selection of knights as members of the judicature and became the first person in his family to amass his wealth, for which his family became greatly conspicuous.

Volusius served on the staff of Publius Quinctilius Varus when he served as a Roman Governor of the Africa Province at an unknown date from approximately 9/8 BC to 4 BC. From 4 to 5, Volusius served as a Roman Governor of Syria. Based on inscriptional evidence, the Horrea Volusiana was either built by Volusius or his grandson Quintus Volusius Saturninus, consul in 56.

Volusius married Nonia Polla the daughter of the consul, Lucius Nonius Asprenas. Polla bore Volusius a son, Lucius Volusius Saturninus and a daughter, Volusia who married a certain Cornelius.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Volusius_Saturninus_(suffect_consul_12_BC)

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]