== Notes for [[Item:Q88327|Q88327]] ==

=Lucius Aemilius Mamercus=
===Consul of the Roman Republic===
'''In Office''': 1 September 484 BC[1] – 29 August 483 BC; '''Serving with''' Caeso Fabius Vibulanus (consul); '''Preceded by''' Servius Cornelius Maluginensis, Quintus Fabius Vibulanus (consul 485 BC); '''Succeeded by''' Marcus Fabius Vibulanus (consul 483 BC), Lucius Valerius Potitus

'''In Office''' 1 August 478 BC – 31 July 477 BC; '''Serving with''' Gaius Servilius Structus Ahala (consul 478 BC), Opiter Verginius Tricostus Esquilinus (consul 478 BC); '''Preceded by''' Caeso Fabius Vibulanus (consul), Titus Verginius Tricostus Rutilus; '''Succeeded by''' Gaius Horatius Pulvillus,

'''In Office:''' 1 August 473 BC – 31 July 472 BC: '''Serving with''' Vopiscus Julius Iulus; '''Preceded by''' Lucius Furius Medullinus (consul 474 BC), Gnaeus Manlius Vulso; '''Succeeded by '''Lucius Pinarius Mamercinus Rufus (consul 472 BC), Publius Furius Medullinus Fusus

'''Personal Details'''
'''Born''': Unknown, Ancient Rome
'''Died''': Unknown, Ancient Rome
'''Children''': Tiberius Aemilius Mamercinus

'''Lucius Aemilius Mamercus''' was a Roman statesman who served as consul three times: in 484, 478 and 473 BC.[2][3][4]

In 484 BC, as consul, Aemilius led the Roman forces in battle against the Volsci and Aequi. The Romans were successful, and the Roman cavalry slaughtered many in the rout which followed.[4]

Livy says that during his first consulship, Aemilius (together with his colleague Caeso Fabius Vibulanus) worked with the senate to oppose increases to the powers of the tribunes.[4]

In 478 BC, Aemilius led a Roman army successfully against the Etruscans.[5]

'''See also: Aemilia gens''' [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aemilia_gens]

'''References'''
# Robert Maxwell Ogilvie, Commentary on Livy, books 1–5, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1965, pp. 404, 405.
# Diodorus Siculus, II.38, II.52, II.64
# Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Roman Antiquities, IX.37
# Livy, Ab urbe condita, 2.42
# Titus Livius, Ab Urbe Condita, ii. 49.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Aemilius_Mamercus

===DBPedia: Lucius Aemilius Mamercus===
https://dbpedia.org/page/Lucius_Aemilius_Mamercus

===Roman–Volscian Wars===
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roman%E2%80%93Volscian_wars

The Roman–Volscian wars were a series of wars fought between the Roman Republic and the Volsci, an ancient Italic people. Volscian migration into southern Latium led to conflict with that region's old inhabitants, the Latins under leadership of Rome, the region's dominant city-state. By the late 5th century BC, the Volsci were increasingly on the defensive and by the end of the Samnite Wars had been incorporated into the Roman Republic. The ancient historians devoted considerable space to Volscian wars in their accounts of the early Roman Republic, but the historical accuracy of much of this material has been questioned by modern historians.

'''Volscian Aggression'''

During the 5th century BC the Volsci and the Aequi, a related people, invaded Latium, as part of a larger pattern of Sabellian-speaking peoples migrating out of the Apennines and into the plains. Several peripheral Latin communities appear to have been overrun. In response the Latins formed the Foedus Cassianum, a mutual military alliance between the Latin cities with Rome as the leading partner. The ancient sources record fighting against either the Aequi, the Volsci, or both almost every year during the first half of the 5th century BC. Famously the Roman nobleman Gnaeus Marcius Coriolanus is supposed to have gone over to the Volsci after being spurned by his countrymen. This annual warfare would have been dominated by raids and counter-raids rather than the pitched battles described by the ancient sources....

'''Ongoing Hostilities from 487 BC'''

One of the consuls in the following year (487 BC), Titus Sicinius Sabinus, was allocated responsibility for continuing the war with the Volsci. The outcome of the hostilities at that time is unclear, although it seems the Romans fared better.[14]

The Volsci and the Aequi were together defeated again in 485 BC. The consul Quintus Fabius Vibulanus incurred the anger of the plebs by lodging the spoils of victory with the publicum.[15]

Again in 484 BC hostilities with the Volsci and Aequi were renewed. '''The Romans led by the consul Lucius Aemilius Mamercus defeated the enemy, and the Roman cavalry slaughtered many in the rout which followed.[15]'''

In 483 BC Livy says that the Volsci renewed hostilities, but gives little detail except to say that the Romans paid little attention to the issue, as their own strength was more than sufficient, and they were distracted by internal matters.[15]

In 475 BC the Volsci together with the Aequi invaded the Latin territory. The Latins, joined by the Hernici but without the assistance of any Roman troops or Roman commander, repelled the enemy and captured a significant amount of booty. The Roman consul Gaius Nautius Rutilus was then sent against the Volsci and the Volscian territory was ravaged, but there was no significant engagement between the opposing forces.[16]

===Dero.abcdef.wiki: Lucius Aemilius Mamercus (Consul)===
'''Auto-Translated from Romanian'''

Lucius Aemilius Mamercus was a politician from the early legendary phase of the Roman Republic. According to ancient tradition, which modern science considers predominantly fictional, it is said to have been in the 5th century BC. He was a Roman consul three times.

Mamercus belonged to the Mamerci branch of the patrician gene Aemilia; he was the oldest representative of the Emilians who appeared in political life. It is said to have had its first consulate in 484 BC. With Kaeso Fabius Vibulanus.

478 BC B.C. became consul for the second time, this time his colleague was Gaius Servilius Structus Ahala. Dionysius of Halicarnassus reports that Aemilius Mamercus made peace with the inhabitants of the rival city of Veji during this second term.

Because he did not consult the Senate before this decision, he was denied a triumphant procession. Mamercus had his third consulate in 473 BC. Chr. Inside. His colleague was either Vopiscus Iulius Iullus or Opiter Verginius Tricostus Esquilinus, the tradition here is inconsistent. In the Senate, Aemilius Mamercus came to Dionysius of Halicarnassus as a spokesman for the agrarian law of Spurius Cassius Viscellinus.

'''Individual Evidence'''
# T. Robert S. Broughton : ''Magistrații Republicii Romane''. Volumul 1: - 509 BC 100 BC (= . Filologica monografiile Vol . 15, partea 1, ZDB -ID 418575-4 ). American Philological Association, New York NY 1951, p. 22 (Reimprimare neschimbată 1968).
# T. Robert S. Broughton: ''Magistrații Republicii Romane.'' Volumul 1: 509 î.Hr. - 100 î.Hr. (= monografii filologice. Vol. 15, partea 1). American Philological Association, New York NY 1951, pp. 25 f., (Reimprimare neschimbată 1968).
# T. Robert S. Broughton: ''Magistrații Republicii Romane''. Volumul 1: 509 î.Hr. - 100 î.Hr. (= monografii filologice. Vol. 15, partea 1). American Philological Association, New York NY 1951, p. 29, (Reimprimare neschimbată 1968).

https://dero.abcdef.wiki/wiki/Lucius_Aemilius_Mamercus_(Konsul)

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]