== Notes for [[Item:Q88790|Q88790]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ashur-Dan_II
--------------------
Ashur-dan IIFrom Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Ashur-Dan II) Jump to: navigation, search This article does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2009)

Ashur-Dan II was a King of Assyria (c. 935 BC – 912 BC).

[edit] BiographyAshur-Dan II succeeded his father, Tiglath-Pileser II. He was succeeded by his son Adad-nirari II.

He reigned from 935 BC until his death in 912 BC.

Ashur-dan II concentrated on rebuilding Assyria within its natural borders, from Tur Abdin to the foothills beyond Arbel, he built government offices in all provinces, and as an economic boost, provided ploughs throughout the land, which yielded record grain production.

He was followed by four able kings, who used the foundation which he had laid to make Assyria the major world power of its time.

Preceded by Tiglath-Pileser II King of Assyria 934–912 BC Succeeded by Adad-nirari II Persondata Name Ashur-dan II Alternative names Short description Date of birth Place of birth Date of death Place of death
This biography of a member of a Middle Eastern royal house is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v ·t ·e
This Assyrian-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v ·t ·e Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ashur-dan_II&oldid=528689170" View page ratingsRate this page Rate this page Page ratings What's this?Current average ratings. Trustworthy

Objective

Complete

Well-written

I am highly knowledgeable about this topic (optional) I have a relevant college/university degreeIt is part of my professionIt is a deep personal passionThe source of my knowledge is not listed here I would like to help improve Wikipedia, send me an e-mail (optional) We will send you a confirmation e-mail. We will not share your e-mail address with outside parties as per our feedback privacy statement.Submit ratings

Saved successfullyYour ratings have not been submitted yetYour ratings have expiredPlease reevaluate this page and submit new ratings. An error has occurred. Please try again later. Thanks! Your ratings have been saved.Do you want to create an account?An account will help you track your edits, get involved in discussions, and be a part of the community.Create an accountorLog inMaybe later Thanks! Your ratings have been saved.Did you know that you can edit this page?Edit this pageMaybe later Categories: Assyrian kings912 BC deathsMiddle Eastern royalty stubsAssyrian stubsHidden categories: Articles lacking sources from February 2009All articles lacking sourcesPersondata templates without short description parameterYear of birth unknownNavigation menuPersonal tools Create accountLog inNamespaces ArticleTalkVariantsViews ReadEditView historyActions Search
Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia InteractionHelp About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact Wikipedia ToolboxWhat links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageRate this page Print/exportCreate a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version LanguagesCatalà Česky Deutsch Español Euskara Italiano Nederlands 日本語 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски 中文 This page was last modified on 2 February 2013 at 20:43.

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. See Terms of Use for details. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

Contact us http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ashur-Dan_II

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per02166.htm#0

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Assyria 933-911 BCE

Ashur-dan II
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.

Ashur-Dan II was King of Assyria. He succeeded his father, Tiglath-Pileser II, in 935 and reigned until his death in 912 BC, when he was succeeded by his son Adad-nirari II.

Preceded by:
Tiglath-Pileser II King of Assyria
934–912 BC Succeeded by:
Adad-nirari II

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]