== Notes for [[Item:Q84494|Q84494]] ==

Mar Ahunai ben Zutra beni David was Exilarch (Exilarch [Hebrew: ראש גלות Rosh Galut, Aramaic: ריש גלותא Reish Galuta lit. "head of the exile", Greek: Æchmalotarcha], referring to the leaders of the Diaspora Jewish community following the deportation of the population of Judah into Babylonian exile after the destruction of the kingdom of Judah) at Babylonia between 520 and 531.

See "My Lines"

( http://homepages.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~cousin/html/p106.htm#i12965 )

from Compiler: R. B. Stewart, Evans, GA

( http://homepages.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~cousin/html/index.htm )
--------------------
Huna* Mar at BABYLON

0520 - 0581

* BIRTH: 0520

* DEATH: 0581

Father: Mar Zutra II, Exilarch at BABYLON

Family 1 :

1. +Kafnai* HOFNAI
--------------------
Huna Mar Huna (Ahunai), birth 520, died 581,

occupation: Exilarch, son of Mar Pahga and sister of Mar Zutra to: nn 1) Hofnai , birth CA 540, died CA 585 executed by the Persian King Hormuzad IV, occupation: Exilarch in Bavel 550-581 to: nn

--------------------
Ahunai (Huna Mar II) was Exilarch from 550-560 being restored after the interregnum. From his line was descended a new dynasty of Exilarchs through Hofnai, Exilarch 560-581 whose sons were Haninai (Exilarch 581-589) and Bostani (I) who founded the new dynasty.
--------------------
According to Sefer Yohassin his name is Mar Huna.

According to 'Yashir Moshe' Pg 30 Mar Huna is the 42nd generation since David Hamelech

Mar Huna did not appear in public, after the very public crucifixion of his father Mar Zutra II, until 550. Mar Huna ruled from 550 until 560

Sefer Yuchassin (Book of Genealogies), written by Rabbi Abraham Zacuto (1452-1515), the historian and astronomer whose charts Columbus used in his voyage, is more a chronology than a genealogy. It was written in 1505 and published in Constantinople in 1566. It covers the period from Creation to the expulsions from Spain and Portugal. Zacuto drew much from the preceding chronicles, which he quotes extensively, but the order of generations differs from that in Seder Olam Zuta. The Constantinople edition, published by Samuel Shullam, includes “Dorot Olam” (Generations of the World), a genealogy from Adam to Exilarch David ben Zakkai (died circa 940); its authorship is uncertain and may be Shullam himself.

"Yashir Moshe - A commentary on the Song of Songs" by Moshe ben Abraham Dayan, Edited by Rabbi Ezra Batsri (head of the Jerusalem Rabbinical Court), Published by Haktav Institute (Jerusalem, 5764/2004) first published in 5741/1981.

He was Exilarch in Baghdad from 550 to 568.

He was Exilarch in Baghdad from 550 to 568.

Exilarch of Babylon

Exilarch of Babylon

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]