== Notes for [[Item:Q112323|Q112323]] ==

http://genealogics.org/getperson.php?personID=I00120383&tree=LEO

'''Bermudo II''' (o Vermudo II) de León, el Gotoso (circa 948 y 953 - 999), rey de Galicia desde el año 982, y además del reino de León desde el año 984. Hijo de Ordoño III (951-956) y de Urraca Fernández, se alzó contra el rey leonés Ramiro III (966-984).

===Biografía===

Nacimiento y años juveniles

Desconocemos el lugar exacto de su nacimiento. Aunque se supone que pudo nacer cerca de Carracedelo, en la comarca de El Bierzo, al oeste de la provincia de León y pasar allí sus años juveniles.

Se le ha llamado Rey berciano. Quedo huérfano de padre, Ordoño III, cuanto contaba cerca de los ocho años, en el 956.

Se supone que mientras la corona de León fue usurpada por parientes con menos derechos que él, se oculto en Galicia, siendo los condes gallegos que le protegían, los que se sublevan contra Ramiro III , que “les había maltratado de obra y palabra” (según afirma Sampiro)y le entregan a Bermudo II el Reino.

===Coronación y guerra civil===

Consiguió el trono gracias al apoyo de gallegos y portugueses, siendo coronado y ungido en la catedral de Santiago de Compostela el 15 de octubre de 982.

Tras su proclamación comenzo una guerra civil. Las tropas gallegas de Bermudo y las leonesas de Ramiro se enfrentan en Portela de Arenas, en la provincia de Lugo, no consiguiendo ninguno de los dos bandos la victoria, quedando así las cosas hasta que en el 26 de junio de 985 muere Ramiro (ya habiendo sido expulsado de la capital leonesa)y Bermudo II se instala en León.

Tras su proclamación tuvo que ponerse bajo la protección del Califato de Córdoba, ya que los empujes del Condado de Castilla y las rebeliones internas en el reino hacían prácticamente imposible que pudiese resolver tantos problemas él mismo. Como resultado, y aunque de resultas del protectorado logró recuperar Zamora, los ejércitos de Almanzor se quedaron en el Reino de León como fuerzas de ocupación y no logró expulsarlos, de forma violenta, hasta el 987.

Como consecuencia, Almanzor montó en cólera y destruyó Coímbra. Después avanzó sobre León, la sitió y la arrasó. Bermudo II se refugió entonces en Zamora, ciudad de la que tuvo que huir a Lugo tras la persecución a la que le sometió Almanzor, lo que causó la destrucción de ambas ciudades. No contento con esto, las tropas musulmanas conquistaron Gormaz y Coruña del Conde (aún conocida como Clunia) (994), Astorga (996) y saquearon Castro Bergidum (El Bierzo) y Santiago de Compostela (997).

En el 999 se agravó tanto la gota que padecía (de ahí su apodo) que le resultaba imposible cabalgar y tenía que ser transportado en una litera. Ese mismo año murió en el monasterio de Villabuena, El Bierzo[6] (Provincia de León) y fue enterrado en el Monasterio de Santa María de Carracedo. Posteriormente, sus restos fueron trasladado al Panteón de los Reyes.[2]

Sampiro fue su Notario y describe a éste en términos elogiosos: fue bastante prudente, confirmó las leyes dictadas por Wamba, mandó abrir y estudiar la colección canónica, amó la misericordia y el juicio y procuró reprobar el mal y escoger el bien.[7] Cuando el obispo Pelayo, que le guardaba bastante rencor, reanudó la recopilación cronística, sustituyó esos elogios de Sampiro por descripciones más crueles (por ejemplo, el mote de gotoso con el que ha pasado a la Historia).

===Matrimonio y descendencia===

* Casado en primeras nupcias con Velasquita, hija de Ramiro II, con la que tuvo una hija, Cristina y un hijo, Ordoño.
* A la muerte de su mujer contrajo matrimonio nuevamente con Elvira, hija del conde castellano García Fernández, con la que tuvo tres hijos, Alfonso V, Teresa y Sancha. También tuvo dos hijos ilegítimos: Elvira y Pelayo

''in: Wikipedia, la enciclopedia libre <http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bermudo_II_de_Le%C3%B3n>''

_____________________________________________________________________________

"Son Of Urraca Fernández de Castilla (Fernandez de Castiile) and Ordoño III Rey de León "

''http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bermudo_II_of_Leon''

_____________________________________________________________________________

=Bermudo II of León=

'''Bermudo II''', called the Gouty (Spanish: el Gotoso) (956-999), king of Galicia (982-999) and León (984-999), was the son of Ordoño III of León. He was raised by the nobility against the king Ramiro III in Galicia in 982. He married firstly Velasquita Ramirez, with whom he had a daughter, Cristina. He married secondly Elvira García of Castile, daughter of the Castilian count García Fernández, with whom he had three children: Alfonso, Theresa, and Sancha. He also had two bastards: Elvira and Pelayo.

He was brought to power only through the support of the Galician and Portuguese nobilities and required the protection of the Caliphate of Córdoba. There was much unrest in Castile in his early years and the Cordoban armies of Almanzor came, not as allies, but as conquerors. He recuperated Zamora, but did not succeed in expelling the Moors, through force of arms, until 987.
For this, Almanzor set out to destroy Coimbra. After advancing on León, he besieged it and razed it. Bermudo took refuge in Zamora. The Moslems continued rampaging. Troops conquered Astorga (996) and sacked Santiago de Compostela (997).

In 999, the gout from which he suffered was aggravated and this made it impossible for him to ride any longer. He travelled by litter. That year, he died in Villanueva del Bierzo and was buried in the monastery of Carracedo. Later, his remains were transferred to the Cathedral of León.

''From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia <>http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bermudo_II_of_Le%C3%B3n''

_____________________________________________________________________________

'''Bermudo II de Leão e da Galiza ou Vermudo II''' (c. 956 - O Berço, Leão, 999), foi rei da Galiza a partir de 982 e de Leão desde 985 e até à sua morte. Julga-se que tenha sido filho bastardo de Ordonho III. Foi cognominado o Gotoso, por sofrer de gota.

Foi filho de Ordonho III de Leão (925 - Zamora, Agosto de 956) e de Elvira Pais Deza (930 -?) filha de Paio Gonçalves, conde de Deza (900 -?) e de Ermesinda Guterres de Coimbra (905 -?). Casou em 960 com Elvira Garcez de Castela (960 - Dezembro de 1017) filha de Garcia Fernandez, (930 — 995) e de Ava de Ribagorza, de quem teve:

# Afonso V de Leão e Castela (994 - 1028), rei de Leão. Casou por duas vezes, a primeira com Elvira Mendes de Melanda, condessa soberana de Portugal, filha do conde Mendo Gonçalves e de Tutadona Moniz.

O segundo casamento foi com Urraca Garcez de Pamplona.

Filhos de uma senhora cujo nome a história não regista:

# Ordonho Bermudes de Leão (980 - 1042) casou com Fronilde Pais de Coimbra (985 - 1058), filha de Paio Rodrigues de Coimbra (960 - 1005) e de Gontinha Fernandes de Leão).

''in: Wikipédia, a enciclopédia livre <http://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bermudo_II_de_Le%C3%A3o>''
--------------------
Bermudo II (o Vermudo II) de León, apodado «el Gotoso» (entre 948 y 9531 - 999), fue Rey de León desde 985 hasta su muerte. Previamente, fue proclamado rey en 981 por un grupo de nobles gallegos y portugueses sublevados contra Ramiro III de León y coronado como tal en Santiago de Compostela en 982. Desde entonces estuvo en guerra con Ramiro III, ejerciendo el dominio efectivo sobre Galicia y Portugal. Con la muerte de Ramiro en 985, Bermudo II quedó como único soberano sobre todo el reino de León. http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bermudo_II_de_León
--------------------
Bermudo II (or Vermudo II) of Leon, dubbed "the Gotoso" (between 948 and 953 [1] - September 999), was King of Leon from 985 until his death. He was proclaimed king in 981 by a group of Galician and Portuguese nobles revolted against Ramiro III de León and crowned as such in Santiago de Compostela in 982. Since then he was at war with Ramiro III, exercising effective control over Galicia and Portugal. With the death of Ramiro in 985, Bermudo II remained unique only in the kingdom of Leon.

The family origins of King Bermudo have been the subject of various investigations that have reached different conclusions, especially on the identity of his mother. By the documents of his time and the historical chronicles, it is certain that the father of Bermudo was a king called Ordoño and there is unanimity among the historians in the identification of this monarch with Ordoño III. In addition, a donation made by Bermudo II to a monastery of Sanabria reads: Quam auus noster domnus Ranemirus concesit Sancte Marie de Taulo. The king calls Ramiro auus. Auus, avus may mean grandfather or ancestor, but, considering that in the time of Ramiro I those lands had not yet been repopulated, the king referred to in the donation can not be other than Ramiro II, father of Ordoño III and , Therefore, grandfather of Bermudo II.

As for the mother, there are several theories. Pelayo, bishop of Oviedo affirmed that he was the son of a second woman of Ordoño III called Elvira. The problem is that there is no evidence that the monarch ever separated from his wife Urraca Fernandez. Urraca appears next to Ordoño III in all the documents from the beginning of the reign in 951 until the death of the king in 956. Despite not agreeing with the intended maternity of Elvira proposed by the bishop Pelayo, Claudio Sánchez-Albornoz accepted the Possibility that Bermudo could have been illegitimate son of Ordoño III. Justo Pérez de Urbel surprised by the few news about the sonship of Bermudo in the Chronicle of Sampiro in which only it appears that: mortuary Ramiro, Veremudus Ordonii filius, ingressus est Legionem et accepit regnum pacifice, Suggested that his mother may have been Gontrodo or Aragonta Peláez, daughter of Pelayo González (son of Gonzalo Betótez and Teresa Eriz) and Ermesinda Gutiérrez since in a diploma dated January 5, 999, Bermudo called avus (grandparents, ancestors) To Gonzalo and Teresa. Professor Emilio Sáez Sánchez, however, considered the diploma a falsification (which denies Perez de Urbel) and believes that Bermudo was the son of Queen Urraca Fernandez, opinion shared by Gonzalo Martinez Diez.

Although the exact location of his birth is unknown, it is assumed that he may have been born near Carracedelo, in the region of El Bierzo, west of the province of León and spend his years of youth there. It has been called, therefore, The Bercian king. [4]

Marriage and descent

Bermudo married for the first time before 981 with Velasquita de León, who after being repudiated by the monarch between 988 and 991, retired to the Monastery of San Pelayo where was abbess the queen widow Teresa Ansúrez. They were parents of:

Cristina Bermúdez who married the infant Ordoño Ramírez el Ciego, son of Ramiro III de León. After being widowed he retired to the Monastery of Cornellana that he had founded and where he professed as a nun, probably receiving burial in the monastery. After repudiating his first wife, Bermudo II probably married at the end of November of 991 with Elvira García, [10] daughter of Castilian Count Garcia Fernandez, with whom he had two children:

Alfonso V of Leon (994-1028); Who succeeded his father to the throne. Sancha Bermúdez, [11] who in 1038 filed a lawsuit against the Lugo headquarters, confirming the document Count Oveco Bermúdez, who in 1042 donated the town of Cauleo, which had been King Bermudo II and distributed after his death between his Daughter Sancha and her brothers, to the headquarters of Lugo. Teresa Bermúdez (died 25 April 1039). According to Bishop Pelayo, Tarasiam post mortem patris sui dedit Adefonsus in coniugio, ipsa nolente, cuidam pagano regi toletano pro pace. [12] Ibn Khaldoun observed that "in 993 Bermudo sent his daughter to Almanzor who made her his slave and then emancipated her and married her." [11] Thus, according to these authors, Teresa was delivered by her father or by her Brother Alfonso to Almanzor, And after being released after the death of this one, returned to the kingdom of Leon [13] where it professed like religious in the Monastery of San Pelayo of Oviedo in which it was buried to its death. Modern historians doubt the veracity of these events and they think that there is a confusion with one of the daughters of the king Sancho Garcés III of Pamplona called Urraca or Abda that was given by its father in 983 to Almanzor since Teresa was not born until after 991. The date of his death, April 25, 1039, [15] is given in his epitaph which reads: Hic dilecta Deo revestians Tarasia Christo dicata proles Beremundi regis et Geloire reginae uel si obiit sub die vii kalendas magii feria IIII hora Mediae noctis, was MLXXVII. King Bermudo maintained extramarital affairs with several ladies, some with a high lineage. According to Professor Margarita Torres, the Galician heritage of some of the sons of Bermudo could be due to the maternal lineage. One of the King's lovers, according to the said author, was Elvira Pinioliz, wife of Bermudo Vela, the parents of Count Oveco Bermúdez.

The children out of wedlock were:

Ordoño Bermúdez. He married Fronilde Peláez, daughter of Count Pelayo Rodríguez and Countess Gotina Fernández. The infant Ordoño and his wife were the progenitors of the Galician Ordóñez. Elvira Bermúdez, owner of certain goods in Galicia, possibly inherited from her mother, in addition to others received from her father and located in the Vidriales valley. Bermudo Bermúdez. A hard tackle from Piniolo Bermúdez to Pelayo Bermúdez. It confirms sale made by the Monastery of Sahagún on March 21, 1006 Pelagius, filius Ueremudi regis.

Grave

He received burial in the Monastery of Santa Maria de Carracedo, originally called San Salvador de Carracedo, that had founded the 27 of December of 990, declaring to the monastery free of all regal authority and ordering that its body was buried in him. Later, Fernando I and Sancha, transferred the rest until the Panther of Kings of San Isidoro de León, in the city of Leon [2] where they were placed in a stone tomb of the Pantheon of Kings of San Isidoro of Lion
--------------------
-https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bermudo_II_of_Le%C3%B3n ''('''ESP''' more sources cited)''

Rey de Galicia (982-999)
Rey de León (984-999)

Rey de Galicia (982-999)
Rey de León (985-999)

Rey de Galicia (982-999)
Rey de León (984-999)

27724436. Kong Bermudo II Den Verkbrudne ORDONGOSON av Leon(5740) was born in 954.(5741) He was a Konge in 981 in Leon.(5742) He died in 999.(5743) Han kjempet mot sin fetter Ramiro III. og forenet Leon med Galicien og Kastiljen. I 992 ble han overvunnet av maurerne som hadde oversvømmet hans rike etter ordre av Almanzor. Han rilbragte de siste årene av regjeringstiden med å reparere ruinene etter dennes invasjon. He was married to Dronning Elvira N.NSDTR av Leon about 992

Bermudo II de Leão e da Galiza (ou Vermudo II; c. 956 - O Berço, Leão, 999), foi rei da Galiza a partir de 982 e de Leão desde 985 e até à sua morte. Julga-se que tenha sido filho bastardo de Ordonho III. Foi cognominado o Gotoso, por sofrer de gota.
Foi feito rei da Galiza, em Santiago de Compostela, pelos nobres galego-portugueses, descontentes com as derrotas de Ramiro III de Leão frente aos muçulmanos. Reforçou o seu poder ante Ramiro ao vencê-lo na Batalha da Portela de Arenas (983); auxiliado pelas forças do Almançor, dominou o reino de Leão em 985, e expulsou os aliados muçulmanos do seu reino; em represália, o Almançor reuniu um grande exército, com o qual saqueou sucessivamente Coimbra, Leão, Zamora, Lugo e Astorga.
Bermudo III acabou por se refugiar na Galiza ante o poderoso assédio muçulmano; contudo, as forças muçulmanas continuaram a saquear o reino, tendo logrado alcançar a própria cidade de Compostela, em 997 tendo feito milhares de cativos cristãos e, de acordo com a tradição, obrigado os vencidos a transportar os sinos da sé-catedral até Córdova.
Bermudo continuou foragido na Galiza ante a desorganização geral do reino; à medida que a sua gota evoluía, deixou de poder cavalgar, e acabou por falecer em 999, vitimado por essa afecção.
Deixou o reino ao seu filho Afonso, então ainda menor.

King of Leon and Galicia

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Leon (985-999)

SOURCE NOTES:
www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal10132

The kingdom of Leon gained a new ruler in 982 named Bermudo II, called el Gotoso, who succeeded Ramiro III. Bermudo reigned until 999. He was succeeded by Alfonso V.

During his reign, Bermudo II el Gotoso waged war with the Moors in 992, and was defeated.

Bermudo ?den Verkbrudne? var konge av Leon 982 - 999.
Han kjempet mot sin fetter, Ramiro III og forenet Leon med Galicien og Castilla.
I 992 ble han overvunnet av maurerne som hadde oversvømmet hans rike etter ordre
av Almanzor. Han tilbrakte de siste år av sin regjeringstid med å reparere ruinene etter denne
invasjon.
Han var gift
1. gang i 983 med Velasquita av Castilla,
2. gang ca. 992 med hennes søster, Elvira.

Nephew of Alfonso I, he abdicated in favor of Alfonso II following defeat by
the Moors.

Nephew of Alfonso I, he abdicated in favor of Alfonso II following defeat by
the Moors.

Nephew of Alfonso I, he abdicated in favor of Alfonso II following defeat by
the Moors.

Name Prefix:<NPFX> King Name Suffix:<NSFX> Ii, Of Léon "El Gotoso" "The Gouty"

Nephew of Alfonso I, he abdicated in favor of Alfonso II following defeat by
the Moors.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]