== Notes for [[Item:Q116217|Q116217]] ==

----

don Nuño Laínez DE CASTILLA, son of don Laín Fernández DE CASTILLA, married doña Eilo Fernández DE CASTILLA, daughter of don Fernando Rodrígez DE CASTILLA.

----

===Biography

https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diego_La%C3%ADnez

According to the Historia Roderici :

This [Lain Calvo] seems to have been the origin of his lineage: Laín Calvo fathered several children; Among them were Fernando Laínez and Bermudo Laínez. Fernando Laínez in turn fathered Laín Fernández and Bermudo Laínez fathered Rodrigo Bermúdez. Laín Fernández in turn fathered Nuño Laínez, and Rodrigo Bermúdez fathered Fernando Rodríguez,''' Fernando Rodríguez in turn fathered Pedro Fernández and a daughter named Eylo. Nuño Laínez took this Eylo as his wife''' and fathered Laín Núñez in her. Laín in turn fathered Diego Laínez, and this Diego Laínez fathered Rodrigo Díaz, the Champion, in the daughter of Rodrigo Álvarez.


----
===Research notes

https://thesignsofthetimes.com.au/34/61747.htm

The ''"Corónicas" Navarras'' name "''Pero Ferrandiz et una fija…don Elo''" as the children of "''Ferrant Rodríguiz''", stating that the latter married "''Nuyno Laniz''" although it does not state directly the parentage of the latter. The ''Historia Roderici'' names “Pedro Fernández and a daughter named Eylo” as the children of “Fernán Rodríguez”, adding that Eilo married “''Nuño Laínez''”. The ''Nobiliario'' of Pedro Conde de Barcelos names "''D. Fernando Rodriguez, D. Ello''" as the children of "D. Fernando Rodriguez", adding in an earlier passage that "Nuño Lainez" married "D. Ello". 1

----
===Genealogy

Foundation for Medieval Genealogy, Medlands: Eilo Fernández. < [http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/CastilNob.htm#EiloFernandezMNunoLainez link] >


*'''NUÑO Laínez''', son of [LAIN Fernández & his wife ---] . The Historia Roderici names “Nuño Laínez” as the son of “Laín Fernández”[372]. … m '''EILO Fernández''', daughter of [FERNAN Rodríguez & his wife ---]. The "Corónicas" Navarras name "Pero Ferrandiz et una fija…don Elo" as the children of "Ferrant Rodríguiz", stating that the latter married "Nuyno Laniz" although it does not state directly the parentage of the latter[375]. … Nuño & his wife had [one child]:
**1. [LAIN Núñez (-after 1063). The "Corónicas" Navarras name "Layn Nunyz" as the son of "Nuyno Laniz" and his wife[378]. The Historia Roderici names Laín Núñez as son of “Nuño Laínez…[and] Eylo”[379]. The Nobiliario of Pedro Conde de Barcelos names "Lain Nuñez" as the son of "Nuño Lainez" and his wife[380]. He subscribed charters of Fernando I King of Castile between 1049 and 1063[381].] '''m ---. The name of Lain's wife is not known'''. Lain & his wife had [two] children:
*** a) DIEGO Laínez (-[1058]). … married "D. Teresa Nuñez" ..
*** b) [FERNANDO Laínez . The Nobiliario of Pedro Conde de Barcelos names "D. Diego Lainez, D. Fernando Lainez" as the children of "Lain Nuñez"[415].] m JIMENA Núñez, daughter of NUÑO Alfonso de Amaya & his wife ---.

===References
* http://www.geneall.net/H/per_page.php?id=7945
* Torres Sevilla-Quiñones de León, Margarita Cecilia, "El linaje del Cid", Annals of the University of Alicante. Medieval History. n.º 13 (2000-2002). ISSN 0212-2480, pp. 343-360. < [https://rua.ua.es/dspace/bitstream/10045/6786/1/HM_13_11.pdf PDF] >
* https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rodrigo_D%C3%ADaz_de_Vivar
* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/El_Cid

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]