== Notes for [[Item:Q81957|Q81957]] ==

'''Marcus Annius Verus''' (died 124) was a distinguished Roman politician who lived in the 2nd century, served as a praetor and was the biological father of the Emperor Marcus Aurelius.

He was the son of Roman Senator Marcus Annius Verus and noblewoman Rupilia Faustina. His brother was Marcus Annius Libo and his sister was Faustina the Elder who married the Emperor Antoninus Pius. He married Domitia Lucilla, the heiress of a wealthy family which owned a tile factory. They had two children, Marcus Aurelius (born in 121, and who was also originally named Marcus Annius Verus), and Annia Cornificia Faustina (born in 123). Annius Verus died young while he held the office of praetor.[1] Both his children were still infants. The likeliest year of his death is 124.[2]

In his Meditations, Marcus Aurelius, who was only about 3 years old when his father died, says of him: "From what I heard of my father and my memory of him, modesty and manliness"

-----------
Marcus Annio Vero (Falleció en aprox. 124) fue un político romano distinguido que vivió en el siglo segundo, sirvió como Pretor y era el padre biológico del emperador Marco Aurelio.

Él era el hijo del senador romano Marcus Annio Vero y la noble Rupilia Faustina. Su hermano era Marco Annio Libo y su hermana Faustina era el Viejo que se casó con el emperador Antonino Pío. Se casó con Domitia Lucilla, la heredera de una familia acomodada que poseía una fábrica de baldosas. Tuvieron dos hijos, Marco Aurelio (nacido en 121, y que también fue originalmente llamado Marcus Annio Vero), y Annia Faustina Cornificia (nacido en 123). Annio Vero murió joven, mientras que ocupó el cargo de pretor. [1] Sus dos hijos eran todavía niños. El año más probable de su muerte es de 124. [2]

En sus Meditaciones, Marco Aurelio, que sólo estaba a unos 3 años cuando su padre murió, dice de él: "Por lo que he oído de mi padre y mi recuerdo de él, la modestia y la hombría"

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Annius_Verus_%28praetor%29
--------------------
'''
=Marcus Annius Verus=
'''

Marcus Annius Verus (died 124) was a distinguished Roman politician who lived in the 2nd century, served as a praetor and was the biological father of the Emperor Marcus Aurelius.

He was the son of Roman Senator Marcus Annius Verus and noblewoman Rupilia Faustina. His brother was the consul Marcus Annius Libo and his sister was Faustina the Elder, wife of Antoninus Pius. He married Domitia Lucilla, the heiress of a wealthy family which owned a tile factory. They had two children, Marcus Aurelius (born in 121, and who was also originally named Marcus Annius Verus), and Annia Cornificia Faustina (born in 123). Annius Verus died young while he held the office of praetor. Both his children were still infants. The likeliest year of his death is 124.

In his Meditations, Marcus Aurelius, who was only about 3 years old when his father died, says of him: "From what I heard of my father and my memory of him, modesty and manliness."

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Annius_Verus_(praetor)

Marcus Annius

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]