== Notes for [[Item:Q111724|Q111724]] ==

== MedLands ==

GARCÍA Iñíguez ([810]-killed by Arabs [Lumberri] 882[57], bur Leire Monastery). .. ... ....

'''m''' [firstly] '''URRACA''', daughter of ---. An undated charter refers to a confirmation by “rex domnus Garcia et regina domna Urraca maiore”[61]. Her origin is not known. Rodrigo Ximénez de Rada, writing in the first half of the 13th century, records that "Enecho…Arista…filium Garsiam" married "Urracam, de Regio semine"[62]. Jaurgain suggests that "de Regio semine" should be interpreted as meaning "de la même race que lui" (based on his assumption that the kings of Navarre were descended from the dukes of Gascony, about which there appears to be no proof) and that Urraca was "fille de [https://www.geni.com/people/Sanche-II-duc-de-Gascogne/6000000000424707328 Sanche-Sancion duc de Vasconie]", although he cites no primary source which confirms this parentage[63]. Her origin is discussed by Salazar y Acha who suggests that she was a member of the Banu Qasi family, related to the second wife of Fruela II King of Asturias, which would account for the introduction of the name Fortún into the family of the kings of Navarre[64].

*http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/NAVARRE.htm#GarciaIIniguezdied882
------
== [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garc%C3%ADa_%C3%8D%C3%B1iguez_of_Pamplona#Marriage_and_descendants Wikipedia] ==

The identity of García's wife or wives is poorly documented, and has been subject to much speculation. An undated confirmation of an earlier lost charter refers to King García and Queen '''Urraca''' Mayor, and this is thought by some to refer to García Íñiguez and an otherwise unknown wife, '''Urraca'''. Based on her name alone and the fact that one of his sons' names was Fortún, a common name among the Banu Qasi dynasty, it has been argued that Urraca could have been '''' a granddaughter of [https://www.geni.com/people/Musa-Ibn-Musa-lbn-Qasaw-Wal%C3%AD-de-Tudela-y-Huesca-y-Zaragoza/6000000012263275369?from_flash=1&fsession_id=1606832998728&through=6000000012263275369 Musa ibn Musa ibn Qasi], the leader of the Banu Qasi clan.[8] Other historians have suggested alternative parentage, or suggested the document does not refer to García Íñiguez at all but instead to García Sánchez II of Pamplona and his mother Queen Urraca Fernández. A second possible wife is infanta Leodegundia, daughter of Ordoño I of Asturias. She is known to have married a ruler of Pamplona not named in the primary source, and García Íñiguez is one of those speculated to have been this prince.[1]

García Íñiguez had following children:

*Fortún Garcés, King of Pamplona from 870 until 905 and married to Auria.
*Onneca Garcés, married to Aznar Galíndez II, Count of Aragon.[9]
*Sancho Garcés, father of Aznar Sánchez de Larraun — the second husband of his cousin Onneca Fortúnez — and probably of Velazquita, who married Mutarrif ibn Musa, of the Banu Qasi.[a]

---------------

'''https://revistas.ucm.es/index.php/ELEM/article/view/ELEM0606220029A/21565

This site shows various trees and refers to the connections for her parents as they are connected on Geni presently as hypothetical, unproven.'''

Sancho Garcés, whose only known child, Aznar Sánchez, married a daughter of king Fortún Garcés and by her had queens Toda Aznárez, wife of king Sancho Garcés I, and Sancha Aznárez, wife of king Jimeno Garcés.

Onneca Garcés, wife of Aznar Galíndez II.

Velasquita Garcés, married to Mutarrīf ibn Mūsā ibn Qasi, Wali of Huesca, son of Mūsā ibn Mūsā.

(perhaps) Jimena, wife of Alfonso III of León (assignment of her parentage based on political, chronological and onomastic arguments).

Reina de Pamplona
Condesa de Aragón
En la página de la referencia 2 se la menciona como Urraca Fernández

SOURCE NOTES:
www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal11146

443590913. Urraca N.NSDTR av kongelig byrd.

Born of the Banu Qasi, Berber Moors
Source: Codex Roda

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]