== Notes for [[Item:Q105543|Q105543]] ==

[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Judah_haNasi Rabbi Judah haNasi], [http://he.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D7%A8%D7%91%D7%99_%D7%99%D7%94%D7%95%D7%93%D7%94_%D7%94%D7%A0%D7%A9%D7%99%D7%90 יהודה הנשיא‎] "Judah the Prince" also known as Rabbeinu HaKadosh רבינו הקדוש‎, "Our Holy Rabbi", was a key leader of the Jewish community of Judea toward the end of the 2nd century CE, during the occupation by the Roman Empire. His place of birth is unknown; nor is it recorded where his father, Shimon ben Gamliel II, sought refuge with his family during the persecutions under Hadrian.

He is best known as the chief redactor and editor of the Mishnah. He was of the Davidic line, the royal line of King David, hence the title nasi, meaning prince. The title nasi was also used for presidents of the Sanhedrin.

As Nasi, he became very wealthy, comparable to Roman rulers. But he gave much of his wealth to the support of the poor. It was said of him, “From the days of Mosheh Rabbeinu till Rabbeinu HaKadosh, there was never found great Torah knowledge combined with great wealth.”

Judah haNasi was born in 135 and died on 15 Kislev in 188CE or 219CE. According to the Midrash, he came into the world on the same day that Rabbi Akiva died a martyr's death. The Talmud suggests that this was a result of Divine Providence: God had granted the Jewish people another leader of great stature to succeed Rabbi Akiva.

On the restoration of order in the Land of Israel, Usha became the seat of the academy and Judah spent his youth there. His father presumably gave him the same education that he himself had received, including Greek language. This knowledge of Greek enabled him to become the Jews' intermediary with the Roman authorities. He favored Greek as the language of the country over Syriac (Aramaic).It is said that in Judah's house, only Hebrew was spoken, and even the maids spoke it.

According to the Talmud (Avodah Zarah 10a-b), Judah haNasi was very wealthy and greatly revered in Rome. He had a close friendship with "Antoninus", possibly the Emperor Antoninus Pius, who would consult Judah on various worldly and spiritual matters.

Hadrian died in 139 C.E and with his death came an improvement in the treatment of the Jewish community in Israel. During a period of relative quiet, Rabbi Yehudah HaNasi managed to befriend the Roman emperors who succeeded Hadrian, particularly Marcus Aurelius (161-180 C.E.). Writes historian Rabbi Berel Wein in his Echoes of Glory (p. 224):

"Providentially, in the course of the Parthian war, Marcus Aurelius met Rabbi [Yehudah HaNasi], and they became friends and eventually confidants. Marcus Aurelius consulted with his friend in Judah on matters of state policy as well as on personal questions.

"The years of Marcus Aurelius' reign, ending in his death in 180, was the high-water mark in the intercourse between Rome and the Jews. The Jews, under the leadership of Rabbi [Yehudah HaNasi], would use this period of blissful respite to prepare themselves for the struggle of darker days surely lurking around the corner."

At this time -circa 170-200 CE - the Mishna was born.

Rabbi Judah haNasi is best known as the chief "editor" or "redactor" of the Mishnah. He was the son of Rabbi Shimon ben Gamliel II, and was born eighty years after the destruction of the Second Temple.

At the time of his birth, a Roman edict was in place forbidding the practice of “Brit Milah,” Circumcision. However, his mother was on good terms with the Roman governor’s wife, and they agreed to perpetrate a deception upon the Roman authorities.

Yehudah, who had been circumcised, was given temporarily to the wife of the governor, while the Roman child, who of course was uncircumcised, was held by the Jewish mother, completely fooling the authorities, including the governor himself. Later, when that Roman child grew up to become Marcus Aurelius, an enlightened and compassionate ruler, he and Rabbi became close friends, which redounded to the benefit of the Jewish People.

As a child, Yehudah studied Torah under the tutelage of his father, in Usha, and under Rabbi Yehudah ben Ilai of Usha and Rabbi Yaakov ben Kurshai. Later, he studied under Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai in Tekoa, and from Rabbi Yosi ben Chalafta and Rabbi Elazar ben Shamua, viewing Rabbi Meir, as it were, “from the back.” All of his teachers conveyed to him the tradition of halachot, Jewish Laws, from the period of the Anshei Knesset HaGedolah, until Rabbi Akiva.

He established his first Torah academy at Sh’faram; later he moved to Beit Shearim, where he remained for many years. His students were Rabbi Chiya (the “Great”), Abba Aricha (known as “Rav”), Rabbah bar bar Chana and Shmuel Yarchinai, a beloved student who also served as his personal physician. He is credited with saying “I learned much from my teachers, more than that did I learn from my colleagues, but most of all from my students!”

To understand to a small extent Rabbi’s perspective on life, we can turn to his sayings in Pirkei Avot. "Calculate the eternal reward for a mitzvah against the temporary loss it may cause, and the eternal cost of a sin against the momentary benefit it may bring. Also, consider three aspects of what is above you, and you will avoid sin. They are:

*1. Man’s deeds are observed.
*2. His words are heard.
*3. He cannot escape the consequences of his behavior because everything he does or says is indelibly recorded.

His Mishnah, which he composed to prevent the loss of Torah knowledge by the Jewish People due to their continuous persecutions, was organized into six sections:

*1. Zeraim – basically, the agricultural and related laws and customs of the Jewish People while resident in the Land of Israel
*2. Moed - the laws concerning the holidays of the Jewish People in the time of the Temple and afterwards.
*3. Nashim - Laws concerning family life observed by the People of Israel.
*4. Nezikin – Laws concerning the person-to-person relationships among the Jewish People in the areas of business, damages, etc.
*5. Kodshim – Laws concerning sacrifices and dietary practices and prohibitions practiced by the Jewish People.
*6. Taharot – Laws of “family purity” that have watched over the Jewish People throu ghout the generations

Rebbi died at the age of seventy, having served as Nasi more than thirty years. When he died, Bar Kappara said, “Angels and humans struggled over the Holy Ark. The Angels overcame the humans, and the Holy Ark has been captured!”

In a time of chaos, the rabbis decide that they must do the unprecedented -- write down the Oral Law.

He is one personality who is absolutely fundamental to understanding this period of time, and one of the greatest personalities of Jewish history.

So great was he that he is now affectionately referred to in Jewish scholarship as only Rebbe.

He had a unique combination of attributes -- being both a great Torah scholar and a strong leader -- that gave him the power to lead the Jewish people at this chaotic time. He was also a man of tremendous personal wealth, which put him in a position to wheel and deal and do what needed to get done, not just with the Jews in the Land of Israel but with the Roman authorities as well.

The Talmud records the tradition that Judah haNasi was buried in the necropolis of Beit She'arim, in the Lower Galilee

Not long after the death of Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi the period know as the era of the Tannaim came to a close. The term Tanna, is derived from the Aramaic word “to teach” and covered a period of 200 years from ca.10 B.C.E. to 200 C.E. beginning with Rabbi Shimon the son of Hillel the Elder and ending with Rabbi Yossi ben Yehuda.

[http://www.jewishencyclopedia.com/view.jsp?artid=601&letter=J Read more]

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[http://wiki.geni.com/index.php/Jewish_Dynasties Jewish Dynasties]

The following were Nesi'im, that is to say presidents of the Sanhedrin.

* Hillel
* Rabban Shimon ben Hillel, about whom very little is known
* Rabban Gamaliel Hazaken (Gamaliel the Elder)
* Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel
* Rabban Yochanan ben Zakai
* Rabban Gamaliel of Yavne
* Rabbi Eleazar ben Azariah, who was Nasi for a short time after Rabban Gamliel was removed from his position
* Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel of Yavne
* Rabbi Judah haNasi (Judah the Nasi), known simply as "Rabbi", who compiled the Mishnah

*<nowiki>------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------</nowiki>

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000007307724757

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]