== Notes for [[Item:Q116157|Q116157]] ==

===Family

https://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/SPANISH%20NOBILITY%20LATER%20MEDIEVAL.htm#GarciaGarciadied1160

GARCÍA García de Aza, son of conde GARCÍA Ordóñez, Tenente en Nájera y Grañón & his second wife Eva --- (1106, before 29 Sep-16 Dec 1160). ... [m firstly --- de Lara, daughter of ---. m [secondly] SANCHA Pérez de Traba, daughter of conde PEDRO Froílaz de Traba & his second wife condesa Mayor Rodríguez (-after Dec 1159).

García García & his [second] wife had [seven] children:

5. '''GÓMEZ García de Roa''' (-after 11 Feb 1191). (-after 11 Feb 1191). Salazar y Castro states that "todos los escritores tienen a este señor por el primogénito de D. Garcia Garces IV del nombre señor de Aza y de doña Sancha su mujer" adding that he found no document which contradicts this statement[169]. However, he also cites a charter of Alfonso VIII King of Castile dated 1 Oct 1177 confirmed by (in order) "Petrus Garsiæ, Gomez Garsiæ, Ordonius Garsiæ"[170]. If this document correctly refers to the sons of García García de Aza, it suggests that Gómez was the second son. Alférez of Alfonso VIII King of Castile 30 Dec 1178 to 4 Aug 1182[171]. "…Gomez Garsie de Roda signifer regis Castelle…" subscribed, for Alfonso VIII King of Castile, the charter dated 21 Mar 1181 which records a peace treaty between King Alfonso VIII and Fernando II King of León[172]. [m EREMBURGA, daughter of --- (-[1192]). The primary source which confirms her marriage has not yet been identified.]

[m MARÍA García Señora de Roa, daughter of GÓMEZ García Señor de Roa & his wife Teresa Álvarez de Asturias. Salazar y Castro records her parentage and marriage, adding that she was her husband´s second cousin her father being "hermano del conde don Garcia Garcia señor de Aza que murió en la batalla de Uclés"[173], although as noted above primary source documentation indicates that the paternal grandfather of Gómez García was named García Ordóñez.]

Gómez & his wife had [five] children:
*a) GONZALO Gómez de Roa (-after 1212). Señor de Aza. - see below.
*b) [JUAN García . His patronymic suggests that this affiliation may be incorrect. Señor de Roa. m URRACA García de Villamayor Señora de Villalón, daughter of JUAN García de Villamayor & his wife Urraca Fernández de Castro. Salazar y Castro records her parentage and marriage[174].]
*c) PEDRO Gómez de Aza . Salazar y Castro records his parentage adding that he "tuvo en honor a Peñafiel…la única noticia que hallamos suya"[175].
*d) FERNANDO Gómez de Aza . Salazar y Castro records his parentage[176]. Señor de Albornoz. - SEÑORES de ALBORNOZ[177].
*e) GARCÍA Gómez de Aza . Salazar y Castro records his parentage[178]. Comendador de Maqueda en la Orden de Calatrava.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]