== Notes for [[Item:Q88543|Q88543]] ==

#I (am) the lady Adda-guppi’, mother
#of Nabium-na’id, king of Babylon,
#votaress of the gods Sin, Nin-gal, Nusku, and Sadarnunna, my deities
#who, from my childhood, have sought after
#their godheads. Whereas in the i6th year of Nabopolassar,
#king of Babylon, Sin, king of the gods, with his city
#and his temple was angry and went up to heaven-the city and
#the people that (were) in it went to ruin.
#(Now) forasmuch as the shrines of Sin, Nin-gal, Nusku,
#and Sadarnunna I sought after and was worshipper of their godhead,
#(and) that I laid hold on the hem of the robe of Sin, king of the gods, night and daytime
#I had ever in mind his great godhead@@aily, without ceaSing,
#of Sin, gamag, Igtar, and Adda, so long as I am alive,
#I (am) their votaress (both) in heaven and earth. My blesSings,
#the goodly things which they gave me, I (too) by day, night, month, and year, gave (back) to them.
#I laid hold on the hem of the robe of Sin, king of the gods, night and daytime
#my two eyes were with him, in prayer and humility of face
#was I bowed before them (and) thus (I prayed), " May thy return
#to thy city be (vouchsafed) to me, that the people, the black-headed,
#may worship thy great godhead." For calming
#the heart of my god and my goddess, a dress of fine wool, jewels,
#silver, gold, a new shift, perfumes, sweet oil,
#applied not to my body, (but in) a torn shift
#I went clothed, my goings-out were noiseless, I proclaimed
#their praises : the glory of my city and of my goddess
#was (ever) set in my heart, I kept watch upon them,
#anything good of mine I did not omit, but carried it (ever) before them.
#From the 2oth year of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, that I was born (in)
#until the 42nd year of Assurbanipal, the 3rd year of Asur-etillu-ili,
#his son, the 2 I St year of Nabopolassar, the 43rd year of Nebuchadrezzar,
#the 2nd year of Awel-Marduk, the 4th year of Neriglissar,
#in 95 years of the god Sin, king of the gods of heaven and earth,
#(in) which I sought after the shrines of his great godhead,
#(for) my good doings he looked upon me with a smile
#he heard my prayers, he granted my saying, the wrath
#of his heart calmed. Towards E-hul-hul the temple of Sin
#which (is) in Harran, the abode of his heart’s delight, he was reconciled, he had
#regard. Sin, king of the gods, looked upon me and
#Nabu-na’id (my) only son, the issue of my womb, to the kingship
#he called, and the kingship of Sumer and Akkad
#from the border of Egypt (on) the upper sea even to the lower sea
#all the lands he entrusted hither
#to his hands. My two hands I lifted up and to Sin, king of the gods,
#reverently with imploration [(I prayed) thus, " Nabu-na’id
#(my) son, offspring of my womb, beloved of his mother,]

'''Col. II.'''

#thou hast called him to the kingship, thou hast pronounced his name,
#at the command of thy great godhead may the great gods
#go at his two sides, may they make his enemies to fall,
#forget not, (but) make good E-hul-hul and the finishing of its foundation (?)
#When in my dream, his two hands had been laid on, Sin, king of the gods,
#spoke to me thus, " With thee I will put into the hands of Nabu-na’id, thy son, the return of the gods and the habitation of Harran ;
#He shall build E-hul-hul, shall perfect its structure, (and) Harran
#more than (it was) before he shall perfect and restore it to its place.
#The hand of Sin, Nin-gal, Nusku, and Sadarnunna
#I. he shall clasp and cause them to enter E-hul-hul ". The word of Sin,
#king of the gods, which he spoke to me I honoured, and I myself saw (it fulfilled);
#Nabu-na’id, (my) only son, offspring of my womb, the rites
#forgotten of Sin, Nin-gal, Nusku, and
#Sadarnunna he perfected, E-hul-hul
#anew he built and perfected its structure, Harran more
#than before he perfected and restored it to its place ; the hand
#of Sin, Nin-gal, Nusku, and Sadarnunna from
#Suanna his royal city he clasped, and in the midst of Harran
#in E-hul-hul the abode of their hearts’ ease with gladness
#and rejoicing he let them dwell. What from former times Sin, king of the gods,
#had not done and had not granted to anybody (he did) for the love of me
#who had ever worshipped his godhead, laid hold on the hem of his robe-Sin, king of the gods,
#uplifted my head and set upon me a good name in the land,
#long days, years of heart’s ease he multiplied upon me.
#From the time of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, until the 9th year
#of Nabu-na’id king of Babylon, the son, offspring of my womb
#104 years of happiness, with the reverence which Sin, king of the gods,
#placed in me, he made me flourish, my own self : the sight of my two eyes
#is clear, I am excellent in understanding, my hand and both feet are sound,
#well-chosen are my words, meat and drink
#agree with me, my flesh is goodly, glad is my heart.
#My descendants to four generations from me flourishing in themselves
#I have seen, I am fulfilled (with) offspring. O Sin, king of the gods, for favour
#thou hast looked upon me, thou hast lengthened my days : Nabu-na’id, king of Babylon,
#my son, to Sin my lord I have devoted him. So long as he is alive
#let him not offend against thee ; the genius of favour, genius of favour which (to be) with me
#thou hast appointed and they have caused me to attain offspring, with him (too)
#appoint (them), and wickedness and offense against thy great godhead
#endure not, (but) let him worship thy great godhead. In the 2I years
#of Nabopolassar, king of Babylon, in the 43 years of Nebuchadrezzar,
#son of Nabopolassar, and 4 years of Neriglissar, king of Babylon,
#(when) they exercised the kingship, for 68 years
#with all my heart I reverenced them, I kept watch over them,
#Nabu-na’id (my) son, offspring of my womb, before Nebuchadrezzar
#son of Nabopolassar and (before) Neriglissar, king of Babylon, I caused him to stand,
#daytime and night he kept watch over them
#what was pleaSing to them he performed continually,
#my name he made (to be) favourite in their sight, (and) like
#[a daughter of] their [own] they uplifted my head

'''Col. III.'''

#I nourished (their spirits), and incense offering
#rich, of sweet savour,
#I appointed for them continually and
#laid ever before them.
#(Now) in the 9th year of Nabu-na’id,
#king of Babylon, the fate
#of herself carried her off, and
#Nabu-na’id, king of Babylon,
#(her) son, issue of her womb, . . . . . . . . . . .
#her corpse entombed, and [robes]
#splendid, a bright mantle. . . . . . . . . . .
#gold, bright. . . . . . . . . . .
#beautiful stones, [precious] stones,
#costly stones. . . . . . . . . . .
#sweet oil her corpse he [anointed]
#they laid it in a secret place. [Oxen and]
#sheep (especially) fattened he [slaughtered]
#before it. He assembled [the people]
#of Babylon and Borsippa, [with the people]
#dwelling in far regions, [kings, princes, and]
#governors, from [the border]
#of Egypt on the Upper Sea
#(even) to the Lower Sea he [made to come up],
#mourning and
#weeping he performed, [dust ?]
#they cast upon their heads, for 7 days
#and 7 nights with. . . . . . . . . . .
#they cut themselves(?), their clothes
#were cast down(?). On the seventh day. . . . . . . . . . .
#the people(?) of all the land their hair(?)
#shaved, and. . . . . . . . . . .
#their clothes. . . . . . . . . . .
#the . . . . . . . . . . . of their clothes. . . . . . . . . . .
#in(?) their places(?). . . . . . . . . . .
#they ? to. . . . . . . . . . .
#at meat (?). . . . . . . . . . .
#perfumes refined he amassed (?). . . . . . . . . . .
#sweet oil upon the heads [of the people]
#he poured out, their hearts. . . . . . . . . . .
#he made glad, he [cheered (?)]
#their minds, the road [to their homes]
#he did not(?) withhold(?). . . . . . . . . . .
#to their own places they went.
#Do thou, whether a king or a prince. . . . . . . . . . .

(Remainder too fragmentary for translation until: --)

#Fear (the gods), in heaven and earth
#pray to them, [neglect] not [the utterance]
#of the mouth of Sin and the goddess
#. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
#- - -. . . . make safe the . . . . . . . . . . . of thy seed
#[ever(?)] and for [ever(?)].

--------------------
•ID: I62250 •Name: Addaguppi •Given Name: Addaguppi •Sex: F •_UID: 470A0F002460A1488693D735CA94C7B4CBE8 •Change Date: 26 Nov 2005 •Death: Y

Marriage 1 Nabubalatsuigbi of Harran •Married: Children 1. Nabonidus I of Babylon

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp%2Dfam&id=I62250

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per01964.htm#0

VOTARESS OF SIN; NIN-GAL, NUSKY, AND SARDARNUNNA AT HARRAN; LOVED 104 (OR 95 )
YEARS; b. 651/49 BC-d. ca. 547 BC AT DUR-KARASHU

RESEARCH NOTES:
Princess of Assyria; Also mother of Nabonidus King of Babylon

Harran (Carrhae)


(©**) Harran (Akkadian Harrânu, "intersecting roads"; Latin Carrhae): town in northern Mesopotamia, famous for its temple of the moon god Sin.
Go here for photos.

From the third millennium BCE until medieval times, Harran is mentioned as an important trade center in northern Mesopotamia, situated on the road from the Mediterranean Sea to the heart of Assyria. It is also mentioned as provincial capital in the Assyrian empire (until the late seventh century BCE) and sanctuary of the moon god Sin, well into the third century CE. Other gods venerated in Harran were Sin's consort Nikkal, the Syrian goddess Atargatis and the Arabian goddess Allat ("Mrs. God"). In the Bible, it is mentioned as one of the towns where Abraham stayed on his voyage from Ur to the promised land. The well where his grandson Jacob met Rachel is still shown today.


Relief showing Nabonidus,
praying to the moon, sun, and
Venus (British Museum,
London; ©***)
Although the town is mentioned as early as 2000 BCE, the city became famous at the end of the seventh century, when the Babylonian king Nabopolassar defeated an Assyrian force on the banks of the Euphrates, south of Harran (25 July 616). In these years, the Assyrian empire was disintegrating, and the Babylonians and the Median leader Cyaxares were unitedly attacking the ancient empire. In 614, they captured Aššur, and two years later, Nineveh was destroyed. The end of the two Assyrian capitals, however, was not the end of the war, however. A new king, Aššur-uballit, set up a kingdom in Harran and defied the Babylonians.
But he was no match for Nabopolassar, who, according to the Fall of Nineveh Chronicle, 'marched to Assyria victoriously' in the fifteenth and sixteenth year of his reign (612-609). Aššur-uballit was forced to leave Harran, but convinced the Egyptians that they had to support his hopeless cause. A large army under command of pharaoh Necho (610-595) advanced to the north. In June 609, Necho and Aššur-uballit tried to recapture Harran and they close to victory, but they had to lift their siege of Harran in August. This was the end of Assyria, its last capital now being part of the Babylonian empire.


Crassus (©!!!)
The first half of the sixth century, Babylon was ruled by king Nebuchadnezzar (604-562). This was the age of Babylonian glory and splendor. However, not everything was fine, and in 555 a coup d' état took place, which led to the accession of king Nabonidus, an old man, who may in fact have been nothing more than a puppet for the real ruler, his son Belsassar.
Nabonidus shocked the religious authorities of Babylon by his dedication to Sin of Harran. A Babylonian king was expected to venerate the supreme god Marduk and take part in the Akitu festival. Nabonidus would have none of it. Instead, he left Babylon and started to live in the Arabian desert (more...). At the same time, he rebuilt the temple of Sin at Harran. Meanwhile, the Babylonians felt betrayed and started to sympathize with king Cyrus of Persia, who had already defeated the Medes and Lydians. When he announced to restore the cult of Marduk, the Babylonians sided with him (October 539).


Harran on the Ephesus
monument (Kunsthistorisches
Museum, Wien; ©***)
Harran was now part of the Achaemenid empire, which was replaced two centuries later by that of the Macedonian king Alexander the Great. The conqueror may have visited Harran in the late summer of 331. After Alexander's death in 323, Harran was part of the empire of the Seleucids, the Macedonian dynasty ruling in Asia. They settled Macedonian veterans at Harran, which remained a recognizable entity after the Seleucid empire had been replaced by that of the Parthians.
In 53 BCE, the Roman general Crassus invaded Parthia. The descendants of the Macedonians sided with him, but nonetheless, he was defeated by a Parthian commander who is called Surena in the Greek and Latin sources, and must have been a member of the Parthian Sûrên clan. The battle of Harran -or Carrhae as the Romans called it- was the beginning of a series of border wars that were to last for almost three centuries.


A Harran house on the arch of
Septimius Severus. (Model
at the Museo nazionale della
civiltà romana, Roma; ©***)
In this period, Harran belonged to a small kingdom called Osrhoene, which was part of the larger Parthian empire and had nearby Edessa as its capital. The Roman emperor Lucius Verus (161-169) tried to conquer this kingdom and nearby Nisibis and was successful, but an epidemic broke out and made annexation impossible. However, a victory monument was erected in Ephesus, and Harran is shown as one of the subject towns.
The Roman emperor Septimius Severus finally added Osrhoene to his realms in 195. The conic domed houses of ancient Harran, which have remained unchanged until the present day, can be seen on the Arch of Septimius Severus on the Forum Romanum.


Caracalla (Centrale
Montemartini; ©***)
His successor Caracalla gave Harran the status of colonia (214) and visited the city in April 217, because he wanted to visit the temple of Sin. Instead, he was murdered by the prefect of the Praetorian guard, Macrinus, who was to be the new emperor.
The Roman emperor Julian the Apostate sacrificed to Sin in 363, at the beginning of his ill-fated campaign against the Sassanid Persians. From now on, the region was a battle zone between the Romans and Sassanids. It remained Roman (or Byzantine) until 639, when the city was captured by the Muslim armies.

At that time, the cult of Sin still existed. Another late-antique religion of Harran was Sabianism. Its adherents worshipped Sin, Mars, and Shamal, the lord of the spirits. Women and men had equal rights, and everyone lived ascetic, refraining from several kinds of meat and groceries. After the arrival of the Islam, they probably went to live in the marshes of the lower Tigris and Euphrates, and are still known as Mandaeans.


Harran today (©***)
The ancient city walls surrounding Harran, 4 kilometer long and 3 kilometer wide, have been repaired throughout the ages (a.o. by the Byzantine emperor Justinian in the sixth century), and large parts are still standing. The position of no less than 187 towers has been identified. Of the six gates (Aleppo gate, Anatolian, Arslanli, Mosul, Baghdad, and Rakka gate), only the first one has remained. The site of the ancient temple of Sin has been used as a castle; its ruin can still be visited.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]