== Notes for [[Item:Q113134|Q113134]] ==

El Rey D.Ramiro el Segundo de Leon,p.4.n.17. oyendo alabar la hermoſura i bõdad de una hermana de Alboazar Albucadan , hija de D. '''Zadan Zada''', biſnieta del Rey Aboali, que venció al Rey D.Rodrigo, aviendo tenido guerras con el Alboazar, que era ſeñor de Gaya, i de toda la tierra, que deſde alli corre haſta Santaren , celebrò con èl pazes con mueſtras de grande amiſtad, ſolo por el amor que tenia a ſu hermana. Entròſe en una galera , i con màs dos entrò por la boca del Duero, i ſubiendo al caſtillo de Gaya, que allí eſtà eminente, vioſe con Alboazar, i por fin de las platicas le pidiò a ſu hermana, prometiendole ſe caſaria con ella: porque ſi bien eſtava caſado con D. Aldonça [A] eran tan parientes, que ſiendo el caſamiento invalido, facilmente le revocaria la Igleſia. Eſcuſoſe Alboazar con que la tenia prometida al Rey de Marruecos. Pero el Rey valiẽdoſe de la Arte Mágica de Amon, grande Aſtrologo,que traìa conſigo,robò la Mora una noche, i ſe fue a ſus galeras con ella; i acudiendo ſu hermano huvo una pelea, en que murieron algunos, i toda via el Rey la llevò a Miñor, i deſde alli a Leon: hizola bautizar con el nombre de Ortiga, que quiere dezir, enſeñada, i perfecta.

''in: Nobiliario del Conde de Barcelos Don Pedro, Hijo del Rey Don Dionisio de Portugal por Alonso Paredes, Madrid, 1646. Titulo 21, p. 111 <http://books.google.com.br/books?pg=PA113&dq=hermigo+alboazar&ei=Ebb8TbTABajZ0QHw9eWyAw&ct=result&id=v4nwPbuf6e0C#v=onepage&q=Ortiga&f=false>''

_____________________________________________________________________________

334.''' ZAYDAN IBN ZAYDA''' (Henrique's thirty-six-times-great-grandfather) was born about 915 to Zayd Ibn Allah 349.
>Zaydan fathered one daughter:
>>Zayra Ibn Zayda317

''in: A Genealogy Report For HENRIQUE DE JESUS TEIXEIRA DE SOUSA <http://horabsurda.org/pdf/arvore.pdf>''

--------------------
1. Abd Al Rahman I of Córdoba . Born in 731. 1st independent emir from 755 . Marry Zaibra. He dies on November 25, 788. They are parents of:

1. Sulayman. W Ali of Toledo . He passes away in 801.

2. Abd Allah.

3. Hisham I "the Appreciated" of Cordoba . Born on April 26, 757. Emir from 788. He died on June 12, 796. He is the father of:

1. Al Hakham I of Córdoba . Born in 770. Emir since 796. He married Adjab . He dies on July 16, 822. They are parents of:

1. Abd Al Rhaman II of Córdoba . Born in 792. Emir since 822. He married Al Shifa . He dies on November 17, 852. They are parents of:

1. Mohammed I of Córdoba . Born in August 823. Emir from 852. He married Ushar . He died on September 29, 886. They are parents of:

1. On the World. Born in 843. Emir from 886. He dies on June 24, 888.

2. Abd Allah I of Cordoba . Born on March 7, 844. Emir from 888. He married Íñiga Onneca Fortúnez de Pamplona , daughter of Fortún Garcés "el Monje" and Auria Ibn Muza. He dies on December 25, 912. They are parents of:

1. Mohamed. Marry Muzna. They are parents of:

1. Abd Al Rhaman III of Córdoba. Born on January 7, 891. Emir de912 a929. 1st Caliph of Cordoba from 929 . He dies on October 15, 961.

1. Zahabon Ibn Zayd from Córdoba . Born around the year 890. He is the father of:

1. Zara Bint de Córdoba . Been born towards 915. It contracts marriage with Lovesendo Ramírez de Amaya . They are parents of:

1. Abdou Nazar de Amaya . Born around 940. He married Unisco Godínez . They are parents of:

1. Trastamiro Abdu Nazar de Amaya . Born around 965. He married Dordia . They are parents of:

http://familiasdemalaga.hispagen.eu/GENEALOGIASNOBLES.htm

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]