== Notes for [[Item:Q99838|Q99838]] ==

Levi ha-Levi ben Japheth (Yefet), also known as Abū Saʿīd, flourished in the first half of the eleventh century. He was the younger of the two known sons of Japheth ben Eli, the Karaite Bible exegete par excellence (his brother being ʿAlī Saʿīd, or Saʿadya, ha-Levi). Like his father, Levi apparently resided in Jerusalem, where, according to Ibn al-Hītī, he counted Jeshua ben Judah (Abū ’l-Faraj Furqān ibn Asad) among his pupils. Later Karaite writers sometimes incorrectly refer to Levi as Saʿīd (not Abū Saʿīd) or Saʿadya, or even Abū Hāshim, in the last instance because they confused Levi’s father, Abū ʿAlī (Yefet), with the prominent ninth- to tenth-century Muʿtazilite Abū ʿAlī ’l-Jubbā’ī, who had a similarly prominent son named Abū Hāshim. Levi himself had three sons of whom only the names are known: Isaiah, Azariah, and Hananiah.

The most important of Levi’s works is his Book of Precepts (Sefer Miṣvot), completed in the year 1006/07. Composed in Arabic, it was eventually translated into Hebrew (for the extant manuscripts in both languages, see Steinschneider, §46 and the manuscripts database on the JNUL website, http://jnul.huji.ac.il). The Book of Precepts was apparently well regarded by Levi’s coreligionists, for it was often quoted by later Karaite writers, especially in the halakhic works of Aaron ben Elijah of Nicomedia and Elijah ben Moses Bashyachi. In its pages Levi polemicizes against the Rabbanite views expounded by Saʿadya Gaon, but in a more moderate tone than many of his predecessors.

Among Levi’s other known works are:

(1) Short notes (nuqaṭ) in Arabic on the Former Prophets, of which are extant only fragments on Joshua (Mss. Brit. Lib. Or. 2564 [Neub. §308], fols. 1r–10v; 2581 [§330], fol. 36) and Judges (Ms. Brit. Lib. Or. 2581 [§330], fol. 37), and possibly Isaiah (Ms. Brit. Lib. Or. 2581 [§330], fols. 38r–43v), Jeremiah (Ms. RNL Yevr.-Arab. I 3432), and Psalms (Ms. Brit. Lib. Or. 2566 [§336]). Poznański suggested that Abraham ibn Ezra’s quotations of “Rabbi Levi” in his comments on Genesis 1:11 (longer commentary), Psalm 7:10, and Psalm 35:13 are from these nuqaṭ.

(2) An Arabic muqaddama on parashat Devarim (Deut. 1:1–3:22), translated into Hebrew by Moses ben Isaiah Fīrūz (extracts of the latter were published by Pinsker, sec. 2, pp. 64–65, on the basis of a now lost, unique Ms.).

(3) A list of the “differences in reading [the biblical text]” (al-khulf fī ’l-qirā'a) between the Masoretes Ben Asher and Ben Naphtali (the colophon of this work is in the Cambridge T-S Geniza Collection, Ms. K.27.36, verso).

(4) A kalām-like work of theology entitled Kitāb al-niʿma (The Book of Grace), extant in at least twelve manuscripts from the Firkovich collections (see the JNUL website given above). This was apparently Levi’s first book, as suggested by his statement in the epilogue that he named it Kitāb al-ni‛ma because “it was the first of God’s graces” shown to him (idh huwa awwal niʿami ʾllāhi ʿalayya).

(5) A treatise on the halakhic differences between his father, Japheth ben Eli, and Sahl ben Maṣliaḥ (Mss. Brit. Lib. Or. 2573 [§589], fols. 10r–21v, 2574 [§590], fols. 19v–22r; RNL Yevr.-Arab. I 671, 1194; II 881.31).

(6) An abridgment (ikhtiṣār) of the lexicon (Kitāb Jāmiʿ al-Alfāẓ) of David ben Abraham Alfasi [al-Fāsī] (Mss. RNL Yevr.-Arab. I 2333; II 402, 632, 634). Levi’s abridgment was itself abridged toward the end of the eleventh century by ʿAlī ben Sulaymān.

(7) According to Ibn al-Hītī, an abridgment (ikhtiṣār), now lost, of the commentary on the Pentateuch by Sahl ben Maṣliaḥ.

Michael G. Wechsler

Bibliography

Mann, Jacob. Texts and Studies in Jewish History and Literature, vol. 2: Karaitica (Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society, 1935).

Pinsker, Simcha. Liqqū ṭ ē Qadmōnīyyut (Zur Geschichte des Karaismus und der karäischen Literatur) (Vienna: Adalbert della Torre, 1860).

Poznański, Samuel. The Karaite Literary Opponents of Saadiah Gaon (London: Luzac, 1908), repr. from Jewish Quarterly Review, o.s. 18 (1906): 209–250; 19 (1907): 59–83; 20 (1908): 74-85, 216-231.

Sklare, David. “Anonymous Karaite Compositions in the Firkovitch Collection,” in Judaeo-Arabic Manuscripts in the Firkovitch Collections: The Works of Yūsuf al-Ba ṣ ir: A Sample Catalogue; Texts and Studies, ed. David Sklare in cooperation with H. Ben-Shammai (Jerusalem: Ben-Zvi Institute, 1997), pp. 127–139 [Hebrew].

Steinschneider, Moritz. Die arabische Literatur der Juden (Frankfurt a. M.: J. Kauffmann, 1902; repr. Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1986).

Cite this page

Michael G. Wechsler. "Levi (Abū Saʿīd) ben Japheth." Encyclopedia of Jews in the Islamic World. Executive Editor Norman A. Stillman. Brill Online, 2013.<http://referenceworks.brillonline.com/entries/encyclopedia-of-jews-in-the-islamic-world/levi-abu-said-ben-japheth-SIM_0013600>

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD76491D1EFBBFA9822EF79916CE62B
geni:6000000017161666144

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]