== Notes for [[Item:Q105360|Q105360]] ==

41. MARIA4 RAMON-DE-MORALES (JOSEPH3 DE MORALES-Y-RAMON, JUANA2 DE TREVINO-QUINTANILLA-Y-SALAZAR, PEDRO1 DE SALAZAR)
*was born 1652 in Saltillo, Coahulia, Mexico.
*She married (1) ASENSIO MALDONADO, son of PEDRO DE MALDONADO.
**He was born 1650.
*She married (2) LAZARO GONZALEZ.
**He died in Saltillo, Coahulia, Mexico.
*She married (3) JUAN DE SALAZAR in Saltillo, Coahulia, Mexico.

Notes for LAZARO GONZALEZ:
*Source:Origen de los Fundadores de Texas, Nuevo Mexico, Coahuila y Nuevo Leon, Saltillo Tomo II, by Guillermo Garmendia Leal. Page 106.

Marriage Notes for MARIA RAMON-DE-MORALES and JUAN DE SALAZAR:
*Marriage source:Source:Origin de los Fundadores de Texas, Nuevo Mexico, Coahulia, y Nuevo Leon, by Guillermo Garmendia Leal. Page 107.

Children of MARIA RAMON-DE-MORALES and ASENSIO MALDONADO are:
*1. i. ANTONIO5 MALDONADO-RAMON,
**b. 1680, Monclova, Coahulia, Mexico;
**m. FELICIANA MENCHACA-XIMENEZ, 12 Nov 1700, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico;
***b. 1682, Saltillo, Coahulia, Mexico.
****Marriage Notes for ANTONIO MALDONADO-RAMON and FELICIANA MENCHACA-XIMENEZ: Source:Index to the Marriage Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara by Raul J. Guerra, Jr., Nadine M. Vasquez, Valdomero Vela, Jr. Page 189.
*2. ii. CATHALINA MALDONADO-RAMON,
**b. 1682;
**m. (1) DIEGO CAMACHO, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico;
**m. (2) DIEGO MENCHACA-GONZALEZ, 26 Nov 1706, Santiago Apostol, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico;
***b. 1680.
****Notes for DIEGO MENCHACA-GONZALEZ: Index to the Marriage Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara, by Raul J. Guerra., Nadine M. Vasquez, Baldomero Vela, Jr. Page 190.
*3. iii. NICOLAS MALDONADO-RAMON,
**b. 31 May 1685, Sagrario Metropolitano, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
*4. iv. ASENCIO MALDONADO-RAMON,
**b. 1680;
**m. FRANCISCA-XAVIERA MENCHACA-XIMENEZ, 19 Jan 1700/01, Monclova, Coahuila, Mexico;
***b. 1682.
****Marriage Notes for ASENCIO MALDONADO-RAMON and FRANCISCA-XAVIERA MENCHACA-XIMENEZ: Source:Index to the Marriage Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara by Raul J. Guerra, Jr., Nadine M. Vasquez, Valdomero Vela, Jr. Page 273.

http://www.somosprimos.com/inclan/salazar.htm

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000014410249987

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]