== Notes for [[Item:Q103720|Q103720]] ==

Gonzalo de Salazar was the royal factor or business manager for the treasury in New Spain. He came to New Spain in 1524 on the same ship as Cristóbal de Oñate.

From Wikipedia,

Gonzalo de Salazar (b. Granada, Spain; d. ca. 1564, New Spain) was leader of several councils that governed New Spain while Hernán Cortés was traveling to Honduras, in 1525-26.

Gonzalo de Salazar was the first Christian child born in Granada after the conquest against the Moors (1492). Consequently, he was granted titles, special privileges, and at an early age, appointed royal page to the Catholic Monarchs at court in Granada. He fought in the Castilian War of the Communities, opposing the rebels against Emperor Charles V. For this, Charles rewarded him with the position of factor (tax collector), and Captain General (see below) of New Spain from 29 December 1524, until 29 January 1526. Prior to the appointment of a Viceroy in New Spain, Gonzalo had worked, alongside Pedro Almindez Chirino, Alonso de Estrada (who preceded him, and succeeded him—they were on bad terms), and others, and endured power struggles and controversy. Gonzalo's father, Doctor Guadalupe de Salazar, a converso, was royal physician, to the Catholic monarchs, and one of 16 "regidores" (administrators) of Granada during the struggle to oust the Moors. Gonzalo, his wife Catalina, and her brother Antonio De La Cadena Maluenda (treasurer of New Spain), left Spain in 1524, and arrived in Mexico City in 1525. Gonzalo, became an encomendero (holder of an encomienda) of Tajimaroa (Michoacán), and held lands, and titles elsewhere. His daughter Catalina de Salazar de la Cadena first married Ruy de Mendoza, of the famous Mendoza clan, and subsequently wed Cristobal de Onate. Their son, Juan de Onate, established San Juan de Los Caballeros near present-day Santa Fe, New Mexico in 1598. Gonzalo's son Juan Velazquez de Salazar, inherited his estates. Gonzalo's had a brother named Juan Salazar Velazquez. Gonzalo Salazar's wife, Catarina (aka Catalina) de la Cadena Maluenda, was descended from Mossen Truchas de Calatayud* (*Reference: "El Libro Verde de Aragon"). The assumed the name Maluenda after the town where they lived. They were money lenders to kings, and prominent spice, and silk merchants in Europe for hundreds of years. Pedro de Maluenda was commissary for Hernan Cortez; witnessed the destruction of the Aztec nation, but died of a fever 6 months after the conquest. The Spanish colonial families were inter-related, of Christian, Sephardic (converso), or Jewish decent. Catalina and Antonio De La Cadena are descendants of Don Lorenzo Suarez de Figueroa 1345-1409, Master of the Order of Santiago (St. James), and his second wife Maria Catalina de Orozco. This line is linked to most of Spanish and European nobility today. The Maluenda Palace, (aka Palace of the Count of Castifale), a mid-fifteenth century home, is situated next to Burgos Cathederal. Lorenzo Suarez de Figueroa (a Mendoza, he used his maternal surname) was Count (later Duke) of Feria. The Figueroa Palace of Feria, now a parador, is in Zafra, Badajoz, Spain.

In 1524 Governor and Captain General Cortés left Mexico City for Honduras. He put the government in charge of Alonso de Estrada, royal treasurer of the colony appointed by Charles, Rodrigo de Albornoz and Licenciado Alonso de Zuazo, with Estrada at the head. The transfer of power occurred October 12, 1524.

When Cortés left Mexico City he was accompanied by Gonzalo de Salazar and Pedro Almíndez Chirino as far as Coatzacoalcos. Salazar and Almíndez used this opportunity to convince the conqueror that they should be included in the government. Cortés sent them back with two decrees. The first decree directed that they join the already-formed government of Estrada, Albornoz and Zuazo as its fourth and fifth members, provided that the two groups could reconcile their differences. The second decree directed that Salazar and Almíndez replace Estrada and Albornoz.

When Salazar and Almíndez arrived back in the capital, they suppressed the first of these decrees, and made known only the second one, thus taking over the government. This took place on December 29, 1524. However, they made the mistake of admitting the deception to some friends. This resulted in a scandal, and on February 17, 1525, Estrada and Albornoz were admitted to the government, which now included all five men mentioned by Cortés. In order of importance, these were Salazar (tax collector), Almíndez (inspector), Estrada (treasurer), Albornoz (accountant) and Zuazo (justicia mayor).

The expanded governing council was the work of Zuazo, acting as an arbitrator based on the first decree received from Cortés. The two factions, however, were not really reconciled. Estrada and Albornoz objected to the arrangement. On April 20, 1525, Salazar and Almíndez proclaimed that no officials were to recognize the authority of Estrada and Albornoz, on pain of 100 lashes and confiscation of property. This proclamation was signed by Zuazo, Cervantes, de la Torre, Sotomayor, Rodrigo de Paz (a member of the ayuntamiento, or city government), and the clerk Pérez. Estrada and Albornoz left Mexico City to seek out Cortés and present their case to him.

The council continued with three members (Zuazo was still a member) until April 20, 1525. In the middle of the night, Zuazo was arrested in his home and taken under guard to be sent back to Spain. He went as far as Santo Domingo, where he spent the rest of his life, and died in 1527.

In early 1526 a messenger (Martín de Orantes AKA Dorantes) from Cortés arrived in Mexico City. His instructions were to replace Salazar and Almíndez in the governing triumvirate with Francisco de las Casas and Pedro de Alvarado. In the absence, or incapacity of Las Casas and Alvarado, Estrada and Albornoz were named as replacements. Orantes entered the city in secret and made contact with members of the opposition.

At daybreak on January 28, 1526 Orantes, and other opponents of Salazar, and Almíndez left the convent where they were staying; marched along the streets shouting "Viva Cortés". They arrested Salazar, and succeeded in getting the ayuntamiento to execute the orders of Cortés. Salazar was caged in public display in the Zocalo, but because of his powerful connections in Europe, and New Spain, was freed. Thereafter he behaved as if nothing has happened. Dubbed "el gordo" behind his back, he was overly courteous, and courtly. Estrada and Albornoz rejoined the government, as Las Casas and Alvarado were absent. Almíndez was arrested later in Tlaxcala, and brought back to Mexico City. Estrada and Albornoz governed from January 29, 1526 to June 24, 1526, or just short of six months. Thereafter, Cortés returned to his post (very briefly) on June 25, 1526. Salazar and Almíndez did not.

[edit] Afterwards

Gonzalo Salazar returned to Spain, to the Spanish court, and was reappointed, and completed his position as factor in New Spain. He returned to the colony in 1540, and lived comfortably until his death probably in 1564.

References

* Allmand, Christopher and McKitterick, Rosamond, "The New Cambridge Medieval History, c. 1415-1500," Vol. 7, p. 155, published 1998.

* Barredo de Valenzuela y Arrojo, Adolfo, and De Cadenas y Lopez, Ampelio Alonso, "Nobiliario de Extremadura, Tomo III, Madrid, 1998, pps. 55-62, & (Dukes of Feria) p. 263.

* Baer, Y. "A History of the Jews of Christian Spain." Philadelphia 1962.

* Cantera Burgos, F. "Alvar Garcia de Santa Maria." Madrid, 1952.

* "Diccionario Historico, Genealogico y Heraldico de las Familias Ilustres de la Monarquis Espanola", p. 256 (Suarez de Figueroa and De La Cadena lineages), D. Luis Vilar Y Pascual, Tomo V, Madrid 1860.

* Edwards, John, "The Spain of the Catholic Monarchs," p. 201.

* "El Libro Verde de Aragon," an ancient document citing Spanish nobility having Jewish roots. Ordered destroyed by the Spanish crown in the 1500s, copies of it survived. It notes that most European nobility has Jewish origins.

* (Spanish) García Puron, Manuel, México y sus Gobernantes. Mexico City: Joaquín Porrua, 1984.

* Gonzalez Crespo, Esther "Los Arellano y el Sonorio de los Cameros en la Baja Edad Media", (Cadena genealogy) "...Catalina de Mendoza (daughter of Diego Hurtado de Mendoza Figueroa and Brianda de Mendoza y Luna) married Alfonso Ramirez de Arellano, Senorio de los Cameros (chamberlain) first Count of Aguilar ...." p. 5.

* Himmerich y Valencia, Robert "The Encomenderos of New Spain, 1521-1555." University of Texas, 1991.

* Johann Heinrich Zedlers, "Grosses Vollstandiges," p. 1267, published by Universallexion aller Wissenschafften und Kunste." Regarding the De La Cadena family, their forbearers the Suarez de Figueroa-Mendoza family and the Dukes of Feria. In old german script, needs translation.

* Himmerich y Valencia, Robert "The Encomenderos of New Spain, 1521-1555." University of Texas, 1991.

* Llano, Rodrigo de, "Biblioteca "Rodrigo de Llano" Seccion de Estudios Historicos de la Universidad de Nuevo León. F1386, 5, 'M3, U2, pps. 8-11.

* Lopez de la Cadena, Alberto Omero, "Our Secret Heritage, Crypto-Jews of South Texas". HaLapid, Summer 2002.

* Marroquin, Jose Maria, "La Cuidad de Mexico", Volume 2, p. 11, published 1900. Cadena genealogy circa 1212 and thereafter. "In the village of Ocana, ... Sancho Sanchez De La Cadena, "Comendador de Socabos...." ("...Oidor" Andres De La Cadena and Teresa (Suarez) de Figueroa (AKA Mendoza) were parents of Maria De La Cadena. Teresa's father was Lorenzo Suarez de Figueroa...." Maria married Pedro Martinez De Mazuelo, parents in turn of Catalina De La Cadena. Catalina married Garcia Martinez de Lerma (Ambassador to Rome, June 5, 1475)....). "...Ruy Diaz de Mendoza Velasquez y Cuellar (b. abt. 1525) Granada, Spain, and married Catalina de Salazar de la Cadena (abt. 1545), daughter of Gonzalo Fernandez de Salazar and Catalina Maluenda de la Cadena. The Figueroa family seat was in the "Palacio de Feria" in Zafra, Badajoz, Spain.

* Porras Munoz, Guillermo, "La Calle de Cadena en Mexico," pps. 1—46.

--------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gonzalo_de_Salazar
--------------------
Served as a page to Ferdinand and Isabella. His parents were members of the court of the Catholic Kings. His father was known ad "El doctor de Guadalupe."

The Encomenderos of New Spain, 1521-1555

By Robert Himmerich y Valencia

Gonzalo de Salazar was the royal factor, or business manager for the treasury in New Spain. He came to New Spain in 1524 on the same ship as Cristobal de Onate. Marc Simmons writes "In all respects, Salazar proved to be an unsavory character, described by contemporaries as a master of subtle duplicity.". Salazar secretly attacked Hernan Cortes' loyalty to Spain and made plans to take over the government of New Spain. When Cortes departed on an expedition to Central America in late 1524, Salazar and a fellow officer, Pedro Almindez Cherino, quickly took over the government. In Cortes' absence, Salazar also appropriated for his own use the huge estates of Cortes. Cortes was gone on his expedition until May 1526 and was unaware of what had happened. But, upon his return, Salazar and Cherino quickly lost the power and authority. Regardless of that fact, Gonzalo retired very comfortably and was known as "El Gordo".

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000000462127170

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]]
[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]][[Category:Pages]]