== Notes for [[Item:Q111550|Q111550]] ==

*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gutier_Men%C3%A9ndez ''(4 languages available) ''

'''Gutier Menéndez'''[a] (c. 865 – 934) was the most powerful Galician magnate of his time in the Kingdom of León.[1] Related to the royal family through marriages, he acted as a powerbroker in the civil wars that followed the disputed succession of 925. ... ... ...

--------

-https://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/Galicia.htm#GutierreMenendezdied933MIlduaraErizB

'''GUTIERRE Menéndez''', son of HERMENEGILDO Gutiérrez & his wife Ermesinda Gatóniz (-933). "…Gutier Menendiz, Arias Menendiz, Flaginus Didaz…" subscribed the charter dated 5 Jun [892] under which Ranulfo Bishop of Astorga donated the church of Villanueva de Valdueza to San Pedro de Montes[346]. “...Sisegutus Petriz, Recemirus cognomenta Albofetæ, Guterius Menendiz...” confirmed the charter dated 3 Feb [912] under which King García I donated "castro...Fano" to the monastery of San Cipriano [de Valdesaz][347]. "…Lucidus Uimarani, Gutherre Menendiz, Gutherre Osoriz, Armentarius Siloni…" subscribed the charter dated 20 Jan 917 under which Ordoño II King of León donated “villis in territorio Gallecie...Cella Paruio et Paiaragio” to Santiago de Compostela[348]. "…Guter Osoriz, Guter Menendi, Arias Menendiz, Flaginus Didaz, Fredinandus Didaz…" confirmed the charter dated 24 Apr [918], probably spurious, under which "Ordonius rex et Giloria regina" donated el Coto de Valdueza to the monastery of San Pedro de Montes[349]. “Guttier Menendiz, Gutier Osoriz, Teton Lucidi, Arias Menediz...” confirmed the charter dated 18 May 919 under which King Ordoño II donated "busto...in montibus...Arbolis" to “Cixilano episcopo” and the monastery of San Cosme and San Damián[350]. "Garseani…rex…cum congugie mea Muma doma regina" donated certain the town of Mutarraf to Eslonza monastery by charter dated 13 May 923 (presumably misdated), confirmed by "Ranimirus, Urraca regina…Gutierre Memendiz, Sesebutus Petri…"[351]. Conde, he governed six counties in Galicia granted to him by Alfonso IV King of León[352]. "…Didacus Crenandiz, Gundisaluus Bettotiz, Guter Menendez comes, Gutier Osoriiz, Theudericus Lucidi, Tellus Bettotiz, Menendus Menendez, Scemenus Didaci, Sisandus Didaci" subscribed the charter dated 17 Sep 924 under which King Fruela II donated “conmisso de Montanos” to Santiago de Compostela[353]. A charter dated 23 Dec 927 records donations by “Gutier Menendiz comes…cum coniuge sua domna Ylduara” to the monastery of Santa María de Loyo and specifies that he was son of “domne Ermesende comitisse”[354]. King Alfonso IV donated “senra...in ueica de Stola” to the monastery of San Cosme and San Damián by charter dated 15 Mar 930, confirmed by “...Titon Lucidi, Guttiher Menendiz, Pelagio Tetoni, Sarracenus Nunnizzi, Didaco Romanizzi...Guttiher Osoriz”[355]. His parentage is confirmed by the charter dated 11 Mar 934 under which “Rudesindus episcopus, Munionem, Froilanem, Adosinda et Ermesinda” (her children) agreed the division of territories inherited from “avorum nostrorum Hermegildi et Ermesinde, Eroni et Adosinde”[356].

'''m''' ILDUARA Eriz, daughter of ERO Fernández & his first wife Adosinda --- (-958). A charter dated 23 Dec 927 records donations by “Gutier Menendiz comes…cum coniuge sua domna Ylduara” to the monastery of Santa María de Loyo, an interpolated document recording that “Ylduara cum filiis meis…Rudesindus episcopus, Munnio, Froila, Adosinda, Ermesinda” confirmed the donation for the soul of “nostro domno diue memoria domno Guttierre”[357]. Her parentage is confirmed by the charter dated 11 Mar 934 under which “Rudesindus episcopus, Munionem, Froilanem, Adosinda et Ermesinda” (her children) agreed the division of territories inherited from “avorum nostrorum Hermegildi et Ermesinde, Eroni et Adosinde”[358].

Gutierre Menéndez & his wife had five children:

------
-------
------

Please have the courtesy not to spam as below


-------

Please have the courtesy of including an English translation, as I have done below
February 5, 2022
Janet Milburn

Guterre Mendes
Source: Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.

This page cites sources , but these do not cover all of the content . Help insert references . Unverifiable content may be removed.— Find sources: Google ( news , books, and academic ) ( April 2021 )
Guterre Mendes
Duke in Galicia
Count in Celanova
Death
934
Spouse
Ilduara Eris
Offspring
see offspring
Dad
Hermenegildo Guterres
Mom
Ermesenda Gatones
Guterre Mendes ( Spanish : Gutierre Menéndez ; ca. 870 [ 1 ] ) – m. [ 2 ] ) was a Galician nobleman and magnate .

Son of Hermenegildo Guterres , count of Coimbra and of Ermesinda Gatones , [ 3 ] daughter of Gatón , count of O Bierzo and of Egilona. He ruled as a lieutenant over six counties ( conmissa ) in Galicia , [ 4 ] some shared with his brother Arias, [ 5 ] [ 6 ] by concession from King Alfonso IV .

He was the brother-in-law of the King of Galicia Ordonho II for having married the latter to his sister Queen Elvira Mendes . [ 7 ] He was the uncle of the King of Galicia Sancho Ordonhes and also of Kings Afonso IV and Ramiro II .

King Sancho Ordonhes would marry his granddaughter Queen Goto Moniz, daughter of Munio Guterres , and Ramiro II with his niece Queen Adosinda Guterres . He exercised important powers by delegation from Ordonho II and received, among other orders, to refound the Monastery of Santo Estevo de Ribas de Sil .

Guterres supported the sons of Ordonho II against the descendants of Froila, managing to oust Afonso Froilaz and bring Sancho Ordóñez to the throne of Galicia through the coronation in Santiago de Compostela by the 6th bishop of Lugo , Hermenegildo , who held the position between 653 and 656.

It was also a stronghold of King Ramiro II who, shortly after being crowned, reconfirms the donations that had been made to Guterre Mendes by Alfonso III "the Great" and confirmed by the King of Galicia Sancho Ordóñez. These were abundant goods confiscated from the rebel Witiza , penultimate king of the Visigoths , who reigned between 702 and 710.

Around the year 890 he married one of the most important Galician aristocrats, Ilduara Eriz or (Santa Ilduara de Celanova). The union of both families meant the creation of one of the greatest territorial patrimonies of the High Middle Ages kingdom of Galicia .

He lived in Galicia, and in the Condado Portucalense , although it is in Galicia that his most important assets are found, where Portomarín stands out and especially Vila Nova dos Infantes , where his manor house , the family manor, was located.


Index
1 marriage and offspring
two References
3 Bibliography
4 external links
marriage and offspring
He married Ilduara Eris (d. ca. 958), daughter of Ero Fernandes , Count of Lugo , [ 4 ] [ 5 ] by whom he had:

Munio Guterres (died ca. 959/960), [ 8 ] [ 5 ] who married his cousin Elvira Árias , daughter of Count Árias Mendes [ 9 ] and Ermesenda Gundesíndes. They were the parents of Goto Moniz, the wife of King Sancho Ordonhes . [ 10 ]
Rosendo de Celanova , (26 November 907 -1 March 977) [ 5 ] [ 4 ] known as Rosendo Guterres or just Saint Rosendo. He was bishop of Mondonhedo (925-950 and 955-958) and of Santiago de Compostela (968-977) and founder of the Monastery of São Salvador de Celanova , where he retired, [ 8 ] among other important functions.
Fruela Guterres (died ca. 943), count, husband of Sarracina and ancestor of the House of Trava , succeeded his uncle Arias in several of his tenancies . [ 5 ] [ 4 ]
Adosinda Guterres (died after 964), [ 11 ] [ 5 ] wife of Jimeno Díaz. After becoming a widow, she married Ramiro Mendes, [ 12 ] [ 13 ] likely the parents of Queen Velasquita Ramires, wife of King Vermudo II . [ 14 ]
Ermesenda Guterres [ 5 ] [ 8 ] (died after 934) was married to the Count of Deza , Paio Gonçalves , son of Gonçalo Afonso Betote and Teresa Eris, [ 15 ] the founders of the Monastery of Carboeiro. [ 16 ] [ 8 ]
References
García Álvarez 2001 , p. 216, no. 65.
García Álvarez 2001 , p. 215, no. 61.
Mattoso 1981 , p. 115–116.
Mattoso 1981, p. 117.
Torres Sevilla-Quiñones de León 1999, p. 306.
López-Sangil 2002 , p. 14.
Mattoso 1981 , p. 116.
López-Sangil 2001, p. 146.
Mattoso 1981 , p. 119.
Mattoso 1981 , p. 120.
García Álvarez 2001 , p. 215.
Torres Sevilla-Quiñones de León 1999 , p. 310.
Mattoso 1981 , p. 118.
García Álvarez 2001 , p. 211-230.
Mattoso 1981 , p. 118–119.
Torres Sevilla-Quiñones de León 1999 , p. 292.
Bibliography
Garcia Alvarez, Manuel Ruben (1960). «¿La Reina Velasquita, nieta de Muniadomna Díaz?» . Betanzos: Casa de Sarmento. Heritage Studies Center. Minho's university. Revista Guimarães (in Spanish) (70): 197-239. OCLC 402770925
López-Sangil, José Luis (2001). «The foundation of the monastery of San Salvador de Cines» . Betanzos: Exc. Betanzos City Council. Anuario Brigantino (in Spanish) (24). OCLC 402770925
López-Sangil, José Luis (2002). The high-medieval gallega nobility, the Froílaz-Traba family . La Coruña: Toxosoutos, SL ISBN 84-95622-68-8
Mattoso, Jose (1981). The Portuguese medieval nobility: family and power . Lisbon: Editorial Estampa. OCLC 8242615
Torres Sevilla-Quiñones de Leon, Margarita Cecilia (1999). Linajes nobiliarios de León y Castilla: Siglos IX-XIII (in Spanish). Salamanca: Junta de Castilla y León, Council of education and culture. ISBN 84-7846-781-5


_________________________________________________________

[https://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guterre_Mendes Guterre Mendes, Wikipédia, a enciclopédia livre]

'''Guterre Mendes''' (em espanhol: '''Gutierre Menéndez'''; ca. 870)– m. 933) Foi filho de Hermenegildo Guterres, conde de Coimbra e de Ermesinda Gatones, filha de Gatón, conde em O Bierzo e de Egilona. Governou como tenente seis condados (conmissa) na Galiza, algumas compartilhadas com seu irmão Arias, por concessão do rei Afonso IV. Era cunhado do rei da Galiza Ordonho II por ter casado este com a sua irmã a rainha Elvira Mendes. Ele era tio do rei da Galiza Sancho Ordonhes e também dos reis Afonso IV e Ramiro II. O rei Sancho Ordonhes casaria com a sua neta a rainha Goto Moniz filha de Munio Guterres, e Ramiro II com a sua sobrinha a rainha Adosinda Guterres. Exerceu importantes poderes por delegação de Ordonho II e recebeu, entre outras encomendas, a de refundar o Mosteiro de Santo Estevo de Ribas de Sil. Guterres apoiou os filhos de Ordonho II contra os descendentes de Froila conseguindo afastar Afonso Froilaz e levar Sancho Ordóñez ao trono da Galiza através da coroação em Santiago de Compostela pelo 6.º bispo de Lugo, Hermenegildo, que exerceu o cargo entre 653 e 656. Foi também um baluarte do rei Ramiro II que, pouco tempo depois de ser coroado, reconfirma as doações que haviam sido feitas a Guterre Mendes por Afonso III "o Grande" e confirmadas pelo rei da Galícia Sancho Ordóñez. Tratava-se de abundantes bens confiscados ao rebelde Vitiza, penúltimo rei dos Visigodos, que reinou entre 702 e 710. Ao redor do ano 890 casou com uma das mais importantes aristocratas galegas, Ilduara Eriz ou (Santa Ilduara de Celanova). A união de ambas as famílias significou a criação de um dos maiores patrimónios territoriais do reino da Galiza da alta idade media. Residiu em terras galegas, e no Condado Portucalense se bem que é em terras da Galiza que se encontram os seus mais importantes bens, onde se destaca Portomarín e especialmente Vila Nova dos Infantes onde se situou a sua casa senhorial, o solar da família.

----------------------------------------------------------

Otero Pedrayo lo llama príncipe, y aunque así se designaba a los magnates gallegos, en este caso se trata de un señor de sangre real, al igual que su esposa Ilduara.

Como su padre Hermenegildo y su suegro, don Ero, fueron condes "en" Lugo. Por entonces el título condal no es título nobiliario, sino que expresa la condición de jefe militar de una mesnada que solventaba de su pecunio, típico uso de los ejércitos feudales. Su residencia en Lugo no debe ser tenida por "domicilio fijo". De hecho los grandes señores poseían varias residencias a lo largo de sus dominios, y este es precisamente el caso, ya que Gutierre tuvo su residencia principal en Vilanova das Infantas, en Ourense, quizás como vasallo no del rey astur, sino de su propio padre, duque de Galicia y conde de Tui. En estos dos casos, los títulos condales de Tui y Celanova sí indican señorío. Finalmente recordar que Tuí se encontraba emplazada por entonces en la margen portuguesa del río Miño, siendo trasladada a su actual emplazamiento varios siglos más adelante.

--------------------

Gutierre, o Gutier Menéndez, conde de Celanova ... o prìnceps de la Tudesia, mayordomo y general de armas del rey -Ordoño II-.

Casó con Ildwara. (...hija de D. Ero, nacido en 899 en el reino Astur-Leonés, y fallecido en 926, quien fuera conde en Lugo durante el reinado de Alfonso III, y que en primeras nupcias casó con Adosinda, madre de Ildwara. Los padres de D. Ero fueron el conde Fernando casó con Gutina. Hermanos de Ildwara, hijos de Adosinda o del segundo matrimonio de D. Ero con Elvira fueron Diego, Teresa, Goto, Gudina, Gonzalo y Gudesteo). Gutierre residió en Vilanova dos Infantes y Portomarín, en la región de Lugo.

Tuvieron por hijos a XI 1 a 5.

http://www.xenealoxia.org/linaxes/galicia/932-feijoo-linaje-formativo

http://campus.usal.es/~revistas_trabajo/index.php/Studia_H_Historia_Medieval/article/viewFile/4277/4302
--------------------
FUENTES:

-http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rosendo_(santo)

——————————————————————————————————————————————

Gutierre (Guterre) MENENDEZ (Duke of COIMBRA no sentido europeu da época)

Conde de CELANOVA Born: poss. abt. 880 Died: abt. 933 Wife/Partner: Ilduara (Ildura) (Saint) ERIZ Children: Fruela (Froila) GUTIERREZ; Adosinda Gutierrez de COIMBRA ; Monio Guterres (Conde) de COIMBRA

in, http://fabpedigree.com/s094/f280290.htm

Primer conde de Celanova, príncipe de la Tudesia, mayordomo y general de armas del rey -Ordoño II, Duc, de Coimbra, Conde de Emineo e Cellanova

--------------------
Fue el más poderoso magnate gallego de su época en el Reino de León.​ Emparentado con la familia real a través de matrimonios, desempeñó un papel clave en las guerras civiles que estallaron después de la disputada sucesión del año 925. Él y su esposa Ilduara fueron los padres de San Rosendo.

[https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gutierre_Men%C3%A9ndez]

----

-https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gutier_Men%C3%A9ndez

-------


Todos entroncados em varias arvores.

https://books.google.pt/books?id=eQxDCQAAQBAJ&lpg=PT36&ots=iHW3XW1ieI&dq=Nu%C3%B1o%20Guti%C3%A9rrez%2C%20Iii%20Conde%20Del%20Sobrado%2C%20Conde%20De%20Celanova&hl=pt-PT&pg=PT35#v=onepage&q=Nu%C3%B1o%20Guti%C3%A9rrez,%20Iii%20Conde%20Del%20Sobrado,%20Conde%20De%20Celanova&f=false

He was Governor of Galicia and, from 907, Duke of Coimbra.

1 NAME Guterre /Menendez/
2 GIVN Guterre
2 SURN Menendez

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]