== Notes for [[Item:Q105044|Q105044]] ==

1. Don BLAS MARIA2 DE-LA-GARZA-FALCON-TREVINO was born Abt. 1591 in Real de Mapimi, Durango, Mexico, and died February 21, 1669 in Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico. He married BEATRIZ GONZALEZ-HIDALGO-NAVARRO Bef. 1626 in Saltillo, Coahulia, Mexico, daughter of MARCOS GONZALEZ-HIDALGO-DE-VALLE and MARIANA NAVARRO-RODRIGUEZ. She was born Abt. 1591 in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico, and died May 10, 1670 in Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.

Source: http://www.somosprimos.com/inclan/garzafalcon.htm

Photos below are of the aforementioned Blas Maria de la Garza Falcon Villarreal, BORN 1712.

--------------------
* Reference: [https://www.ancestry.com/family-tree/person/tree/110326636/person/120137628323 Ancestry Genealogy] - [https://www.geni.com/projects/SmartCopy/18783 SmartCopy]: ''Sep 6 2017, 12:59:48 UTC''

* Reference: [https://www.ancestry.com/family-tree/person/tree/110326636/person/120137628323/facts Ancestry Genealogy] - [http://www.geni.com/projects/SmartCopy/18783 SmartCopy]: ''Sep 6 2017, 13:03:38 UTC''

--------------------
* Reference: [https://www.ancestry.com/family-tree/person/tree/110326636/person/120137628323 Ancestry Genealogy] - [https://www.geni.com/projects/SmartCopy/18783 SmartCopy]: ''Feb 8 2018, 19:42:43 UTC''

--------------------
=== GEDCOM Note ===
Captain Blas Maria de la Garza Falcon Trevio

--------------------
=== GEDCOM Source ===

@@R1453530179@@ Ancestry Family Trees Online publication - Provo, UT, USA: Ancestry.com. Original data: Family Tree files submitted by Ancestry members.
=== GEDCOM Source ===
Ancestry Family Tree http://trees.ancestry.com/pt/AMTCitationRedir.aspx?tid=159345381&pid=218
--------------------
=== GEDCOM Source ===

@@R1453530179@@ Ancestry Family Trees Online publication - Provo, UT, USA: Ancestry.com. Original data: Family Tree files submitted by Ancestry members.
=== GEDCOM Source ===
Ancestry Family Tree http://trees.ancestry.com/pt/AMTCitationRedir.aspx?tid=159345381&pid=223

----

=== GEDCOM Note ===
(Research):Information taken from Bexarenos Genealogical Register Volume XXVII, September 30, 2010, Use of Marriage Dispensation Requests in Genalogical Research by Raul J. Guerra.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000009589046181

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]