== Notes for [[Item:Q105621|Q105621]] ==

Gaon of the Yeshiva academy of Firuz Shapur in Babylon, during the transition period between the Savora Jewish sages and the Geonim. The academy in Firuz Shapur functioned for several generations as a third Yeshiva academy in Babylon, in parallel to the Pumbedita and Sura Yeshiva academies. Approximately 90 men held the position of Gaon in the Yeshivot of Peroz-Shavur (closed in 660).

Mar Isaac was the last Rosh Yeshivah of the academy in Firuz Shapur. During the time Babylon was conquered by the Muslims, Mar Isaac came with 90,000 Jews to meet the conqueror, Ali Ibn Abi Talib, and was received in a friendly manner.

Abraham ibn Daud in his "Sefer ha-Ḳabbalah" says Khalif 'Ali gave the daughter of the last Sassanid king, Yezdegerd (624-651/2), to Bustenai's son Hisdai.

R' Sherira Gaon (Iggeret) writes of the encounter between the Moslem caliph, Ali, and the head of the Yeshivah of Peroz-Shavur:

''"It was he [R' Yitzchak Gaon] who was in Peroz-Shavur when Ali ben Abutaleb conquered* the city, and Mar Yitzchak of Peroz-Shavur went out to him and welcomed him with great friendliness. At that time, there were in Peroz-Shavur ninety thousand Jews, who were received by Ali ben Abutaleb with great friendliness."''

The circumstances of this event are noteworthy. R' Yitzchak was the senior of the Babylonian Geonim, having taken office earlier than R' Rava and R' Huna. Now, R' Yitzchak found himself received "with great friend­liness" by the ruler of the Moslem Empire, and yet he did not use this opportunity to request any special advantages for his own yeshivah over the other two, nor to achieve any personal gain. Thus, this incident furnishes eloquent proof that in addition to their outstanding scholarship, the Geonim as exemplified by R' Yitzchak Gaon.

R' Yitzchak and his colleagues seem to have been convinced by the friendship displayed by Ali, who "honored and elevated [R' Yitzchak]" (Ravad, Sefer HaKabbalah; see Seder Ha­Chachamim Part 1, p. 62; Ravad gives the date of this event as 640 CE / 4400), that Pumbeditha and Sura were no longer in danger, and that Peroz-Shabur was no longer needed as a potential place of refuge. They therefore disbanded this central yeshivah, and its members were absorbed into Pumbeditha. In this way they restored the situation of Talmudic times, when Sura and Pumbeditha, either jointly or in turn, had reigned supreme.

R' Yitzchak Gaon died sometime after 680 CE (4420). A few years earlier, both Sura and Pumbedisa had inaugurated new Geonim: in Pumbeditha, R' Bustonai, and in Sura, R' Sheshna, whose full name as inscribed on his seal was "R' Mesharsheya Tachlifa" (Iggeret of R'Sherira Gaon, p. 102). R' Bustonai Gaon was succeeded by R'Chana Mari bar R' Yosef, who became Gaon of Pumbeditha in 689 CE (4449), thus completing the first hundred years of the Geonic Era.

'Ali was buried in Kufa Persia, next to the grave of King Jehoiachin, the first Exilarch of Israel.

The visit described by historian R Sherira Gaon occurred around 640CE. Imam Ali bin Abutalib (as) passed away in 661 CE, according to most sources. Relations continued to be friendly until the Second Fitna, that began in 680CE. The Exilarch and the academies placed their hopes in the family of Caliph 'Ali (as). The events that followed were most tragic. Anti-Jewish feeling increased dramatically from that point on, for various reasons.

References

1. Neubauer's "Medieval Jewish Chronicles," i. 64

2. As Halevi points out (vol. 6, p. 178)

3. Sherira II.'s "Letter," ed. Neubauer, ib. p. 35; Abraham ibn Daud, ib. p. 62

4. FIRUZ-SHABUR, jewishencyclopedia.com; Article

5. Iggeret Rav Sherira Gaon

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000019140673087

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]