== Notes for [[Item:Q112842|Q112842]] ==

==Afonso Anes de Cambra==

Afonso Anes de Cambra (? - March of 1272 ) was a military of the Kingdom of Portugal having exerted the Tenancy Lafões in 1242 . He was also a Rico-man of the court of D. Sancho II of Portugal .

==Spouse==

He was the son of João Fernandes de Riba de Vizela and Marinha Moniz Varela. He married Urraca Pires da Ribeira, daughter of Pedro Nunes, parade lord " Pestanas de Cão " and Maria Soares, who had:

==Children==

* Martim Afonso de Cambra married Fruilhe,
* Fernão Afonso de Cambra married twice, the first with Sancha Pais Correia daughter of Paio Correia ( 1250 -?) And Maria Mendes de Melo. The second marriage was with Maria Gomes Ribeiro,
* Major Afonso de Cambra married twice, the first with Martim Pires Correia and the second with Fernão Gonçalves Chancino .
* Constança Afonso de Cambra ( 1220 -?) Married twice, the first with Estevão Mendes da Silva . Having widowed, he was mistress of D. Rodrigo Sanches , bastard son of D. Sancho I and governor or lieutenant of Besteiros and Lafões , "lands" where D. Constança had the main assets. D. Rodrigo died in combat, in the Lide de Gaia in 1245 or 1246 , passed the wife of Fernão Rodrigues Pacheco son of Rui Pires de Ferreira and Teresa Pires de Cambra
* Marinha Afonso de Cambra, was a nun at the Monastery of Arouca ,
* Teresa Afonso de Cambra, was a nun at the Monastery of Arouca,
* Urraca Afonso de Cambra,
* Maria Afonso de Cambra, was a nun at the monastery of Arouca.

==Sources==

* Manuel José da Costa Felgueiras Gayo , Nobiliary of the Families of Portugal, Carvalhos de Basto, 2nd Edition, Braga, 1989. vol. III-pg. 230 (Cambras) and vol. X-pg. 396 (Sousas).

* Wikipédia, a enciclopédia livre: [http://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Afonso_Anes_de_Cambra PT]

* '''Afonso Anes de Cambra''' (? - Março de 1272) foi um militar do Reino de Portugal tendo exercido a Tenência Lafões em 1242. Foi igualmente um Rico-homem da corte de D. Sancho II de Portugal.

* Genealogía del Libertador, Ramón Darío Suárez, (Mérida, Venezuela, Julio 1983, Segunda Edición Aumentada y Corregida. Imprenta Oficial. Ejecutivo del Estado Mérida. Depósito Legal: if 83-0415), LAT AM 929.28 B638d/G.S.., Página: 283 (Confiabilidad: 3).

* Genealogía del Libertador, Ramón Darío Suárez, (Mérida, Venezuela, Julio 1983, Segunda Edición Aumentada y Corregida. Imprenta Oficial. Ejecutivo del Estado Mérida. Depósito Legal: if 83-0415), LAT AM 929.28 B638d/G.S.., Página: 361 (Confiabilidad: 3).

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]