== Notes for [[Item:Q115298|Q115298]] ==

Alfonso IX of León From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfonso_IX_of_Le%C3%B3n#Children

Alfonso, father of 3 kids from his first void marriage and father of another 5 from his second void marriage, also fathered many illegitimate children, some 23 known kids in total (3 + 5 + perhaps 15 out of married life, all documented):

Alfonso's children by Aldonza Martínez da Silva (daughter of Martim Gomes da Silva & Urraca Rodrigues and subsequently wife with issue of Diego Froilaz, Conde de Cifuentes, had issue): 9) Pedro Alfonso of León, 1st Lord of Tenorio (ca. 1196/ca. 1200-1226), Grand Master of Santiago, married N de Villarmayor, and had issue 10) Alfonso Alfonso of León, died yong 11) Fernando Alfonso of León, died young 12) Rodrigo Alfonso of León (ca. 1210-ca. 1267), 1st Lord of Aliger and Governor of Zamora, married ca. 1240 to Inés Rodriguez de Cabrera (ca. 1200-), and had issue 13) Teresa Alfonso of León (ca. 1210-), wife of Nuno Gonzalez de Lara, el Bueno, señor de Lara 14) Aldonza Alonso of León (ca. 1212/ca. 1215-1266), wife, first, of Diego Ramírez Froilaz, nephew of her stepfather, without issue, and, second, of Pedro Ponce de Cabrera, (ca. 1210-), and had issue, ancestors of the notorious Ponce de León family.
--------------------
Mistress of the king, Alfonso IX of Leon, with whom she had three children (possibly four)

Rodrigo Alfonso de León ("1210"" d.1252). Lord of Aliger and Castro del Río and Head over the border of Andalucia. He married Ines Rodriguez, daughter of Rodrigo Fernandez de Valduerna "The Ugly", lord of Cabrera and second lieutenant of King Alfonso IX of León, and Teresa Froilaz.

Aldonza Alfonso de León (1,212-one thousand two hundred and sixty-six/1267). Diego Ramirez married Froilaz, Lord Mansfield and Wheel[citation needed], and by June 12303 to Count Pedro Ponce de Cabrera, son of the Earl of Cabrera Ponce Vela and Countess Teresa Rodriguez, Aria M. Valley . Children from this marriage were the first to bear the name Ponce de Leon. She was buried in the Monastery of Santa Maria de Nogales, located in the town of San Esteban de Nogales, with her second husband.

Teresa Alfonso de León. According to some historians married Nuño González de Lara "el Bueno", lord of the House of Lara.4 However, most historians argue that who married Nuño González de Lara was Teresa Alfonso de Molina, daughter of infant Alfonso de Molina.2

She then married a nobleman Diego Froilaz , son of Count and Countess Froila Ramirez Sanchez Fernandez, and had three more children:2 Ramiro Diaz (?-D.1268). Lord of Asturias de Santillana. He married Teresa Fernández de Lara, daughter of Fernando Alvarez de Lara and Teresa Rodríguez de Villalobos. Rodrigo Díaz de Cifuentes Sancha Díaz de Cifuentes. She married Rodrigo Alvarez de Lara, illegitimate son of Álvaro Núñez de Lara and Teresa Gil de Osorno.
--------------------

file:///C:/Users/hp/Desktop/CALDERN%20Las%20otras%20mujeres.pdf

Paramour of Alfonso IX who bore illigitimate children
Sources:
Nobliario das familias de Portugal: Felgueiras Gayo. Carvalhos de Basto, 2nda Edicao Braga 1989.
Pedatura Lusitana 6 Vol. Cristovaoalao de Morais, Caravalhos de Basto 2nda Edicao Braga 1997
Notes:
Alfonso IX had many children with Aldonza Rodriguez de Silva, aka, Aldonza Martins da Silva.
One of their sons, Rodrigo is the focus of the day because his Sire winds through many familiar houses and surnames. See Rodrigo:
She was a Senora de Honor de Mansilla.

TITL Ahnentafel for Margery Arundell
AUTH Marlyn Lewis
PUBL 08 Oct 1997
REPO
CALN
MEDI Manuscript
TITL Lineage & Ancestry of HRH Prince Charles, Prince of Wales
AUTH Gerald Paget
PUBL Skilton, Edinburgh 1977
REPO
CALN
MEDI Book
PAGE p 69

TITL Ancestral File (TM)
AUTH The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
PUBL June 1998 (c), data as of 5 JAN 1998
REPO
NAME Family History Library
ADDR 35 N West Temple Street
CONT Salt Lake City, UT 84150 USA
TITL Stanley.ged
REPO
CALN
MEDI Other
DATA
TEXT Date of Import: Dec 23, 1999
AFN ZJW6-WC

GIVN Aldonza Martinez De
SURN SILVA
AFN ZJW6-WC
REPO @@REPO32@@
TITL Ancestral File (TM)
AUTH The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
PUBL June 1998 (c), data as of 5 JAN 1998
ABBR Ancestral File (TM)
_MASTER Y
DATE 3 NOV 1999
TIME 19:01:16

SURN Silva
GIVN Aldonza Martinez de
AFN ZJW6-WC
_UID C425032A7C5AA54C9DA46B80FEBF5A4D6D1F
REPO @@REPO4@@
TITL Ancestral File (TM)
AUTH The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
PUBL July 1996 (c), data as of 2 January 1996
_ITALIC Y
_PAREN Y
DATE 28 Apr 2000
TIME 01:00:00

TYPE Periodical
AUTH Vajay, Szabolcs de
TITL _From Alfonso VII to Alfonso X: The First Two Centuries of theBurgundian Dynasty in Castile and Leon - a Prosopographical Catalogue inSocial Genealogy, 1100-1300_
PERI Studies in Genealogy and Family History in Tribute to Charles Evans. . .
PUBL Assoc. for the Promotion of Scholarchip in Genealogy, Ltc.Occasional Publiscation No. Two, 1989
VOL Two
DATE 6/25/2000 quoted in email to GEN-MEDIEVAL-L@@rootsweb.com by Todd A.Farmerie <farmerie@@interfold.com>
DATE 26 JUN 2000

GIVN Aldonza Martinez
SURN de Silva

GIVN Aldonza Martinez
SURN de Silva

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]