== Notes for [[Item:Q88959|Q88959]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shalmaneser_I
--------------------
Shalmaneser IFrom Wikipedia, the free encyclopediaJump to: navigation, search King Shalmaneser I, pouring out Dust of a Conquered City in front of an Assyrian Temple after returning victorious.Shalmaneser I (Shulmanu-asharedu;[1] 1274 BC – 1245 BC or 1265 BC - 1235 BC) was a king of Assyria.

Son of Adad-nirari I, he succeeded his father as king in 1265 BC.

According to his annals, discovered at Assur, in his first year he conquered eight countries in the northwest and destroyed the fortress of Arinnu, the dust of which he brought to Assur. In his second year he defeated Shattuara, king of Hanilgalbat, and his Hittite and Ahlamu allies. He incorporated the remains of the Mittani kingdom as part of one of the Assyrian provinces. Shalmaneser I also claimed to have blinded 14,400 enemy prisoners in one eye. He was one of the first Assyrian kings who was known to deport his defeated enemies to various lands rather than simply slaughtering them all.

He conquered the whole country from Taidu to Irridu, from Mount Kashiar to Eluhat, and from the fortresses of Sudu and Harranu to Carchemish on the Euphrates. He built palaces at Assur and Nineveh, restored the "world-temple" at Assur, and founded the city of Nimrud. He was succeeded by his son Tukulti-Ninurta I.

[edit] Limmu Officials by YearAnnual limmu officials beginning with the year of accession of Šulmanu-ašared. The list is partly derived from Freydank[2] and McIntyre.[3] The exact order of the earliest limmus is conjectural but the ordering from Šerriya onwards is essentially fixed.

1265 Adad-šumu-lešir son of Sin-ašared 1264 Šulmanu-ašared (king) 1263 Mušabšiu-Šibitti 1262 Ber-šumu-iddina 1261 Abi-ili son Aššur-šumu-lešir 1260 Aššur-alik-pana 1259 Adad-Šamši son of Adad-šumu-lešir 1258 Kidin-Sin son Adad-teya 1257 Šerriya 1256 Aššur-kašid 1255 Aššur-mušabši son of Iddin-Mer 1254 Aššur-mušabši son of Anu-mušallim 1253 Qibi-Aššur son of Šamaš-aḫa-iddina 1252 Aššur-nadin-šume 1251 Mušallim-Aššur 1250 Qibi-Aššur son of Ṣilli-Marduk 1249 Ina-pi-Aššur-lišlim son of Bābu-aḫa-iddina 1248 Ber-šumu-lešir son of Ete-pi-Tašmete 1247 Aššur-dammiq son of Abi-ili 1246 Ber-bel-lite 1245 Ištar-eriš son of Šulmanu-qarrad 1244 Lullayu son of Adad-šumu-iddina 1243 Aššur-ketti-ide son of Abi-ili 1242 Ekaltayu 1241 Aššur-daʼissunu son of Ululayu 1240 Riš-Adad 1239 Nabu-bela-uṣur 1238 Usat-Marduk 1237 Ellil-ašared 1236 Ittabši-den-Aššur 1235 Ubru

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shalmaneser_I

Shalmaneser I
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.

Shalmaneser I, son of Adad-nirari I, succeeded his father as king of Assyria about 1310 BC.

He carried on a series of campaigns against the Aramaeans in northern Mesopotamia, annexed a portion of Cilicia to the Assyrian empire, and established Assyrian colonies on the borders of Cappadocia.

According to his annals, discovered at Assur, in his first year he conquered eight countries in the north-west and destroyed the fortress of Arinnu, the dust of which he brought to Assur. In his second year he defeated Shattuara II, king of Hanilgalbat, and his Hittite and Ahlamu allies, and conquered the whole country from Taidu to Irridu, all of mount Kashiar to Eluhat and the fortresses of Sudu, Harranu to Carchemish on the Euphrates. He built palaces at Assur and Nineveh, restored "the world-temple" at Assur, and founded the city of Kalah.

Preceded by:
Adad-nirari I King of Assyria
1274–1245 BCE Succeeded by:
Tukulti-Ninurta I

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]