== Notes for [[Item:Q116318|Q116318]] ==

doña GOTO, daughter of ---. "Gundissalvo Nunnez…cum uxore mea dompna Goto et mea cognate dompna Urraca et dompna Ariel Nunniz" donated property to the monastery of San Millán de la Cogolla by charter dated 1087[982]. "Senior Gonzalvo Nunnez et uxor mea domna Goto, dominantes Lara…cum filiis nostris" donated property to the monastery of San Millán de Cogollo by charter dated 1095[983]. Torres suggests that she was doña GOTO Núñez, daughter of don NUÑO Álvarez & his wife doña María Gutiérrez[984]. According to Salazar y Castro[985], she was the daughter of Gonzalo Salvadórez (see above).

Gonzalo & his wife had five children:

1. doña TERESA González . Gonzalo Núñez and his wife Goto entrusted their daughter Teresa to the monastery of San Pedro de Molinos by charter dated 11 Apr 1095[986]. She is cited by Montenegro[987].

2. don PEDRO González ([1080/85]-killed Bayonne 16 Oct 1130). "P[etrus] Gallecie comes…cum fratre meo obtimate R necnon sororibus meis…sanctimonialis Munina atque Visclavara" donated "monasterium Sancti Martini de Juvia" to Cluny by charter 14 Dec 1113 confirmed by "Froyla Vimaraci, Menendo Vimaraic, Menendo Solinizi, Comes Gugues, Comes Munio Pelagis, comes Rudericus Veilazi"[988]. Conde 1110.

- see below.

3. don RODRIGO González de Lara (-Jerusalem after 1143). "P[etrus] Gallecie comes…cum fratre meo obtimate R necnon sororibus meis…sanctimonialis Munina atque Visclavara" donated "monasterium Sancti Martini de Juvia" to Cluny by charter 14 Dec 1113 confirmed by "Froyla Vimaraci, Menendo Vimaraic, Menendo Solinizi, Comes Gugues, Comes Munio Pelagis, comes Rudericus Veilazi"[989]. There are references to "Rodrigo González" as Alférez of Alfonso VI King of Castile between 29 Jan 1078 and 9 Jun 1081, but these must refer to a different person if the estimated birth date of Rodrigo's older brother Pedro is correct as shown above. Señor de Lara y Liabana. Conde in the valley of the Río Miera and in Asturias de Santillana 1104 to 11 Aug 1111[990]. "Urracha…Ispanie regina, regis Aldefonsi regineque Constantie filia" donated property to the abbey of Silos by charter dated 26 Mar 1119, confirmed by "…Petrus Gonsalvi comes, Rodericus Gonsalvi…"[991]. Conde in the lands beyond the Río Miera, to Aguilar de Campoó by 1125. The Chronica Adefonsi Imperatoris names "the Castilians Count Pedro de Lara and his brother Count Rodrigo González" as leaders of the opponents of Alfonso VII King of Castile on his accession in 1126[992]. He rebelled against Alfonso VII King of Castile in 1131, physically attacking the king on the banks of the Pisuerga River[993]. Restored to King Alfonso's good favour, he was appointed governor of Toledo in 1136. The Chronica Adefonsi Imperatoris records that, after disputes arose once more, Rodrigo González was forced to travel to Jerusalem. On his return to Spain in 1139, he stayed at the court of the taifa King of Valencia having been refused entry to Castile, but caught leprosy and left again for Jerusalem where he died[994]. m firstly (1120 or 1122) Infanta doña SANCHA de Castilla, daughter of don ALFONSO VI King of Castile and León & his fifth wife Isabel née Zaïda --- ([1120/16 Mar 1104]-after 10 May 1125). The Chronicon Regum Legionensium names "Sancha the wife of count Rodrigo and Elvira who married Duke Roger of Sicily" as the daughters of King Alfonso and his fourth "legitimate wife…Elisabeth"[995]. Both daughters are named in a charter dated 16 Mar 1104[996]. In view of the dates of their marriages, it is unlikely that they were born much before this date. This suggests that their mother may have been King Alfonso's fifth wife, formerly known by her Muslim name Zaïda, although if their estimated birth dates are correct there would have been an interval of several years between their births and the birth of their older brother Sancho, which seems surprising. m secondly (9 Sep 1135) as her second husband, doña ESTEFANIA de Urgel, widow of don FERNANDO García [de Castro] Señor de Hita y Uceda, daughter of ARMENGOL [V] Conde de Urgel & his wife doña María Pérez Señora de Valladolid (-after 1143). Rodrigo & his first wife had three children:

a) don PEDRO Rodríguez (-1180). Pedro Rodríguez “filius comitis Ruderici Gonsaluez” transferred properties to the bishop of Burgos by charter dated Mar 1166[997]. m doña MENCIA López, daughter of don LOPE Díaz Conde de Haro, Señor Soberano de Vizcaya & his second wife doña Aldonza Ruiz de Castro. “Sancia Lopez…comitissa domna Mencia…Urraca Lopez…Aldonza Lopez…Elvira Lopez…Don Garcia Lopez…Stephania Lopez monacha…Tota Lopez…Maria Lopez…Diago Lopez” donated property to the monastery of Santa María de Cañas by charter dated Sep 1174[998]. "Domna Alduenza cometissa…olim…domni Lupi comitis uxor" donated property to the monastery of San Millán de la Cogolla by charter dated 1187, witnessed by "domnus Didacus Lupiz, domna Mencia cometissa, domna Alduenza, domna Tota Camensis abbatissa, domnus Sancius Lupiz…"[999].

b) doña ELVIRA Rodríguez de Lara (-8 Aug 1159). m (before 1135) as his second wife, ARMENGOL [VI] "el Castellano" Conde de Urgel, son of ARMENGOL [V] Conde de Urgel & his wife doña María Pérez Señora de Valladolid (Valladolid 1096-28 Jun 1154, bur Nuestra Señora de Valbuena).

c) daughter. According to Reilly, two daughters had been born of Rodrigo's first marriage by 10 May 1125[1000]. However, Farmerie and Taylor say that don Pedro and doña Elvira were the only children of don Rodrigo González de Lara[1001]. Don Rodrigo González joined with "his daughters" by his first marriage in 1125 in a donation to the monastery of Vega[1002].

4. doña MUÑINA . "P[etrus] Gallecie comes…cum fratre meo obtimate R necnon sororibus meis…sanctimonialis Munina atque Visclavara" donated "monasterium Sancti Martini de Juvia" to Cluny by charter 14 Dec 1113 confirmed by "Froyla Vimaraci, Menendo Vimaraic, Menendo Solinizi, Comes Gugues, Comes Munio Pelagis, comes Rudericus Veilazi"[1003].

5. doña VISCLAVARA . "P[etrus] Gallecie comes…cum fratre meo obtimate R necnon sororibus meis…sanctimonialis Munina atque Visclavara" donated "monasterium Sancti Martini de Juvia" to Cluny by charter 14 Dec 1113 confirmed by "Froyla Vimaraci, Menendo Vimaraic, Menendo Solinizi, Comes Gugues, Comes Munio Pelagis, comes Rudericus Veilazi"[1004].

6. doña MARÍA González (-after 8 Jun 1109). Íñigo Jiménez Señor de ambos Cameros y el valle de Arnedo and his wife María González donated property to San Prudencio de Monte Laturce by charter dated 8 Jun 1109[1005]. m as his first wife, ÍÑIGO Jiménez Señor de los Cameros, son of JIMENO --- & his wife --- (-after 1145).

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]