== Notes for [[Item:Q89464|Q89464]] ==
{{q|Q154076|Q154073}} is a relative of Charlemagne. We need to check this page to see if they have proper wikidata links.
 
This page contains source notes and references for this entity.

==Source Notes==

==Note 1==
This [[Category:Charlemagne dfa notes]]
entry is derived from https://www.reddit.com/r/UsefulCharts/comments/1hzt99c/project_settipanicharlemange_pt2_from_charlemagne/#lightbox unless it already is in [ [:Category:Part 1 derived]] at which point it is only derived from part 1. Later once this code gets into the notes pages remove [[:Category:Part 2 or 1 derived]] from all of the pages in that categor y using Catalot

==Note 2==
This tree portion [[Category:Part 1 derived]]
has been made from the work of Settipani with an intermediate reference of a diagram created by Redditor Lower_Gift_1656 here https://www.reddit.com/r/UsefulCharts/comments/1hvsqm7/project_settipanicharlemange_pt1_from_charlemagne/  https://drive.google.com/file/d/1L03SSL-ag5dUPm56Hhxd4r5-TbNH3qt-/view

==Note 3==
<p style="text-align: left;" dir="ltr"><a href="[[Category:Wikipedia links]]https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anicius_Faustus">[[Category:Wikipedia links]]
[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anicius_Faustus</a></p> com/r/UsefulCharts/comments/1hzt99c/project_settipanicharlemange_pt2_from_charlemagne/#lightbox</a>&nbsp;and <a href="https://drive.google.com/file/d/1L03SSL-ag5dUPm56Hhxd4r5-TbNH3qt-/view">https://dr ive.google.com/file/d/1L03SSL-ag5dUPm56Hhxd4r5-TbNH3qt-/view</a></p> om/r/UsefulCharts/comments/1hzt99c/project_settipanicharlemange_pt2_from_charlemagne/#lightbox</a>&nbsp;the Settipani Reddit one her line goes up to the Emesenes, and in what I have written earlier it  goes into the Jesus bloodline and a link to the Quraysh ancestors.</p>
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]]

==links==
* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anicius_Faustus_Paulinus_%28consul_298%29

--------------------
'''
=Anicius Faustus Paulinus=
'''

(Sextus or Marcus) Anicius Faustus Paulinus or Paulinianus (c. 240-aft. 300) was a Roman senator who was appointed consul in AD 298.

'''Biography'''

A member of the gens Anicia, Paulinus was possibly the son of Sextus Cocceius Anicius Faustus Paulinus, the Proconsular governor of Africa Proconsularis during the 260s, and grandson of Quintus Anicius Faustus Paulinus. He was the patron of the town of Uzappa.

If he is identified as the Faustus mentioned on the Great Altar of Hercules in Rome, he served as Praetor urbanus early in his career. He was subsequently appointed suffect consul probably sometime during the AD 270s. He was then made consul posterior alongside Virius Gallus in AD 298. After serving as consul, he was appointed Praefectus Urbi of Rome, serving from AD 299 through until 1 March 300.

It is postulated that Faustus married the noblewoman Amnia Demetrias, with whom he probably had at least two sons: Amnius Anicius Julianus, Consul of Rome in 322 and Sextus Anicius Faustus Paulinus, the Roman consul of AD 325.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anicius_Faustus_Paulinus_(consul_298)

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per04552.htm#0

RESEARCH NOTES:
of Rome

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.hdhdata.org/roots/d0020.shtml#f00057

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]