== Notes for [[Item:Q87632|Q87632]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demetrius_II_Nicator

Demetrius II (Greek: Δημήτριος Β' d. 125 BCE), called Nicator (Greek: "Νικάτωρ", i.e. "Victor"), was one of the sons of Demetrius I Soter, brother of Antiochus VII Sidetes and his mother could have been Laodice V. He ruled the Seleucid Empire for two periods, separated by a number of years of captivity in Parthia.

--------------------
'''
=Demetrius II Nicator=
'''

Demetrius II (Ancient Greek: Δημήτριος Β`, Dēmḗtrios B; died 125 BC), called Nicator (Ancient Greek: Νικάτωρ, Nikátōr, "the Victor"), was one of the sons of Demetrius I Soter, brother of Antiochus VII Sidetes and his mother could have been Laodice V. He ruled the Seleucid Empire for two periods, separated by a number of years of captivity in Hyrcania in Parthia.

'''In exile'''

As a young boy, he fled to Crete after the death of his father, his mother and his older brother, when Alexander Balas usurped the Seleucid throne.

'''First reign'''

About 147 BC he returned to Syria, and with the backing of Ptolemy VI Philometor, king of Egypt, regained his father's throne. The Egyptian king also divorced his daughter Cleopatra Thea from Balas and remarried her to Demetrius. Alexander fled to the Nabateans who, anxious to stay on good terms with Egypt, cut off his head.

However, Demetrius was not a popular king. The people of Syria had little respect for the young boy, who had come to power with the help of Egypt and Cretan mercenaries led by the ruthless condottiere Lasthenes. The Antiochenians offered the Seleucid throne to Ptolemy VI, who had already conquered most of southern Syria for his own interest. However, he insisted Demetrius would become king, knowing that Rome would never tolerate a unified Hellenistic state, and the year after Ptolemy VI was killed when Alexander Balas made a last desperate attempt to regain his throne. The Egyptian troops marched home, leaderless and disillusioned, and with Balas dead as well Demetrius became sole master of the Seleucid kingdom.

But new troubles soon arose. The pillaging of the Cretan soldiers caused the Antiochenians to rise in rebellion, and only after terrible massacres was order restored. Soon after, the general Diodotus conquered Antioch and had his protégé Antiochus VI Dionysus, the infant son of Alexander Balas, proclaimed king. Demetrius proved unable to retake the capital, instead establishing himself in Seleucia. Diodotus had Antiochus VI deposed a few years later, and made himself king as Tryphon, but the division of the kingdom between the legitimate Seleucid heir and the usurper in Antioch persisted.

'''Defeat and captivity'''

In 139 BC Parthian activity forced Demetrius to take action. He marched against Mithradates I, king of Parthia and was initially successful, but was defeated in the Iranian mountains and taken prisoner the following year. The Babylonian province of the Seleucid empire became Parthian, but in Syria was the dynasty's grip was reassured under Antiochus VII Sidetes, the younger brother of Demetrius, who also married Cleopatra Thea.

King Mithradates had kept Demetrius II alive and even married him to a Parthian princess named Rhodogune, with whom he had children. However, Demetrius was restless and twice tried to escape from his exile in Hyrcania on the shores of the Caspian sea, once with the help of his friend Kallimander, who had gone to great lengths to rescue the king: he had travelled incognito through Babylonia and Parthia. When the two friends were captured, the Parthian king did not punish Kallimander but rewarded him for his fidelity to Demetrius. The second time Demetrius was captured when he tried to escape, Mithradates humiliated him by giving him a golden set of dice, thus hinting that Demetrius II was a restless child who needed toys. It was however for political reasons that the Parthians treated Demetrius II kindly.

In 130 BC Antiochus Sidetes felt secure enough to march against Parthia, and scored massive initial successes. Now Phraates II made what he thought was a powerful move: he released Demetrius, hoping that the two brothers would start a civil war. However, Sidetes was defeated soon after his brother's release and never met him. Phraates II set people to pursue Demetrius, but he managed to safely return home to Syria and regained his throne and his queen as well.

'''A failed second reign'''

However, the Seleucid kingdom was now but a shadow of its former glory, and Demetrius had a hard time ruling even in Syria. Recollections of his cruelties and vices – along with his humiliating defeat – caused him to be greatly detested. The Egyptian queen Cleopatra II set up an army for Demetrius, hoping to engage him in her civil wars against her brother king Ptolemy VIII, but this only added to his grief. The troops soon deserted, and king Ptolemy VIII reacted by setting up yet another usurper, a man named Alexander II Zabinas against Demetrius.

In 126 BC Demetrius was defeated in a battle at Damascus. He fled to Ptolemais but his wife Cleopatra Thea closed the gates against him. He was killed on a ship near Tyre,[2] after his wife had deserted him. His miserable death after being captured and possibly tortured, was a fitting epitaph to the many shortcomings of his reign. Demetrius II was certainly incapable of handling the developing threats to the Seleucid empire, but his reputation for cruelty was probably undeserved. He was only around fourteen at his coronation, and the real power was in the hands of others. He was succeeded by his queen Cleopatra Thea and then by two of their sons, Seleucus V Philometor and Antiochus VIII Grypus.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demetrius_II_Nicator

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per01248.htm#0

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Syria 146/145-125 BC; also daughter Laodike Princess of Syria

"NICATOR"; KING OF SYRIA 145-139/8 BC; HAD CHILDREN BY 2ND WIFE AS WELL

He was the ruler of Syria from 146 BC to 125 BC.

He was the ruler of Syria from 146 BC to 125 BC.

Demetrius II (of Syria), called Nicator (died about 125 bc), king of Syria
(145-139 bc, 127-125 bc), son of Demetrius I. With the aid of Ptolemy VI,
king of Egypt, he deposed and killed the usurper Alexander Balas (reigned
150-145 bc) and became king of Syria in 145 bc. Demetrius married his
predecessor's widow, Cleopatra Thea (died about 120 bc), who was the
daughter of Ptolemy VI. In 140 bc, during a war with Parthia, Demetrius
was taken prisoner. In captivity he married Rodogune, daughter of the
Parthian king Mithradates I (reigned 171-138 bc). Demetrius II returned to
Syria in 129 bc. His brother, Antiochus VII (born 158? bc), who had
usurped the throne in 139 bc and married Cleopatra Thea, was killed in
battle in 127 bc. Demetrius II then regained the crown and reigned until
his assassination two years later. His son, Seleucus V, succeeded him but
enjoyed a short reign; he was put to death by his mother, Cleopatra Thea,
in the same year.

Birth: in 161 BC 1
Death: in 125 BC [assassinated] 1
Event: Ancestor M
Event: Ruled 145 - 139 BC, King of Syria 1
Event: Ruled 129 - 125 BC, King of Syria 1
Note:
Demetrius II Nicator (Greek: "Victor") (b. 161 BC--d. 125), king of Syria from 145 to 139 and from 129 to 125 BC.
The son of King Demetrius I Soter, he went into exile when his fatherwas killed fighting the usurper Alexander Balas in 150. Demetrius returned to Syria (147) with an army of Cretan mercenaries, deposed Balasin 145, and installed himself on the throne. In 140 he drove back a Parthian invasion but was defeated and captured by the Parthians in 139. Demetrius was released from captivity in 129 and returned to Syria,but, during his second reign, he controlled only part of the kingdom.He was assassinated about four years later

Birth: in 161 BC 1
Death: in 125 BC [assassinated] 1
Event: Ancestor M
Event: Ruled 145 - 139 BC, King of Syria 1
Event: Ruled 129 - 125 BC, King of Syria 1
Note:
Demetrius II Nicator (Greek: "Victor") (b. 161 BC--d. 125), king of Syria from 145 to 139 and from 129 to 125 BC.
The son of King Demetrius I Soter, he went into exile when his fatherwas killed fighting the usurper Alexander Balas in 150. Demetrius returned to Syria (147) with an army of Cretan mercenaries, deposed Balasin 145, and installed himself on the throne. In 140 he drove back a Parthian invasion but was defeated and captured by the Parthians in 139. Demetrius was released from captivity in 129 and returned to Syria,but, during his second reign, he controlled only part of the kingdom.He was assassinated about four years later

Birth: in 161 BC 1
Death: in 125 BC [assassinated] 1
Event: Ancestor M
Event: Ruled 145 - 139 BC, King of Syria 1
Event: Ruled 129 - 125 BC, King of Syria 1
Note:
Demetrius II Nicator (Greek: "Victor") (b. 161 BC--d. 125), king of Syria from 145 to 139 and from 129 to 125 BC.
The son of King Demetrius I Soter, he went into exile when his fatherwas killed fighting the usurper Alexander Balas in 150. Demetrius returned to Syria (147) with an army of Cretan mercenaries, deposed Balasin 145, and installed himself on the throne. In 140 he drove back a Parthian invasion but was defeated and captured by the Parthians in 139. Demetrius was released from captivity in 129 and returned to Syria,but, during his second reign, he controlled only part of the kingdom.He was assassinated about four years later

Demetrius II Nicator
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.
(Redirected from Demetrius II of Syria)
Jump to: navigation, search

Demetrius II (d. 125 BC), called Nicator (Victor), was the middle son of Demetrius I Soter. As a young boy, he fled to Crete after the death of his father, his mother and his older brother, when Alexander Balas usurped the Seleucid throne. About 147 BC he returned to Syria, and with the help of Ptolemy VI Philometor, king of Egypt, regained his father's throne. The Egyptian king also divorced his daughter Cleopatra Thea from Balas and remarried her to Demetrius. Alexander fled to Cilicia.

However, Demetrius was not a popular king. The people of Syria had little respect for the young boy, who had come to power with the help of Egypt and Cretan mercenaries led by the ruthless condottier Lasthenes. The Antiochenians offered the Seleucid throne to Ptolemy VI, who had already conquered most of southern Syria for his own interest. However, he insisted Demetrius would become king, knowing that Rome would never tolerate a unified hellenistic state, and the year after Ptolemy VI was killed when Alexander Balas made a last desperate attempt to regain his throne. The Egyptian troops marched home, leaderless and disillusioned, and with Balas dead as well Demetrius became sole master of the Seleucid kingdom.

But new troubles soon arose. The pillaging of the Cretan soldiers caused the Antiochenians to rise in rebellion, and only after terrible massacres could order be restored. Soon after, the general Diodotus conquered Antioch and had his protegé Antiochus VI Dionysus, the infant son of Alexander Balas, proclaimed king. Demetrius proved unable to retake the capital,instead establishing himself in Seleucia. Diodotus had Antiochus VI deposed a few years later, and made himself King as Tryphon, but the division of the kingdom between the legitimate Seleucid heir and the usurper in Antioch persisted.

[edit]
Defeat and captivity
In 139 BCE Parthian activity forced Demetrius to take action. He marched against Mithradates I, king of Parthia and was initially successful, but was defeated in the Iranian mountains and taken prisoner the following year. The Babylonian province of the Seleucid empire became Parthian, but in Syria was the dynasty's grip was reassured under Antiochus VII Sidetes, the younger brother of Demetrius, who also married Cleopatra Thea.

King Mithradates had kept Demetrius II alive and even married him to a Parthian princess named Rhodogune, with whom he had children. However, Demetrius was restless and twice tried to escape from his exile on the shores of the Caspian sea, once with the help of his friend Kallimander, who had gone to great lengths to rescue the king: he had travelled incognito through Babylonia and Parthia. When the two friends were captured, the Parthian king did not punish Kallimander but rewarded him for his fidelity to Demetrius. The second time Demetrius was captured when he tried to escape, Mithradates humiliated him by giving him a golden set of dice, thus hinting that Demetrius II was a restless child who needed toys. It was however for political reasons that the Parthians treated Demetrius II kindly.

In 130 BCE Antiochus Sidetes felt secure enough to march against Parthia, and scored massive initial successes. Now Mithradates released what he thought was a powerful move: he released Demetrius, hoping that the two brothers would start a civil war. However, Sidetes was defeated soon after his brother's release and never met him. Mithradates set people to pursue Demetrius, but he could return safely home to Syria to regain his throne and his queen as well.

[edit]
A failed second reign
However, the Seleucid kingdom was now but a shadow of its former glory, and Demetrius had a hard time to rule even in Syria. Recollections of his cruelties and vices - along with his humiliating defeat - caused him to be greatly detested. The Egyptian queen Cleopatra II set up an army for Demetrius, hoping to engage him in her civil wars against her brother king Ptolemy VIII, but this only added to his grief. The troops soon deserted, and king Ptolemy VIII reacted by setting up yet another usurper, a man named Alexander II Zabinas against Demetrius.

In 126 BCE Demetrius was defeated in a battle at Damascus, and killed on a ship near Tyre, after his wife Cleopatra Thea had deserted him. His miserable death - he was captured and possibly tortured - was a fitting epitaph to the many shortcomings of his reign. Demetrius II was certainly uncapable to handle the developing threats to the Seleucid empire, but his reputation of cruelty was probably undeserved. He was only around fourteen at his coronation, and the real power was in the hands of others.

He was succeeded by his queen Cleopatra Thea and then by two of their sons, Seleucus V Philometor and Antiochus VIII Grypus.

Preceded by:
Alexander Balas Seleucid King
146–139 BC Succeeded by:
Antiochus VII Sidetes
Preceded by:
Antiochus VII Sidetes Seleucid King
129–126 BCE Succeeded by:
Cleopatra Thea
and
Seleucus V Philometor

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]