== Notes for [[Item:Q101584|Q101584]] ==

According to the Tapestry: "Don Shlomo, and he was to be found in Sicily when there were the savage decrees in Venice, and he and his brothersimmigrated to Portugal and he died in Lisbon".

Reference:''' "Divrei ha-Yamim le-Bnei Yahya,( דברי הימים לבני יחייא )"''', by Eliakim Carmoly, Printed in Frankfort am Main/Rodelheim, Published by: Isak Kaufman, 1850. Genealogy of, and biographical work on, the Yahya family by Eliakim Carmoly. There is an introduction from Carmoly, in which he informs that the Yahya family is one of distinction from the time of Maimonides. Originally achieving greatness in Portugal and Spain, they after settled in Italy and Turkey. The text is preceded by a chart of the family, beginning with the Nasi, Don Yahya, and concluding with Don Gedalia. The text, in seven chapters, is set in a single column, primarily in rabbinic type although there are instances of vocalized square letters, and is accompanied by extensive footnotes. The final page is an announcement of the forthcoming publication of seven minor Yerushalmi tractates by Carmoli. The text of this book was compared to the "bin Yahya Family Tapestry", currently stored in the antiquity archives of Jewish Theological Seminary in New York City, by Abraham Greenstein - grandson of Abraham Gindi HaKohen. The text matches the Tapestry.

Rabbi and Court Jew to Eduard King of Portugal. Father of three sons. The Pogroms of 1391 forced Shlomo to flee to Portugal to take up residence with family members in Venice then Sicily...ultimately returning to Portugal to die in Lisbon. Samuel Abravanel of Seville, of whom Menahem ben Zerah wrote was "intelligent, loved wise men, befriended them, was good to them and was eager to study whenever the stress of time permitted." He had great influence at the court of Castile.

Solomon Negro and his cousin, Moshe Navarro, agreed to pay some 200,000 livres annually for five years for the privilege of farming taxes.

In 1388, Samuel Abravanel served as royal treasurer. During the anti-Jewish riots of 1391 he was converted to Christianity under the name of ''Juan Sanchez de Sevilla'' and was appointed Almoxarife in Castile. Samuel and his Family and his family apparently later fled to the safety of their cousins (ibn Yahya Family of Lisbon) in Lisbon, Portugal, where they reverted to Judaism and filled important governmental posts with Ibn Yahya family members.

http://up-pt.academia.edu/RodrigoDominguez/Papers/922000/Mercadores-banqueiros_e_cambistas_no_Portugal_dos_seculos_XIV-XV
--------------------
Tapestry inscription : Don Shlomo; he was to be found in Sicily when there were the savage decrees in Venice and he and his brothers immigrated to Portugal and he died in Lisbon

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD9A84961EFBBFA9822EF79916C74FD
geni:6000000002638976205

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]