== Notes for [[Item:Q105814|Q105814]] ==

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shahrbanu
Shahrbānū (or Shehr Bano) (Persian: شهربانو; "Lady of the Land")[1] was allegedly one of the wives of Husayn ibn Ali, the third Shia Imam and grandson of the Islamic prophet Muhammad, as well as the mother of his successor, Ali ibn Husayn.[2] She was reportedly a Sassanid princess, a daughter of Yazdegerd III, the last Sassanid emperor of Persia.[3] Shahrbanu has also been referred to with several other names by different writers, such as: Shaharbānawayh,[4] Shahzanān,[5] Shahjahan,[6] Jahanshah,[7] Salāma,[8] Salāfa,[9] Ghazāla,[10] and Sādira.[11]

Islamic legends state that Shahrbanu was captured during the Muslim conquest of Persia. When presented before the Arab nobility and offered a choice in husband, she requested to be given in marriage to Husayn.[1] The majority of Shia sources state that Shahrbanu subsequently died shortly after giving birth to her son Ali[12][13] and was buried in the Jannat al-Baqi, alongside other members of Muhammad's family. Some traditions however, indicate to the Bibi Shahr Banu Shrine in Rey being her resting place.[1]

https://iranicaonline.org/articles/sahrbanu
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shahrbanu
====

For detailed exploration of the Shahrbanuya and the twilight of Sassanid Empire see

"'''Jews in Islamic Countries in the Middle Ages'''"
By Moše Gîl, Volume 28 of Etudes sur le judaïsme médiéval / Etudes sur le judaïsme médiéval. Translated by David Strassler, Published by Brill 2004, ISBN 900413882X, 9789004138827

In particular we refer you to pages 78-79, footnote 64

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dalam kitab Al Kharaij Arrawandi dikisahkan bahwa terjadi perang besar antara pasukan Islam dan pasukan imperium Persia. Prajurit Islam berhasil menaklukkan kerajaan besar ini. Sang raja melarikan diri, sementara sebagian dari keluarga istana, termasuk puteri-puteri raja, tertangkap dan menjadi tawanan. Mereka diboyong ke Madinah.

Kedatangan puteri sang raja mengundang perhatian warga Madinah sehingga mereka datang berbondong-bondong untuk menyaksikannya. Saat itu, di dalam masjid khalifah Umar menanyakan dimana puteri-puteri raja itu. Orang-orang lantas menunjukkan mereka. Rupanya, satu diantara mereka nampak sangat anggun dan seperti bercahaya. Umar meminta puteri anggun supaya memperlihatkan wajahnya yang tersembunyi di balik cadar.

Puteri raja Persia yang paling anggun itu bangkit dan menatap satu persatu barisan pemuda yang menyatakan siap untuk menikah dengan puteri-puteri raja itu. Sampai pada giliran pemuda Hussein bin Ali, tatapan mata gadis bernama Jahan Syah itu terhenti dan tak berpijak ke arah lain. Setelah merasa yakin dengan pemuda putera az-Zahra as itu, dia berkata: “Jika aku memang diberi pilihan, maka aku akan memilih pemuda ini.”

Setelah dipilih gadis itu, Imam Hussein yang saat itu berusia 18 tahun memintanya supaya nama Jahan Syah diganti dengan nama Syahr Banu. Imam Ali kemudian meminta Imam Hussein supaya segera membawa menantunya itu pulang. Beliau juga memberitahu Imam Hussein bahwa perkawinan ini akan segera dianugerahi dengan kelahiran seorang putera yang sangat agung dan mulia. Putera itu tak lain adalah Ali Zainal Abidin Assajjad. Putera yang berusia 23 tahun saat ayahandanya dibantai di padang Karbala pada hari Asyura, dan dia sendiri dalam keadaan sakit parah dan ditangisi oleh ibundanya.

Menjelang detik-detik perpisahan dengan suaminya, Imam Hussein, Syahr Banu bersimpuh dengan beliau. “Wahai putera Rasul” ucap Syahr Banu, “Demi ibundamu Fatimah az-Zahra, pikirkanlah nasibku nanti, karena di sini akulah orang yang paling asing. Selama ini aku bernaung di bawahmu dan dengan ini aku menjadi mulia. Namun, katakanlah apa yang aku lakukan nanti setelah kepergianmu? Aku bukanlah orang Arab (‘ajam"), dan engkau sendiri tahu besarnya permusuhan antara Arab dan ‘ajam.”

Sambil berlinang air mata, Imam Hussein as menjawab:

“Janganlah cemas, sebab Allah yang telah mengantarkanmu dari negeri ajam ke negeri Arab mampu mengembalikan ke negerimu lagi. Nantikanlah nanti sepeninggalku; Dzuljanah akan datang ke perkemahan. Naikilah Dzuljanah dan pergilah dari sini, dan ketahuilah pasukan musuh tidak akan bisa berbuat apa-apa terhadapmu.”

Dengan bantuan dan perlindungan dari Allah, janda Imam Hussein yang berdarah bangsawan Persia itu akhirnya tiba di bumi leluhurnya. Beliau menetap di kota Rey dan meninggal di sana. Jasad suci beliau dikebumikan di sebuah gunung di pinggiran kota Teheran. Lokasi makamnya selalu disesaki para peziarah hingga kini.

--------------------
Described to have been one of the daughters of Yazdegerd IIl the last Emperor of the Sassanid dynasty of Persia/Iran. Other names by which she has been referred to include: Shaharbānawayh, Shahzanān, Salāma, Salāfa, Ghazāla, Harar, Salama, and Sādira.

Shahrbānū was one of four (4) wives of Husayn ibn Ali, (grandson of Muhammad and third Twelver Shī`a Imām) and the mother of Ali ibn Husayn (the fourth Twelver Shī`a Imām).

Differing reports in history state that Shahrbānū was brought to Madinah as a slave either during the caliphate of `Umar, `Uthmān, or `Ali. Based on comparisons and the study of hadith, Shī`a's believe that it was during the caliphate of `Ali, with the appointment of Hurayth ibn Jābir to govern the eastern provinces, that the daughters of Yazdigird III were sent to Madinah.

Having been brought to Madinah, Ali allowed the ladies freedom in choosing whomever they wanted to marry from the Muslims, to which Shahrbānū was famously reported to have replied, "I want a head over whom there is no head".

Shahrbānū chose the hand of Husayn ibn `Ali in marriage and one of her sisters chose Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr. `Ali foretold the birth of the next Shī`a Imām as he said to Husayn: "Treat this lady kindly, for she will bear you the best of the people of the Earth after you. She is the mother of the trustees (of authority), the pure progeny".

According to Shī`a belief, Shahrbānū died shortly after giving birth to her son Ali ibn Husayn, and was thus not present at Karbalā. The eighth Twelver Shī`a Imām, Ali ar-Ridha has also been quoted as saying, "(Shahrbānū) died during her confinement, and one of (Husayn's) slave-wives looked after him (Ali ibn Husayn). The people claimed that (the slave-wife) was his mother, while she was his retainer".

Even amongst the Iranian scholars there has been some dispute as to the existence of a Persian princess by the title of Shahrbānū. The scholars Ali Shariati and Ayatullah Mutahhari are amongst those who have declared that any narrations pertaining to Shahrbānū are weak and false. Whereas Al-Mubarrad, al-Dinawari, Allameh Tabatabaei and many others disagree, and contend that Shahrbānū was the mother of Ali ibn Husayn, the fourth Twelver Shī`a Imām. Narrations of Shahrbānū have also been reported in Sunni sources including, "Bab 27" of Qabusnama, where '''Salmān the Persian is recounted to have been involved in the selection of Husayn by Shahrbānū.'''
==

The shrine of Shahrbānū can be found in ancient Rayy, in the southern suburbs of Tehran, Iran.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shahrbanu
--------------------
'''Princess of Iran'''

Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shahr_Banu
--------------------
ŠAHRBĀNU (lit. “Lady of the Land,” i.e., of Persia), said to be the daughter of Yazdgerd III (r. 632-51), the last Sasanian king. According to the beliefs of the Shiʿites, in particular the Twelvers or Imamis, but also of a substantial number of Sunnis, she became the principal wife of the third Imam, Ḥosayn b. ʿAli, and the mother of the fourth Imam, ʿAli b. Ḥosayn b. ʿAli Zayn al-ʿĀbedin (q.v.).

Shahar Bano is placed at serial number 33 in descendant to King Jamshed and fortieth in Pedigree to Sa’am Bin Noa

The chronicler Yaʿqubi (d. 904) and the heresiographers Ḥasan b. Musā Nowbaḵti and Saʿd b. ʿAbd-Allāh (both d. ca. 912-13) are among the first Shiʿites to allude in passing to the fact that the mother of Imam Zayn al-ʿĀbedin was the daughter of the last Sasanian king (Yaʿqubi II, pp. 246-47 and 303; Nowbaḵti, p. 53; Ašʿari, p. 70). In the second half of the 9th century, Ṣaffār Qomi (d. 902-903) delivers a long and detailed version of the account, containing especially striking details, in the form of a Hadith or saying attributed to the fifth Imam Moḥammad Bāqer: under the second caliph ‘Omar (r. 634-44), the daughter of the last Sasanian king is brought captive to Medina. Light radiating from the visage of the princess illuminates the Prophet’s mosque where the caliph presides. An invocation in Persian by the Princess provokes the ruler’s temper. ʿAli intervenes in favour of the young princess and makes it clear to ‘Omar that events unfolding are beyond his understanding and that he should step aside. ʿAli then authorises the princess, with whom he speaks in Persian, to freely choose her husband. The chosen one is Ḥosayn to whom ʿAli announces the good news that the young woman will be the mother of his child, i.e. the next Imam (Ṣaffār, p. 335, no. 8). Ṣaffār’s account contains some noteworthy details: it is the first time that the account is presented in the form of an Imam’s Hadith, thus rendering it a sacred quality. It will subsequently become the first account in which the Persian princess is called Šahrbānu (and also Jahānšāh, literally, “king of the world”).

...

Finally, let us cite the account narrated by Mofid’s master, the famous Ebn Bābuya (Ebn Bābawayh), known as Shaykh Ṣaduq, (d. 991) who in his ʿOyun akbār al-Reżā, relates a Hadith going back to the eighth Imam ʿAli Reżā in which the latter, finding himself in Khorasan as inheritor to the ʿAbbasid caliph Maʾmun (r. 813-33), confirms the link that exists between the Imams and the Persians. As proof, he tells the story of the capture, under the reign of ʿOṯmān, of the two daughters of Yazdgerd and their marriage to the Imams Ḥasan and Ḥosayn. According to this account, both women are said to die while in labour, notably the wife of Ḥosayn who passes away after giving birth to Imam Zayn al-ʿĀbedin (Ebn Bābuya, chap. 35, no. 6, II, p. 128). *

http://bit.ly/1WGYMcG

Les écrits d'Al-Moubarrad sont considérés comme la première source racontant l'histoire que Shahrbanou ou Shahr Banou - fille aînée de Yazdgard III, dernier empereur de la dynastie sassanide de Perse - avait épousé Al-Hussein ibn Ali, petit-fils du prophète Mahomet et troisième imam chiite, et qu'elle a donné naissance à Ali Zayn al-Abidin (quatrième Imam chiite). Cela rend par la suite l'ensemble des imams chiites descendants de la dynastie
sassanide, ainsi que du prophète de l'islam.

Yazdgard III avait trois filles : Adragh, Shahr Banû et Mardavand et deux fils : Bahrâm et Pérôz III. Après la conquête de la Perse et la prise de Ctésiphon, Shahr Banû fut capturée et fut donnée en mariage à Husayn (Hussein ibn Ali), le fils du calife Ali et de Fatima (Fille de Mahomet). Husayn fut considéré par les chiites comme le troisième calife. Shahr Banû serait morte peu de temps après avoir donné naissance à son seul enfant, Ali.

http://antikforever.com/Perse/Sassanides/suite2.htm

Pedigree of Shahar Banu
One of sons to Saam was “Arphaxad or Arpachshad” also known as Zo’ul Had Nabi Allah. According to Jewish Time Line Encyclopedia by Mattis Kantor (2004 Edition) Arphaxed period was 1651-2110 BC (with an age of 460 years) who had various children. In second generation to Shem was “Sar Qus” the son of Arphaxad (or Arfakhshad). With particular reference to larger span of age in the past and its gradual decline, pedigree records provide a tracing of his offspring (i) Ku’Mars (ii) Siya Mak (iii) Hoshang (iv) Sayo Mars who was the father of (v) King Jamshed. The period of King Jamshed appears to be in the time line of Prophet Ibrahim/Abraham, perhaps with a difference in region or a gap of solar years not more than one century, as such Prophet Abraham stands at sixth to the descendant of "Salekh Zo'ul Battee" the brother of "Sur Qus". With these eight generations Sha-Poor Dhul’al Kinaf (died ca 224 AD[15]) stood 22nd and his son Ardeshir I, the founder of Sasanian Empire in 241 CE, at 23rd in descendants to Shem. His fourth descendant was Yazdegard and his sixth descendant in generation (tenth to Sha-Poor Dhul’al Kinaf) was Yazdegerd III, died in 652/53 ca. With this pedigree Shahar Bano is placed at serial number 33 in descendant to King Jamshed and fortieth in Pedigree to Sa’am Bin Noah

http://bit.ly/1SjhC36

Al-Masudi mentions names of two sons to Yazdagard-III and three daughters, namely Adrag, Shahar Banu and Mardawand, respectively.[20] Col. James Tod, writer of the Ancient History of Rajasthan "The Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan" writes that in ancient time Rajpootana (Rajasthan) was included as vassal kingdom in the Sassanid Empire and there were family relations between Persian and Rahjistan. He wrote further that one of Yazdegard's daughter Mah Bano was wife to Chundar Bhan who was Rana of Audhaypur (king of Audhaypur), papularly known as Chundar Bhoga. This book reveals that King Yazdegard-III had three daughters and Firoze as son, and Mahmud Ghazni was 7th in descendants to Feroze.[21] Al-Tabri and Ibn Khaldun inferred marital engagement of Yazdegard-III with a woman at Merv in addition to previous marriage(s).[22][23] Washington Irving in his book "Mahomet and His Successors" cited not only wives but also concubines and their female attendants during hideout.[24] Research scholar Dr. Zameer Akhtar Naqvi traces the name of first wife of Yazdagard-III and the mother of Shahar Banu, quoting that the city Matli situated in the Province of Sindh was first established for habitation by the last Sassanian King in honor of his wife. Her name was either Mah Talat or Maha Talat, a daughter of vassal king of Sindh in the Sassanid Empire. http://bit.ly/1SjhC36

http://www.iranicaonline.org/articles/sahrbanu

Pedigree of Shahar Banu[edit] One of sons to Saam was “Arphaxad or Arpachshad” also known as Zo’ul Had Nabi Allah. According to Jewish Time Line Encyclopedia by Mattis Kantor (2004 Edition) Arphaxed period was 1651-2110 BC (with an age of 460 years) who had various children. In second generation to Shem was “Sar Qus” the son of Arphaxad (or Arfakhshad). With particular reference to larger span of age in the past and its gradual decline, pedigree records provide a tracing of his offspring (i) Ku’Mars (ii) Siya Mak (iii) Hoshang (iv) Sayo Mars who was the father of (v) King Jamshed. The period of King Jamshed appears to be in the time line of Prophet Ibrahim/Abraham, perhaps with a difference in region or a gap of solar years not more than one century, as such Prophet Abraham stands at sixth to the descendant of "Salekh Zo'ul Battee" the brother of "Sur Qus". With these eight generations Sha-Poor Dhul’al Kinaf (died ca 224 AD[15]) stood 22nd and his son Ardeshir I, the founder of Sasanian Empire in 241 CE, at 23rd in descendants to Shem. His fourth descendant was Yazdegard and his sixth descendant in generation (tenth to Sha-Poor Dhul’al Kinaf) was Yazdegerd III, died in 652/53 ca. With this pedigree Shahar Bano is placed at serial number 33 in descendant to King Jamshed and fortieth in Pedigree to Sa’am Bin Noah.

--------------------
* Wilaadat (Birth):
* Wafaat (Death):
--------------------
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shahrbanu

[Relation to Sindh:

Mirza Imam Ali Baig Afsar, Ph.D in Sindhi in his book “Sindh Jee Azadari” with its translation into Urdu language book “Sindh and Ahle Bayt” writes that Monarchs of Sindh maintained friendly relations with Sassanid Kings. During Rai dynasty Yazdegerd III visited the present day city Matali in District Badin, Sindh. There he married a Sindhi princess with whom Yazdegerd had two daughters, namely Shaharbanu and Ghayan Banu respectively.[62] Research scholar Dr. Zameer Akhtar Naqvi traces the name of first wife of Yazdagard-III and the mother of Shahar Banu, quoting that the city Matli situated in the Province of Sindh was first established for habitation by the last Sassanian King in honor of his wife. Her name was either Mah Talat or Maha Talat, a daughter of vassal king of Sindh in the Sassanid Empire.[63]

Among earlier Muslim historiographers, Ibn Qutaybah in his book “al-Ma‘ārif” republished in 1934 from Egypt at page-73 had written that one of wives of 4th Shia Imam (Jayda al-Sindhi) belonged to Sindh who was mother of Zaid Shaheed and daughter in law to Shahar Banu. Zayd Shaheed was grandson of Husain Ibn Ali, borne in 695 CE in Madina. This fact has also been inferred in book “Zayd Shaheed” by Abdul Razzak, published from Najaf.]
--------------------
In Herman Tree: Sayidina Husen
Putri Radja Persia (Iran Sekarang) Terakhir (Yazdegerd III).

OR "SHAHRBANU""SAHRBANU"

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000009115140731

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]