== Notes for [[Item:Q1861|Q1861]] ==

{geni:about_me} '''Krishna''' (/ˈkrɪʃnə/,[6] Sanskrit pronunciation: [ˈkr̩ʂɳɐ]; Sanskrit: कृष्ण, IAST: Kṛṣṇa) is a major deity in Hinduism. He is worshipped as the eighth avatar of the god Vishnu and also as the supreme God in his own right.[7] He is the god of compassion, tenderness, love[8][9][10] and is one of the most popular and widely revered among Indian divinities.[11] Krishna's birthday is celebrated every year by Hindus on Krishna Janmashtami according to the lunisolar Hindu calendar, which falls in late August or early September of the Gregorian calendar.[12] Krishna is usually depicted with a flute in his hand. The anecdotes and narratives of Krishna's life are generally titled as Krishna Leela. He is a central character in the Mahabharata, the Bhagavata Purana and the Bhagavad Gita, and is mentioned in many Hindu philosophical, theological, and mythological texts.[13] They portray him in various perspectives: a god-child, a prankster, a model lover, a divine hero, and as the universal supreme being.[14] His iconography reflects these legends, and shows him in different stages of his life, such as an infant eating butter, a young boy playing a flute, a young boy with his lover Radha or surrounded by women devotees, or a friendly charioteer giving counsel to Arjuna.[15]
<p>===Family</p>
<p>*Parents: Devaki (mother), Vasudeva (father), Yashoda (foster mother), Nanda (foster father)</p>
<p>*Siblings: Balarama (brother), Subhadra (sister), Vindhyavasini (sister)</p>
<p>*Consorts: Radha; Rukmini Satyabhama, Jambavati, Kalindi, Mitravinda, Lakshmana, Satya, Bhadra, Nagnajiti and 16,000–16,100 other junior queens[4][note 1]</p>
<p>*Dynasty Yaduvanshi</p>
<p>----</p>
<p>Family of krishna</p>
<p>Krishna had a total of 16,108 wives, out of which eight were his princely wives and 16,100 were rescued from Narakasura, who had forcibly kept them in his harem. After Krishna killed Narkasura he rescued these 16,100 women and freed them, but all of them returned to him saying that they have been raped by Narkasura repeatedly and now neither their family will accept them nor will any one marry them, thus remaining shelter less. Krishna married them and gave them shelter in his new palace and a respectful place in the society but never had sexual relations with any. [66][67] The first son of Queen Rukmini was Pradyumna, and also born of her were Charudeshna, Sudeshna and the powerful Charudeha, along with Sucharu, Chharugupta, Bhadracaru, Charuchandra, Vicaru and Caru, the tenth. Pradyumna fathered the greatly powerful Aniruddha in the womb of Rukmavati, the daughter of Rukmi. This took place while they were living in the city of Bhojakata. The ten sons of Satyabhama were Bhanu, Subhanu, Svarbhanu, Prabhanu, Bhanuman, Chandrabhanu, Brihadbhanu, Atibhanu (the eighth), Sribhanu and Pratibhanu. Samba, Sumitra, Purujit, Satajit, Sahasrajit, Vijaya, Citraketu, Vasuman, Dravida and Kratu were the sons of Jambavati. These ten, headed by Samba, were their father's favorites. The sons of Nagnajiti were Vira, Candra, Asvasena, Citragu, Vegavan, Vrisha, Ama, Sanku, Vasu and the opulent Kunti. Sruta, Kavi, Vrisha, Vira, Subahu, Bhadra, Santi, Darsa and Purnamasa were sons of Kalindi. Her youngest son was Somaka. Madra's sons were Praghosha, Gatravan, Simha, Bala, Prabala, Urdhaga, Mahasakti, Saha, Oja and Aparajita. Mitravinda's sons were Vrika, Harsha, Anila, Gridhra, Vardhana, Unnada, Mahamsa, Pavana, Vahni and Kshudhi. Sangramajit, Brihatsena, Sura, Praharana, Arijith, Jaya and Subhadra were the sons of Bhadra, together with Vama, Ayur and Satyaka. Diptiman, Tamratapta and others were the sons of Lord Krishna and Rohini.
<p>------</p>
<p>Vasudeva was the father of Lord Krishna. Devaki , daughter of the Yadava chieftain Ugrasena and sister of Kamsa was his mother. Please note that Krishna's father was called Vasudeva (with Va pronounced as V-uh). Krishna was called Vasudeva ( with Va pronounced as Vaa) , which indicated his father's name (Vaasudeva means "of Vasudeva" per Sanskrit rules).May 17, 2015

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]