== Notes for [[Item:Q115671|Q115671]] ==

'''ALFONSO VI King of Castile & León''' '''(Compostela c1038/40-Toledo 30 Jun 1109, bur Sahagún, León, San Mancio chapel in the royal monastery of Santos Facundo y Primitivo)'''
s/o''' FERNANDO I "el Magno" King of Castile & León & Sancha de León'''

x betrothed 1069, [late 1073/early 1074], repudiated after 22 May 1077) [as her first husband,] '''AGNES d’Aquitaine''', d/o GUILLAUME VIII Duke of Aquitaine [GUILLAUME VI Comte de Poitou] & Mathilde -- ([1059]-[6 Jun 1078 or after 1099], bur [Sahagún, León, royal monastery of Santos Facundo y Primitivo]).

xx Dec 1079 '''CONSTANCE de Bourgogne''', widow of HUGUES [II] Comte de Chalon,d/o ROBERT I Duke of Burgundy [Capet] & Hélie de Semur ([>1045]-[25 Jul/25 Oct] 1093, bur Sahagún, León, royal monastery of Santos Facundo y Primitivo)
*Infanta doña URRACA I Queen of Castile and Leó (late 1080[562]-Saldaña 8 Mar 1126, bur León, Monastery of San Isidro). The Chronicle of Alberic de Trois-Fontaines names "Waracta filia imperatoris Fernandi"[563].

x '''Mistress''' (1): ([1080]) JIMENA Muñoz, d/o ?MUNIO Muñoz & Velasquita (-Espinareda del Bierzo 1128, after 25 May, maybe 23 Jul, bur San Andres de Espinareda)
*[Infanta doña] ELVIRA Alfonso ([1080/81]-15 Nov [1156])
*[Infanta doña] TERESA Alfonso ([1081/82]-1 Nov 1130).

xxx [cDec] 1094)''' BERTA''', d/o ?Guillaume I Comte Palatin de Bourgogne, Comte de Vienne et de Macon (-early Jan 1100, bur Sahagún, León, royal monastery of Santos Facundo y Primitivo).

xxxx ([Burgos] 1100 before 14 May) '''ISABEL''' [Elisabeth], d/o ? (-before Mar 1106, bur Royal Pantheon of San Isidor de León)

xxxxx(Mar 1106)''' ZAÏDA''', widow of ABU NASIR al Fatah al Ma'Mun Emir of Córdoba, d/o? (-13 Sep 1107, bur Royal Pantheon of San Isidor at León)
*Infante don SANCHO de Castilla y León (Sep 1093[564]-killed in battle Uclés 29 May 1108)
* Infanta doña SANCHA de Castilla y León ([1100/16 Mar 1104]-after 10 May 1125)
* Infanta doña ELVIRA de Castilla y León ([1100/16 Mar 1104]-8 Feb 1135)
https://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/CASTILE.htm#AlfonsoVIdied1109B
----




French Records have marriages to wives in this order:

==Mariage Ferdinand Ier le Grand avec Sancie Afonso de León==

Fernando ou Ferdinand Ier le Grand épouse en 1032 ou 1033 Sancie Afonso de León. Leurs enfants sont :

Urraca (1033-1101),
Sanche Ferdinandez dit Sanche II le Fort (1037-1072), Roi de Castille et León,
Elvira (1038-15 novembre 1101),

Alfonso ou Alphonse VI de Castille surnommé le Vaillant (1039 ou 1040-1er ou le 29 juillet 1109), Roi de Castille, de León de Tolède, de Galice, qui épousera :
(1) en 1069 Agnès de Poitou,
(2) en 1081 Constance de Bourgogne,
(3) en 1092 Isabelle ou Zaïda de Séville,
(4) en 1093 Berthe de Bourgogne-Comté,
(5) en 1108 Béatrice d'Aquitaine,
Garcia Ferdinandez ou Garcia II de Castille (1042-1090), Roi de Galicie, Comte de Portugal.

!profile needs fixing!

----

* http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/CASTILE.htm#AlfonsoVIdied1109B


* https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfonso_VI_de_Le%C3%B3n

* http://genealogics.org/getperson.php?personID=I00020895&tree=LEO

Alfonso VI (before June 1040 – June 29/July 1, 1109), nicknamed the Brave, was King of León from 1065 to 1109 and King of Castile from 1072 following his brother's death. As he was the first Alfonso to be King of Castile, he is sometimes referred to as Alfonso I of Castile. In 1077, he proclaimed himself "Emperor of All Hispania". Much romance has gathered around his name.

* http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfonso_VI_of_Castile

Alphonse VI de León et Castille1, surnommé le Brave, né avant juin 1040, mort le 1er juillet 1109, roi de León (1065-1109), roi de Castille (1072-1109) à la mort de son frère, roi de Tolède (1085-1109) par conquête et roi de Galice (1090-1109) à la mort de son autre frère. Il était le fils de Ferdinand Ier de Castille, de León et Asturies et de Sancha de León.

Lorsque Ferdinand Ier de Castille et de León, père d’Alphonse, meurt en 1065, le royaume est partagé entre ses trois fils. Alphonse, dit le Brave, reçoit le royaume de León. Après une guerre fratricide avec son aîné, Sanche II, il y asseoit son pouvoir et parvient à unifier le royaume castillan.

En 1069, il fait payer tribut à Abbad III, roi de Séville sous la dynastie des Abbadides.

Fort de ce succès, il se lance dans la reconquête de l’Espagne musulmane (ou Reconquista), divisée depuis l’effondrement du califat de Cordoue en principautés indépendantes (les taïfas de la première période). Soutenu par les moines de Cluny et le pape Grégoire VII, Alphonse, marié à Constance de Bourgogne, fait appel aux chevaliers bourguignons. En 1085, après un siège de quatre années, Tolède est prise.

Cependant, les princes musulmans appellent à leur secours les Almoravides qui franchissent le détroit de Gibraltar et mettent en déroute Alphonse VI à la bataille de Sagrajas, en octobre 1086. Mais les Almoravides ne réussissent pas à tirer avantage de leurs victoires militaires, comme celles de Consuegra (1097) et de Malagón (1100). Le Cid Campeador, au service d’Alphonse, symbolise cette résistance chrétienne à l’Islam.

Beaucoup de romans de chevalerie ont illustré son nom. Dans la chanson de geste du Cid , il joue le rôle attribué par le poète médiéval aux plus grands rois et à Charlemagne lui-même. Il est tour à tour l'oppresseur et la victime héroïque et obstinée - le type idéal de protecteur que chantaient les jongleurs et les troubadours. Il est le héros d'une chanson de geste qui tout comme les chants espagnols primitifs, les chansons de Bernard del Carpio et la légende des Infants de Lara n'existent plus que dans des fragments incorporés dans la Chronique d'Alphonse le Sage.

Avec un peu d'indulgence, Alphonse VI est présenté comme un homme fort qui agit comme un roi dont les intérêts sont la loi et l'ordre et qui est le chef d'une nation en reconquête. Alphonse s'est marié deux fois. Avant Constance de Bourgogne, il est fiancé avec Agathe, fille de Guillaume le Conquérant. Sous l'influence, dit-on, de sa femme Constance, il implante l'Ordre des Cisterciens dans son royaume, les établissant à Sahagún et choisit un cistercien français Bernard comme premier archevêque de Tolède après la reconquête.

Mariages et descendance

Ep. 1069 Agnès de Poitiers, fille Guillaume VI, duc Aquitaine, répudiée 1079.

Ep. .... Ximena de Guzman

Ep. 1081 Constance de Bourgogne, fille de Robert Ier duc Bourgogne et d’Ermengar de Hélie de Saumur

Ep. 1093 Berthe de Bourgogne, fille du comte palatin Guillaume Ier de Bourgogne et d'Étiennette de Bourgogne

Ep.(?) 1098 Zaïda, fille de l’émir Abulkasim Muhammad Ben Abbad Al'tanmid de Séville

Il marie ses filles Urraque, la légitime, et Thérèse de León, l'illégitime, avec des princes français et par tous moyens favorise l'influence française – la plus grande force civilisée en Europe. Il rapproche aussi son royaume de la papauté et décide de remplacer le vieux rite de saint Isidore, le rite mozarabe, par le rite romain. D'un autre côté, il est très ouvert à l'influence arabe, protège ses sujets maures et bat monnaie avec des inscriptions en lettres arabes. Après la mort de Constance, il s'est peut-être marié et a certainement vécu avec la princesse Zaïda. Sa femme Isabelle est peut-être cette princesse convertie au christianisme sous le nom de Marie ou d'Isabelle.

http://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alphonse_VI_de_Castille

--------------------

Alfonso VI de León y Castilla

De Wikipedia, la enciclopedia libre

Alfonso VI (1040 - 1 de julio de 1109), rey de León desde el 27 de diciembre de 1065, de Galicia y de Castilla desde el 6 de octubre de 1072, fue apodado el Bravo. Hijo de Fernando I el Magno, rey de León, Galicia y Castilla (1035-1065) y de Doña Sancha de León.

A la muerte de su padre en 1065 recibió el Reino de León, mientras que a su hermano primogénito Sancho le correspondió Castilla, y a su hermano menor, García, Galicia. Alfonso tuvo que enfrentarse desde muy pronto con los deseos expansionistas de su hermano Sancho. La paz solo duró mientras vivió su madre, la reina Sancha, pero tras su muerte (1067) comenzaron las disputas. Sancho no aceptó el testamento de su padre y quiso apoderarse de los territorios que habían pasado a sus hermanos. Destronó con facilidad a su hermano García, y después de las batallas de Llantada (1068) y Golpejera en 1072, Alfonso es hecho prisionero por Sancho, el cual se hace así con la corona leonesa.

Alfonso fue encarcelado en Burgos, de donde logra fugarse y se refugia bajo la protección del rey taifa de Toledo. Otras versiones dicen que se le peló y se le obligó a tomar la casulla en el monasterio de Sahagún de donde huyó con la ayuda del abad y del conde Pedro Ansúrez.

El asesinato de Sancho II, a manos de un caballero portugués, Vellido Dolfos en el asedio de Zamora, le permitió recuperar el trono y reclamar para sí el de Castilla, al no tener Sancho herederos. En este momento la leyenda sitúa la jura exculpatoria de su posible participación en la muerte de Sancho, que tomó El Cid a Alfonso en la iglesia de Santa Gadea de Burgos (Juras de Santa Gadea). Estos sucesos fueron aprovechados por García para recuperar el trono gallego, pero al año siguiente, en 1073, es nuevamente depuesto y encarcelado de por vida en el castillo de Luna (en donde falleció en 1090). A partir de este momento Alfonso se dedicó a engrandecer sus territorios, fundamentalmente a costa de los musulmanes, combinando la presión militar y la extorsión económica. En 1076, tras la muerte del monarca navarro Sancho Garcés IV se anexionó los territorios de Álava, Vizcaya, Guipúzcoa y La Bureba, adoptando en 1077 el título de Emperador.

Respecto a los musulmanes, en los primeros años de su reinado, Alfonso siguió con la práctica de explotación económica mediante el sistema de parias, consiguiendo que la mayor parte de los reinos de taifas de la España musulmana fuesen sus tributarios. Aprovechó el llamamiento de ayuda del rey taifa de Toledo contra un usurpador para poner sitio a Toledo, la cual cayó el 25 de mayo de 1085. Tras esta victoria, el monarca se tituló emperador de las dos religiones. La ocupación del reino de Toledo significó la incorporación a su reino del territorio situado entre el Sistema Central y el río Tajo. De esta forma, puede iniciar una gran actividad militar contra las taifas: Córdoba, Sevilla, Badajoz y Granada estaban directamente amenazadas por Alfonso.

En estas circunstancias, los reyes de taifas (Sevilla, Granada, Badajoz y Almería) decidieron pedir ayuda a los almorávides, los cuales desembarcan en la península. El emir almorávide Yusuf ibn Tasfin consiguió vencer a Alfonso VI en las batallas de Zalaca(1086), cerca de Badajoz, Consuegra (1097) y Salatrices (1106), donde Alfonso recibió una herida en la tibia izquierda de la que nunca curó, herida que todavía es perceptible en los restos de su esqueleto.

Los almorávides sitiaron varias veces Toledo, pero sin conseguir tomarla. En los últimos años de su reinado, Alfonso se esforzó en impedir que los almorávides se consolidasen en la España musulmana, sin éxito. Los reinos de taifas del sur de España, y el de Denia, fueron ocupados por los almorávides, que derrotaron de nuevo al monarca en Uclés (1108) donde además morirá Sancho Alfónsez, su único hijo varón. La corona terminaría por ello en manos de su hija, la infanta doña Urraca, aunque su otra hija, Teresa (mi ANCESTRO), se quedaría con el condado portucalense que bajo el mando de su hijo Alfonso Raimúndez se convirtió en el Reino de Portugal.

Murió en Toledo y fue enterrado en el Monasterio de Sahagún, villa ésta muy apreciada por el monarca, a la cual concedió ciertos privilegios en el denominado Fuero de Sahagún. Así mismo, fortaleció enormemente al monasterio de la orden de San Benito, alcanzándose bajo su reinado la mayor prosperidad de la villa y del monasterio, que bastantes años después llegaría a fundar incluso su propia universidad.

En el terreno cultural Alfonso VI fomentó la seguridad del Camino de Santiago e impulsó la introducción de la reforma cluniacense en los monasterios de León y de Castilla.

El monarca sustituyó la liturgia mozárabe o toledana por la romana.

Vida personal

—Primer Matrimonio: con Inés de Aquitania en 1069. Luego de 8 años de unión, en 1077, el rey obtiene la anulación de su boda alegando la esterilidad de Ines. Ella morirá un año más tarde, en 1078.

Tras su divorcio, entabla conversaciones para un posible matrimonio con Agatha de Normandía, hija del rey Guillermo I de Inglaterra, pero su muerte prematura en 1080 frustro el proyecto.

—Segundo Matrimonio: con Constanza de Borgoña en 1081. Ella era bisnieta de Hugo Capeto, rey de Francia, y además viuda, sin hijos, del conde Hugo II de Châlon. De este matrimonio (que duró hasta su muerte en 1093) nacieron 2 hijas:

Urraca (n. 1081 - m. 1126), la cual acabaría siendo la sucesora de su padre en el trono castellano-leones

Elvira (n. 1082 - m. joven).

—Tercer Matrimonio: con Berta de Borgoña-Maçon en 1093. Ella morirá en 1095 sin descendencia.

—Cuarto Matrimonio: con Zaida (bautizada Isabel), viuda del gobernador de Córdoba, Al-Mamun en 1091. De este matrimonio (que dura hasta la muerte de Zaida en 1107) nacieron 3 hijos:

Sancho (n. 1098 - m. 1108), único hijo varón y presunto heredero del rey; su prematura muerte en la batalla de Uclés aceleró el fin de su padre.

Elvira (n. 1100 - m. 8.2.1135), casada con Roger II, rey de Sicilia.

Sancha (n. 1101 - m. ?), casada con Rodrigo de Lara, conde de Liébana.

Otras teorías dicen que Zaida murió en 1093 o 1094 y que Elvira y Sancha son hijas de la reina Isabel, que tenía el mismo nombre que ella. Hay debate al respecto entre los historiadores. Según estas teorías, el matrimonio con la reina Isabel duró de 1100 a 1107 y Sancho debió nacer en el segundo semestre de 1093 o en el primero de 1094.

—Quinto Matrimonio: con Beatriz (su origen es dudoso, posible miembro de la casa de Este o de la casa ducal de Aquitania). Este enlace, celebrado en 1108, durará solo un año, hasta la muerte del rey. Muerto el rey, la reina regresó a su país.

Además, tuvo varias relaciones extra-matrimoniales, siendo la más notoria la que tuvo con:

Jimena Muñoz (o Nuñez de Guzmán o Núñez de Lara según algunos historiadores), la cual le dio 2 hijas:

Teresa de León (n. 1070 - m. 1132), condesa de Portugal como parte de su dote nupcial, casada con Enrique de Borgoña; el hijo de ambos, Alfonso I Enríquez, será el primer rey de Portugal.

Elvira (n. 1071 - m. 1151), casada con Raimundo IV, conde de Tolosa.

Alfonso VI, el conquistador de Toledo, el gran monarca europeizador, ve, en los últimos años de su reinado, cómo la gran obra política realizada se resquebraja ante el empuje almorávide y las debilidades internas. Alfonso VI había asumido plenamente la idea imperial leonesa y su apertura a la influencia europea le había hecho conocer las prácticas políticas feudales, que en la Francia de su tiempo, alcanzaban su expresión más acabada. En la conjunción de estos dos elementos, ve Claudio Sánchez-Albornoz la explicación de la concesión iure hereditario -anómala en la tradición histórica castellanoleonesa- de los gobiernos de los Reino de Galicia y Portugal a sus dos yernos borgoñones, Raimundo, primer marido de Urraca, y Enrique, casado con Teresa. De esa decisión, arrancó, a la vuelta de unos años, la independencia portuguesa y la perspectiva de una Galicia independiente bajo Alfonso Raimúndez, que luego no se hizo realidad al convertirse éste en Alfonso VII de Castilla y León.

--------------------

Alfonso, restregando el sueño de sus ojos, componiendo con los dedos sus revueltos cabellos, avanzó, la cabeza erguida y el orgullo en el alma: "¿Hasta cuándo me vais a engañar? ¿Qué queréis aquí?, fue su saludo. "Pues queríamos --respondieron ellos humildemente-- pedir auxilio a tal y tal de los reyes de taifas. Nos queda esta esperanza última." Y Alfonso, sin nada replicarles hirió nerviosamente el suelo con el pie, dio unas palmadas, y al que se presentó le dijo: "Que vengan los embajadores de Ben Abbed, de Sevilla." Los embajadores vinieron; arrastraban sus rozagantes ropas de gala; en sus bocas traían frases de gran rendimiento: "oído y obedecido", con todas las demás zalamerías que podían. El emperador no les dirigió sino palabras altaneras, y cuando los embajadores le presentaron multitud de tesoros preciosos, él, apartando con el pie todo aquello que le habían puesto delante, mandó a sus servidores retirarlo de allí. Después fue llamando a otros embajadores de los reyes de taifas, y a todos trató con igual desdén y de todos recogieron los sirvientes del cristiano dones en abundancia.

Los cuitados magnates toledanos se hartaron de admirar a qué grado de envilecimiento habían llegado todos los reyes de taifas, y con el más amargo desengaño salieron de la presencia del emperador para volverse a Toledo.

Allí se escondieron, solitarios, avergonzados, durante tres días, al cabo de los cuales la ciudad se entregó al sitiador.

Toledo se rindió el 6 de mayo de 1085.

--------------------

Alfonso gifta Minst fem gånger och hade Två älskarinnor och en fästmö

Other Spouses: Constance av Burgund

Alfonso VI (före juni 1040 - 1 juli 1109), med smeknamnet the Brave, var kung av León 1065 till 1109 och kung av Kastilien sedan 1072 efter sin brors död. Eftersom han var den första Alfonso att vara kung av Kastilien, är han ibland kallas Alfonso I av Kastilien. In 1077, utropade han sig till "Kejsare av alla Hispania". Mycket romantik har samlat kring hans namn.

Som den andra och favorit son till kung Ferdinand I av Kastilien och prinsessan Sancha i León, tilldelades Alfonso León, medan Kastilien fick hans äldste bror Sancho, och Galicien att hans yngste bror García. Sancho mördades år 1072. García avsattes och fängslades för livet följande år.

I cantar de Gesta Lay av Cid, spelar han den del förklaras enligt medeltida poeter till största kungar, och till Karl den store själv. Han är omväxlande förtryckare och offer för heroiska och egensinnig adeln - den idealiserade typer av beskyddare för vilka jongleurs och trubadurer sjöng. Han är hjälten i cantar de Gesta, som liksom alla utom ett fåtal av de tidiga spanska sånger, liksom cantar av Bernardo del Carpio och Infantes Lara, existerar nu bara i fragment ingår i krönika Alfonso den vise eller i ballad form.

Sin flykt från klostret Sahagún, där hans bror Sancho försökt fängsla honom, hans ridderliga vänskap för sin värd Almamun i Toledo, Caballero aunque Moro ", en riddare även om en mor", den passionerade lojalitet hans vasall, Pero (Pedro) Ansúrez, och hans broderlig kärlek till sin syster Urraca Zamora, kan vara skyldig till något till poeten som tog honom som en hjälte.

De är svaret på poeten adelsmän som företrädde kungen som har lämnats in till att ta ett förnedrande ed i händerna på Rodrigo Díaz de Vivar (El Cid) att förneka inblandning i sin brors död i kyrkan Santa Gadea i Burgos, och så har sedan förföljt den modige mannen som trotsade honom.

När varje utrymme annat, står Alfonso VI ut som en stark man kämpar som en kung vars intresse var lag och ordning, och som var ledare för nationen i återerövringen. Han imponerade sig på araberna som en mycket stark och listig fiende, utan som en innehavare av hans ord. En historia av muslimskt ursprung, vilket förmodligen inte mer historisk än ed Santa Gadea, berättar om hur han lät sig luras av Ibn Ammar, favoriten Al Mutamid, kungen av Sevilla. De spelade schack för en mycket vacker bord och uppsättning av män, som tillhör Ibn Ammar. Tabell och män skulle gå till kungen om han vann. Om Ibn Ammar fick han till namnet insatsen. Den senare segrade och krävde att den kristne kungen bör bespara Sevilla. Alfonso höll ord.

Oavsett sanningen kan ligga bakom den romantiska berättelser av kristna och muslimer, vi vet att Alfonso representerade på ett anmärkningsvärt sätt, de två stora influenser sedan forma karaktären och civilisationen i Spanien.

På uppmaning, sägs det, av hans hustru Constance, han väckte cisterciensordens ordning i Spanien, infört dem i Sahagun valde en fransk Cistersiensorderns, Bernard, som första ärkebiskop i Toledo efter återerövringen den 25 maj 1085. Han gifte sig med hans döttrar, Urraca, Teresa och Elvira till franska furstar, och på alla sätt vidarebefordrade spridningen av franska inflytandet - då störst civiliserande kraft i Europa. Han ritade även Spanien närmare påvedömet. Det var Alfonso beslut som upprättade den romerska ritualen i stället för den gamla bönboken Saint Isidore - den mozarabiska rit.

Å andra sidan var han mycket öppen för arabiska inflytande. Han skyddade muslimerna bland sina undersåtar och slog mynt med inskriptioner på arabiska bokstäver. Han medgav också att hans hov och till hans säng flyktingen muslimska prinsessan Zaida i Sevilla.

Alfonso besegrades den 23 oktober 1086, i slaget vid Zallaqa, i händerna på Yusuf ibn TashfiMarriages och childrenAlfonso gifta minst fem gånger och hade två älskarinnor och en fästmö:

Innan hans första äktenskap, han sägs ha varit förlovad med Agatha, en dotter till William I av England och Matilda av Flandern. Agatha dog innan äktenskapet kunde ske, enligt uppgift från förödmjukelse inför tanken på giftermål med Alfonso.

Hans första hustru var Agnes av Akvitanien, dotter till William VIII av Akvitanien och hans andra hustru Mateoda. De gifte sig 1069 och akademiskt åsikt delas om hon dog eller de frånskilda grund av blodsband, i slutet av 1070-talet. De hade inga barn.

Hans andra hustru, som han gifte sig 1081, var Constance av Burgund, mor till Alfonso äldsta legitima dotter Urraca.

1093 gifte han sig med Bertha, Toscana och Lombardiet. Hon hade inga barn.

Efter hennes död gifte Alfonso en Isabel, med vilken han fick två döttrar, Elvira, (som gifte sig med Roger II av Sicilien) och Sancha, (hustru till Rodrigo González de Lara). Senare källor säger att hon var dotter till en kung Ludvig av Frankrike, men det är kronologiskt omöjligt. Reilly spekulerade hon var burgundiska ursprung, men andra gör henne identisk älskarinna Zaida.

Hans sista hustru var Beatrice. Vissa källor hävdar att hon var släkt med Hisham III, den sista emiren av Cordoba. Alternativt har det föreslagits att hon var systerdotter till första hustru Agnes, och dotter till William IX av Akvitanien. Hon hade inga barn med Alfonso.

Han hade också två kända älskarinnor.

Genom Jimena Muñoz, en "mest ädla familj", hade han två illegitima döttrar, en annan Elvira (faktiskt hans äldsta barn) och Teresa.

En andra älskarinna var Zaida i Sevilla, sade spanska muslimska källor vara dotter-in-law Al Mutamid, den muslimska kung i Sevilla. Hon var mor till Alfonso ende son, Sancho, som, även oäkta, skulle heta faderns arvinge. Flera moderna källor har föreslagit att Zaida, döpta under namnet Isabella, är identisk med Alfonso hustru, drottning Isabella (eller att hon var en andra drottning Isabel som han gifte sig med följd att den första). Zaida / Isabel dog i barnsäng, men datumet är okänt, och det är oklart om barnet levereras var Sancho, Sancha (om Zaida var identisk med drottning Isabel), eller ett extra barn, annars okänd.

Alfonso utsedda efterträdare, hans son Sancho, stupade i slaget vid Uclés under 1108, vilket gör Alfonso änka dotter Urraca hans arvinge. För att stärka sin ställning som hans efterträdare, började Alfonso förhandlingar för henne att gifta sig med sin syssling, Alfonso I av Aragonien, men dog innan äktenskapet kunde ske.

--------------------

--------------------

Alfonso VI (before June 1040 – June 29/July 1, 1109), nicknamed the Brave or the Valiant, was King of León from 1065 to 1109 and King of Castile from 1072 following the death of his brother Sancho II. In 1077 he proclaimed himself "Emperor of all Spain". Much romance has gathered around his name.

--------------------

--------------------

Llamado Alfonso el Bravo, fue rey de León (1065 - 1109), de Galicia (1071 - 1072; 1072 - 1109) y de Castilla (1072 - 1109).

--------------------

Alfonso VI (before June 1040 – June 29/July 1, 1109), nicknamed the Brave (El Bravo) or the Valiant, was King of León from 1065, King of Castile and de facto King of Galicia from 1072, and self-proclaimed "Emperor of all Spain". Much romance has gathered around his name.

Contents [hide]

1 Accession

2 Strong fighter

3 Marriages and children

4 Ancestry

5 Notes

6 External links

7 References

[edit] Accession

As the middle of three sons of King Ferdinand I of León and Sancha of León, Alfonso was allotted León when the kingdom was divided following his father's death, while Castile was given to his elder brother Sancho, Galicia to younger brother García, and sisters Urraca and Elvira given the cities of Zamora and Toro respectively. Each of the brothers was also assigned a sphere of influence among the Taifa states. Alfonso appears to have taken the first step in violating this division, in 1068 invading the Galician client Taifa of Badajoz and extorting tribute. In response, Sancho attacked and defeated Alfonso at Llantada but three years later in 1071 they joined forces against García. Sancho over-marched Alfonso's León to conquer García's northern lands, while Alfonso himself is found issuing charters in the southern part of the Galician realm. García fled to taifa Seville, and the remaining brothers then turned on each other. This conflict culminated in the Battle of Golpejera in early January, 1072. Sancho proved victorious and Alfonso himself was forced to flee to his client Taifa of Toledo. Later that year as Sancho was mopping up the last of the resistance, besieging his sister Urraca at Zamora in October, he was assassinated, opening the way for Alfonso to return to claim Sancho's crown. García, induced to return from exile, was imprisoned by Alfonso for life, leaving Alfonso in uncontested control of the reunited territories of their father. In recognition of this and his role as the preeminent Christian monarch on the peninsula, in 1077 he proclaimed himself "Emperor of all Spain".

In the cantar de gesta The Lay of the Cid, he plays the part attributed by medieval poets to the greatest kings, and to Charlemagne himself. He is alternately the oppressor and the victim of heroic and self-willed nobles — the idealized types of the patrons for whom the jongleurs and troubadours sang. He is the hero of a cantar de gesta which, like all but a very few of the early Spanish songs, like the cantar of Bernardo del Carpio and the Infantes of Lara, exists now only in the fragments incorporated in the chronicle of Alfonso the Wise or in ballad form.

His flight from the monastery of Sahagún (Safagún in Leonese language), where his brother Sancho endeavoured to imprison him, his chivalrous friendship for his host Almamun of Toledo, caballero aunque moro, "a knight although a Moor", the passionate loyalty of his vassal, Pero (Pedro) Ansúrez, and his brotherly love for his sister Urraca of Zamora, may owe something to the poet who took him as a hero.

They are the answer to the poet of the nobles who represented the king as having submitted to taking a degrading oath at the hands of Rodrigo Díaz de Vivar (El Cid) to deny intervention in his brother's death in the church of Santa Gadea at Burgos, and as having then persecuted the brave man who defied him.

[edit] Strong fighter

When every allowance is made, Alfonso VI stands out as a strong man fighting as a king whose interest was law and order, and who was the leader of the nation in the reconquest. He impressed himself on the Arabs as a very fierce and astute enemy, but as a keeper of his word. A story of Muslim origin, which is probably no more historical than the oath of Santa Gadea, tells of how he allowed himself to be tricked by Ibn Ammar, the favourite of Al Mutamid, the King of Seville. They played chess for an extremely beautiful table and set of men, belonging to Ibn Ammar. Table and men were to go to the king if he won. If Ibn Ammar gained he was to name the stake. The latter did win and demanded that the Christian king should spare Seville. Alfonso kept his word.

Whatever truth may lie behind the romantic tales of Christian and Muslim, we know that Alfonso represented the two great influences then shaping the character and civilization of Hispania.

Alfonso showed a greater degree of continental integration than his predecessors. The marital practices of the Iberian royalty had been largely endogamous, previously limiting choice of partners to the peninsula and Gascony, but Alfonso married French and Italian wives, while marrying daughters to French princes and an Italian king. His second marriage was arranged, in part, through the influence of the French Cluniac Order, and Alfonso is said to have introduced them into Hispania, established them in Sahagun and choosing a French Cluniac, Bernard, as the first Archbishop of Toledo after its 1085 conquest. He also drew his kingdom nearer to the Papacy, a move which brought French crusaders to aid him in the reconquest, and it was Alfonso's decision which established the Roman ritual in place of the old missal of Saint Isidore — the Mozarabic rite.

On the other hand he was very open to Arabic influence. He protected the Muslims among his subjects and struck coins with inscriptions in Arabic letters. He also admitted to his court and to his bed the refugee Muslim princess Zaida of Seville.

Alfonso was defeated on October 23, 1086, at the battle of Sagrajas, at the hands of Yusuf ibn Tashfin, and Abbad III al-Mu'tamid, and was severely wounded in the leg.

[edit] Marriages and children

Alfonso married at least five times and had two mistresses and a fiancée:

In 1067, two brothers from Iberia are said to have competed for the hand of Agatha, one of the daughters of William I of England and Matilda of Flanders and formerly fiancee of Harold Godwinson. Alfonso proved successful, and was betrothed to Agatha. A nun at the time, Agatha is said to have prayed for death rather than being forced to marry Alphonso, and she died before the marriage could take place.

Epitaph of Jimena Muñoz, Alfonso's mistress and progenitor of the first Portuguese royal lineIn 1069, Alfonso married Agnes of Aquitaine, daughter of William VIII of Aquitaine and his second wife Mateoda. They last appear together in May 1077, and then Alfonso appears alone. This suggests that she had died, although Orderic Vitalis reports that in 1109 Alfonso's 'relict' Agnes remarried to Elias I of Maine, leading some to speculate that Alfonso and Agnes had divorced due to consanguinity. It seems more likely that Orderic gave the wrong name to Alfonso's widow, Beatrice. Agnes and Alfonso had no children.

Apparently between his first and second marriages he formed a liaison with Jimena Muñoz, a "most noble" (nobilissima) concubine "derived from royalty" (real generacion). She appears to have been put aside, given land in Ulver, at the time of Alfonso's remarriage. By her Alfonso had two illegitimate daughters, Elvira and Teresa.

His second wife, who he married by May 1080, was Constance of Burgundy, daughter of Robert I, Duke of Burgundy. This marriage initially faced papal opposition, apparently due to her kinship with Agnes. Her tenure as queen consort brought significant Cluniac influences into the kingdom. She died in September or October, 1093, the mother of Alfonso's eldest legitimate daughter Urraca, and of five other children who died in infancy.

Either before or shortly after Constance's death, Alfonso formed a liaison with a second mistress, Zaida of Seville, said by Iberian Muslim sources to be daughter-in-law of Al Mutamid, the Muslim King of Seville. She fled the fall of Seville for Alfonso's kingdom in 1091, and soon became his lover, having by him Alfonso's only son, Sancho, who, though illegitimate, was apparently not born of an adulterous relationship, and hence born after the death of Constance. He would be named his father's heir. Several modern sources have suggested that Zaida, baptised under the name of Isabel, is identical with Alfonso's later wife, Queen Isabel (or that she was a second queen named Isabel whom he married in succession to the first). Zaida/Isabel died in childbirth, but the date is unknown, and it is unclear whether the child being delivered was Sancho, an additional illegitimate child, otherwise unknown, or legitimate daughter Elvira (if Zaida was identical to Queen Isabel).

By April 1095, Alfonso married Bertha. Chroniclers report her as being from Tuscany, Lombardy, or alternatively, say she was French. Several theories have been put forward regarding her origin. Based on political considerations, proposals make her daughter of William I, Count of Burgundy or of Amadeus II of Savoy. She had no children and died in late 1099 (Alfonso first appears without her in mid-January 1100).

Within months, by May 1100, Alfonso again remarried, to Isabel, having by her two daughters, Sancha, (wife of Rodrigo González de Lara), and Elvira, (who married Roger II of Sicily). A non-contemporary tomb inscription says she was daughter of a "king Louis of France", but this is chronologically impossible. It has been speculated that she was of Burgundian origin, but others conclude that Alfonso married his former mistress, Zaida, who had been baptized as Isabel. (In a novel twist, Reilly suggested that there were two successive queens named Isabel: first the French (Burgundian) Isabel, mother of Sancha and Elvira, with Alfonso only later marrying his mistress Zaida (Isabel), after the death of or divorce from the first Isabel.) Alfonso was again widowed in mid-1107.

By May 1108, Alfonso married his last wife, Beatrice. She, as widow of Alfonso, is said to have returned home to France, but nothing else is known of her origin unless she is the woman Orderic named as "Agnes, daughter of William, Duke of Poitou", who as relict of Alfonso, (Agnetem, filiam Guillelmi, Pictavorum ducis, relictam Hildefonsi senioris, Galliciae regis), remarried to Elias of Maine. If this is the case, she is likely daughter of William IX of Aquitaine and niece of Alfonso's first wife. Beatrice had no children by Alfonso.

One other woman was reported by later sources to have been Alfonso's lover. The historian Abu Bakr Ibn al Sayraff, writing before 1161, stated that Alfonso abandoned Christianity for Zoroastrianism and had carnal relations with his sister Urraca, but then repented and was absolved, making pilgrimages to holy sites as penance. This has been followed by some later historians but others dismiss it as propaganda or misunderstanding.

Alfonso's designated successor, his son Sancho, was slain after being routed at the Battle of Uclés in 1108, making Alfonso's eldest legitimate daughter, the widowed Urraca as his heir. In order to strengthen her position as his successor, Alfonso began negotiations for her to marry her second cousin, Alfonso I of Aragon and Navarre, but died before the marriage could take place, Urraca succeeding.

[edit] Ancestry

Ancestors of Alfonso VI of León and Castile[hide]

16. Sancho II of Navarre

8. García II of Navarre

17. Urraca Fernández

4. Sancho III of Navarre

18. Ferdinand Vermúdez, Count of Cea

9. Jimena Fernández

19. Elvira Díaz

2. Ferdinand I of León and Castile

20. García Fernández, Count of Castile

10. Sancho García, Count of Castile

21. Ava of Ribagorza

5. Muniadona Mayor

22. Gómez Díaz, Count of Saldaña

11. Urraca Gómez

23. Muniadona Fernández

1. Alfonso VI of León and Castile

24. Ordoño III of León

12. Bermudo II of León

6. Alfonso V of León

26. García Fernández, Count of Castile

13. Elvira García

27. Ava of Ribagorza

3. Sancha of León

28. Gonçalo I Mendes, Count of Portugal

14. Mendo II Gonçalves, Count of Portugal

29. Ilduara (Ildonza) Peláez

7. Elvira Mendes

15. Tutadona Moniz (Portuguese)

[edit] Notes

[edit] External links

IX Centenary of Leon-Castilla's King Alfonso VI (1109-2009)

Alfonso VI on a Manuscript:.

[edit] References

This entry incorporates public domain text originally from the 1911 Encyclopedia Britannica.

The Kingdom of León-Castilla under King Alfonso VI, 1065-1109, by Bernard F. Reilly (Princeton University Press, 1988): full text online at LIBRO.

Portugal, A Country Study, by Louis R. Mortimer, ed. Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress, 1993.

Preceded by

Ferdinand I King of León

(first reign)

1065–1072 Succeeded by

Sancho II

Preceded by

García II King of Galicia (and Portugal)

(first reign)

jointly with Sancho II

1071–1072

Preceded by

Sancho II King of León (second reign),

Castile and Galicia

(and Portugal)

(second reign)

1072–1109 Succeeded by

Urraca

Vacant

Title last held by

Ferdinand I of León Emperor of Spain

1077 – 1109 Succeeded by

Urraca

suo jure

Alfonso I

jure uxoris

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfonso_VI_of_Le%C3%B3n_and_Castile"

Categories: 1040 births | 1109 deaths | House of Jiménez | Kings of León | Castilian monarchs | Kings of Galicia | Roman Catholic monarchs | 11th-century Spanish people | 12th-century Spanish people

--------------------

Alfonso VI (before June 1040 – June 29/July 1, 1109), nicknamed the Brave (El Bravo) or the Valiant, was King of León from 1065, King of Castile and de facto King of Galicia from 1072, and self-proclaimed "Emperor of all Spain". Much romance has gathered around his name.

Contents [hide]

1 Accession

2 Strong fighter

3 Marriages and children

4 Ancestry

5 Notes

6 External links

7 References

[edit] Accession

As the middle of three sons of King Ferdinand I of León and Sancha of León, Alfonso was allotted León when the kingdom was divided following his father's death, while Castile was given to his elder brother Sancho, Galicia to younger brother García, and sisters Urraca and Elvira given the cities of Zamora and Toro respectively. Each of the brothers was also assigned a sphere of influence among the Taifa states. Alfonso appears to have taken the first step in violating this division, in 1068 invading the Galician client Taifa of Badajoz and extorting tribute. In response, Sancho attacked and defeated Alfonso at Llantada but three years later in 1071 they joined forces against García. Sancho over-marched Alfonso's León to conquer García's northern lands, while Alfonso himself is found issuing charters in the southern part of the Galician realm. García fled to taifa Seville, and the remaining brothers then turned on each other. This conflict culminated in the Battle of Golpejera in early January, 1072. Sancho proved victorious and Alfonso himself was forced to flee to his client Taifa of Toledo. Later that year as Sancho was mopping up the last of the resistance, besieging his sister Urraca at Zamora in October, he was assassinated, opening the way for Alfonso to return to claim Sancho's crown. García, induced to return from exile, was imprisoned by Alfonso for life, leaving Alfonso in uncontested control of the reunited territories of their father. In recognition of this and his role as the preeminent Christian monarch on the peninsula, in 1077 he proclaimed himself "Emperor of all Spain".

In the cantar de gesta The Lay of the Cid, he plays the part attributed by medieval poets to the greatest kings, and to Charlemagne himself. He is alternately the oppressor and the victim of heroic and self-willed nobles — the idealized types of the patrons for whom the jongleurs and troubadours sang. He is the hero of a cantar de gesta which, like all but a very few of the early Spanish songs, like the cantar of Bernardo del Carpio and the Infantes of Lara, exists now only in the fragments incorporated in the chronicle of Alfonso the Wise or in ballad form.

His flight from the monastery of Sahagún (Safagún in Leonese language), where his brother Sancho endeavoured to imprison him, his chivalrous friendship for his host Almamun of Toledo, caballero aunque moro, "a knight although a Moor", the passionate loyalty of his vassal, Pero (Pedro) Ansúrez, and his brotherly love for his sister Urraca of Zamora, may owe something to the poet who took him as a hero.

They are the answer to the poet of the nobles who represented the king as having submitted to taking a degrading oath at the hands of Rodrigo Díaz de Vivar (El Cid) to deny intervention in his brother's death in the church of Santa Gadea at Burgos, and as having then persecuted the brave man who defied him.

[edit] Strong fighter

When every allowance is made, Alfonso VI stands out as a strong man fighting as a king whose interest was law and order, and who was the leader of the nation in the reconquest. He impressed himself on the Arabs as a very fierce and astute enemy, but as a keeper of his word. A story of Muslim origin, which is probably no more historical than the oath of Santa Gadea, tells of how he allowed himself to be tricked by Ibn Ammar, the favourite of Al Mutamid, the King of Seville. They played chess for an extremely beautiful table and set of men, belonging to Ibn Ammar. Table and men were to go to the king if he won. If Ibn Ammar gained he was to name the stake. The latter did win and demanded that the Christian king should spare Seville. Alfonso kept his word.

Whatever truth may lie behind the romantic tales of Christian and Muslim, we know that Alfonso represented the two great influences then shaping the character and civilization of Hispania.

Alfonso showed a greater degree of continental integration than his predecessors. The marital practices of the Iberian royalty had been largely endogamous, previously limiting choice of partners to the peninsula and Gascony, but Alfonso married French and Italian wives, while marrying daughters to French princes and an Italian king. His second marriage was arranged, in part, through the influence of the French Cluniac Order, and Alfonso is said to have introduced them into Hispania, established them in Sahagun and choosing a French Cluniac, Bernard, as the first Archbishop of Toledo after its 1085 conquest. He also drew his kingdom nearer to the Papacy, a move which brought French crusaders to aid him in the reconquest, and it was Alfonso's decision which established the Roman ritual in place of the old missal of Saint Isidore — the Mozarabic rite.

On the other hand he was very open to Arabic influence. He protected the Muslims among his subjects and struck coins with inscriptions in Arabic letters. He also admitted to his court and to his bed the refugee Muslim princess Zaida of Seville.

Alfonso was defeated on October 23, 1086, at the battle of Sagrajas, at the hands of Yusuf ibn Tashfin, and Abbad III al-Mu'tamid, and was severely wounded in the leg.

[edit] Marriages and children

Alfonso married at least five times and had two mistresses and a fiancée:

In 1067, two brothers from Iberia are said to have competed for the hand of Agatha, one of the daughters of William I of England and Matilda of Flanders and formerly fiancee of Harold Godwinson. Alfonso proved successful, and was betrothed to Agatha. A nun at the time, Agatha is said to have prayed for death rather than being forced to marry Alphonso, and she died before the marriage could take place.

Epitaph of Jimena Muñoz, Alfonso's mistress and progenitor of the first Portuguese royal lineIn 1069, Alfonso married Agnes of Aquitaine, daughter of William VIII of Aquitaine and his second wife Mateoda. They last appear together in May 1077, and then Alfonso appears alone. This suggests that she had died, although Orderic Vitalis reports that in 1109 Alfonso's 'relict' Agnes remarried to Elias I of Maine, leading some to speculate that Alfonso and Agnes had divorced due to consanguinity. It seems more likely that Orderic gave the wrong name to Alfonso's widow, Beatrice. Agnes and Alfonso had no children.

Apparently between his first and second marriages he formed a liaison with Jimena Muñoz, a "most noble" (nobilissima) concubine "derived from royalty" (real generacion). She appears to have been put aside, given land in Ulver, at the time of Alfonso's remarriage. By her Alfonso had two illegitimate daughters, Elvira and Teresa.

His second wife, who he married by May 1080, was Constance of Burgundy, daughter of Robert I, Duke of Burgundy. This marriage initially faced papal opposition, apparently due to her kinship with Agnes. Her tenure as queen consort brought significant Cluniac influences into the kingdom. She died in September or October, 1093, the mother of Alfonso's eldest legitimate daughter Urraca, and of five other children who died in infancy.

Either before or shortly after Constance's death, Alfonso formed a liaison with a second mistress, Zaida of Seville, said by Iberian Muslim sources to be daughter-in-law of Al Mutamid, the Muslim King of Seville. She fled the fall of Seville for Alfonso's kingdom in 1091, and soon became his lover, having by him Alfonso's only son, Sancho, who, though illegitimate, was apparently not born of an adulterous relationship, and hence born after the death of Constance. He would be named his father's heir. Several modern sources have suggested that Zaida, baptised under the name of Isabel, is identical with Alfonso's later wife, Queen Isabel (or that she was a second queen named Isabel whom he married in succession to the first). Zaida/Isabel died in childbirth, but the date is unknown, and it is unclear whether the child being delivered was Sancho, an additional illegitimate child, otherwise unknown, or legitimate daughter Elvira (if Zaida was identical to Queen Isabel).

By April 1095, Alfonso married Bertha. Chroniclers report her as being from Tuscany, Lombardy, or alternatively, say she was French. Several theories have been put forward regarding her origin. Based on political considerations, proposals make her daughter of William I, Count of Burgundy or of Amadeus II of Savoy. She had no children and died in late 1099 (Alfonso first appears without her in mid-January 1100).

Within months, by May 1100, Alfonso again remarried, to Isabel, having by her two daughters, Sancha, (wife of Rodrigo González de Lara), and Elvira, (who married Roger II of Sicily). A non-contemporary tomb inscription says she was daughter of a "king Louis of France", but this is chronologically impossible. It has been speculated that she was of Burgundian origin, but others conclude that Alfonso married his former mistress, Zaida, who had been baptized as Isabel. (In a novel twist, Reilly suggested that there were two successive queens named Isabel: first the French (Burgundian) Isabel, mother of Sancha and Elvira, with Alfonso only later marrying his mistress Zaida (Isabel), after the death of or divorce from the first Isabel.) Alfonso was again widowed in mid-1107.

By May 1108, Alfonso married his last wife, Beatrice. She, as widow of Alfonso, is said to have returned home to France, but nothing else is known of her origin unless she is the woman Orderic named as "Agnes, daughter of William, Duke of Poitou", who as relict of Alfonso, (Agnetem, filiam Guillelmi, Pictavorum ducis, relictam Hildefonsi senioris, Galliciae regis), remarried to Elias of Maine. If this is the case, she is likely daughter of William IX of Aquitaine and niece of Alfonso's first wife. Beatrice had no children by Alfonso.

One other woman was reported by later sources to have been Alfonso's lover. The historian Abu Bakr Ibn al Sayraff, writing before 1161, stated that Alfonso abandoned Christianity for Zoroastrianism and had carnal relations with his sister Urraca, but then repented and was absolved, making pilgrimages to holy sites as penance. This has been followed by some later historians but others dismiss it as propaganda or misunderstanding.

Alfonso's designated successor, his son Sancho, was slain after being routed at the Battle of Uclés in 1108, making Alfonso's eldest legitimate daughter, the widowed Urraca as his heir. In order to strengthen her position as his successor, Alfonso began negotiations for her to marry her second cousin, Alfonso I of Aragon and Navarre, but died before the marriage could take place, Urraca succeeding.

[edit] Ancestry

Ancestors of Alfonso VI of León and Castile[hide]

16. Sancho II of Navarre

8. García II of Navarre

17. Urraca Fernández

4. Sancho III of Navarre

18. Ferdinand Vermúdez, Count of Cea

9. Jimena Fernández

19. Elvira Díaz

2. Ferdinand I of León and Castile

20. García Fernández, Count of Castile

10. Sancho García, Count of Castile

21. Ava of Ribagorza

5. Muniadona Mayor

22. Gómez Díaz, Count of Saldaña

11. Urraca Gómez

23. Muniadona Fernández

1. Alfonso VI of León and Castile

24. Ordoño III of León

12. Bermudo II of León

6. Alfonso V of León

26. García Fernández, Count of Castile

13. Elvira García

27. Ava of Ribagorza

3. Sancha of León

28. Gonçalo I Mendes, Count of Portugal

14. Mendo II Gonçalves, Count of Portugal

29. Ilduara (Ildonza) Peláez

7. Elvira Mendes

15. Tutadona Moniz (Portuguese)

[edit] Notes

[edit] External links

IX Centenary of Leon-Castilla's King Alfonso VI (1109-2009)

Alfonso VI on a Manuscript:.

[edit] References

This entry incorporates public domain text originally from the 1911 Encyclopedia Britannica.

The Kingdom of León-Castilla under King Alfonso VI, 1065-1109, by Bernard F. Reilly (Princeton University Press, 1988): full text online at LIBRO.

Portugal, A Country Study, by Louis R. Mortimer, ed. Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress, 1993.

Preceded by

Ferdinand I King of León

(first reign)

1065–1072 Succeeded by

Sancho II

Preceded by

García II King of Galicia (and Portugal)

(first reign)

jointly with Sancho II

1071–1072

Preceded by

Sancho II King of León (second reign),

Castile and Galicia

(and Portugal)

(second reign)

1072–1109 Succeeded by

Urraca

Vacant

Title last held by

Ferdinand I of León Emperor of Spain

1077 – 1109 Succeeded by

Urraca

suo jure

Alfonso I

jure uxoris

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfonso_VI_of_Le%C3%B3n_and_Castile"

Categories: 1040 births | 1109 deaths | House of Jiménez | Kings of León | Roman Catholic monarchs | 11th-century Spanish people | 12th-century Spanish people

--------------------

Alfonso I (of Castile), called The Brave (1030-1109), King of Castile (1072-1109), and also King of León as Alfonso VI (1065-1109). His father, King Ferdinand I of Castile and León, died in 1065 and left his kingdom, divided into three parts, to his three sons. Alfonso received only León, but he succeeded to nearly all his father's dominions as a result of a war with his brothers, and he also added Toledo and New Castile to his holdings. In 1086 the Abbadids of Seville, with Almoravid help, defeated him at Zalaca and stopped the gradual reconquest of Spain by the Christian rulers. Alfonso regained some of his power, but in 1108, a year before his death, the Almoravids defeated him again and killed his only son.

--------------------

Alfonso VI (before June 1040 – July 1, 1109), nicknamed the Brave, was King of León from 1065 to 1109 and King of Castile since 1072 after his brother's death. As he was the first Alfonso to be King of Castile, he is sometimes referred to as Alfonso I of Castile. In 1077, he proclaimed himself "Emperor of All Hispania". Much romance has gathered around his name.

Alfonso VI. A 12th century painting at the Cathedral of Santiago de Compostela.

Alfonso VI. A 12th century painting at the Cathedral of Santiago de Compostela.

As the second and favorite son of King Ferdinand I of Castile and Princess Sancha of León, Alfonso was allotted León, while Castile was given to his eldest brother Sancho, and Galicia to his youngest brother García. Sancho was assassinated in 1072. García was dethroned and imprisoned for life the following year.

In the cantar de gesta The Lay of the Cid, he plays the part attributed by medieval poets to the greatest kings, and to Charlemagne himself. He is alternately the oppressor and the victim of heroic and self-willed nobles — the idealized types of the patrons for whom the jongleurs and troubadours sang. He is the hero of a cantar de gesta which, like all but a very few of the early Spanish songs, like the cantar of Bernardo del Carpio and the Infantes of Lara, exists now only in the fragments incorporated in the chronicle of Alfonso the Wise or in ballad form.

His flight from the monastery of Sahagún, where his brother Sancho endeavoured to imprison him, his chivalrous friendship for his host Almamun of Toledo, caballero aunque moro, "a knight although a Moor", the passionate loyalty of his vassal, Pero (Pedro) Ansúrez, and his brotherly love for his sister Urraca of Zamora, may owe something to the poet who took him as a hero.

They are the answer to the poet of the nobles who represented the king as having submitted to taking a degrading oath at the hands of Rodrigo Díaz de Vivar (El Cid) to deny intervention in his brother's death in the church of Santa Gadea at Burgos, and as having then persecuted the brave man who defied him.

When every allowance is made, Alfonso VI stands out as a strong man fighting as a king whose interest was law and order, and who was the leader of the nation in the reconquest. He impressed himself on the Arabs as a very fierce and astute enemy, but as a keeper of his word. A story of Muslim origin, which is probably no more historical than the oath of Santa Gadea, tells of how he allowed himself to be tricked by Ibn Ammar, the favourite of Al Mutamid, the King of Seville. They played chess for an extremely beautiful table and set of men, belonging to Ibn Ammar. Table and men were to go to the king if he won. If Ibn Ammar gained he was to name the stake. The latter did win and demanded that the Christian king should spare Seville. Alfonso kept his word.

Statue of Alfonso VI at the Sabatini Gardens in Madrid (F. Corral, 1753).

Statue of Alfonso VI at the Sabatini Gardens in Madrid (F. Corral, 1753).

Whatever truth may lie behind the romantic tales of Christian and Muslim, we know that Alfonso represented, in a remarkable way, the two great influences then shaping the character and civilization of Spain.

At the instigation, it is said, of his wife Constance, he brought the Cistercian Order into Spain, established them in Sahagun, chose a French Cistercian, Bernard, as the first Archbishop of Toledo after the reconquest on May 25, 1085. He married his daughters, Urraca, Teresa and Elvira to French princes, and in every way forwarded the spread of French influence — then the greatest civilizing force in Europe. He also drew Spain nearer to the Papacy. It was Alfonso's decision which established the Roman ritual in place of the old missal of Saint Isidore — the Mozarabic rite.

On the other hand he was very open to Arabic influence. He protected the Muslims among his subjects and struck coins with inscriptions in Arabic letters. He also admitted to his court and to his bed the refugee muslim princess Zaida of Seville.

Alfonso was defeated on October 23, 1086, at the battle of Zallaqa, at the hands of Yusuf ibn Tashfin, and Abbad III al-Mu'tamid, and was severely wounded in the leg.

[edit] Marriages and children

Alfonso married at least five times and had two mistresses and a fiancée:

* His first wife was Agnes of Aquitaine, daughter of William VIII of Aquitaine and his second wife Matoeda. They married in 1069 and scholarly opinion is divided whether she died or they divorced due to consanguinity, in the late 1070s. They had no children.

* Prior to his next marriage, (and perhaps prior to his first) he was betrothed to Agatha, one of the daughters of William I of England and Matilda of Flanders. Agatha died before the marriage could take place, reportedly out of mortification at the prospect of her marriage to Alfonso.

* His second wife, who he married in 1081, was Constance of Burgundy, the mother of Alfonso's eldest legitimate daughter Urraca.

* In 1093, he married Bertha, hypothesized to have been daughter of William I, Count Palatine of Burgundy. She had no children.

* Following her death, Alfonso married an Isabel, by whom he had two daughters, Elvira, (who married Roger II of Sicily) and, Sancha, (wife of Rodrigo González de Lara).

* His final wife was Beatrice. Some sources state she was related to Hisham III, the last Emir of Cordoba. Alternatively, it has been suggested she was niece of first wife Agnes, and daughter of William IX of Aquitaine. She had no children by Alfonso.

* He also had two known mistresses.

o By Jimena Muñoz, of a "most noble family", he had two illegitimate daughters, another Elvira (actually his eldest child) and Teresa.

o A second mistress was Zaida, said by Spanish Muslim sources to be daughter-in-law of Al Mutamid, the Muslim King of Seville. She was mother of Alfonso's only son, Sancho, who, though illegitimate, would be named his father's heir. Several modern sources have suggested that Zaida, baptised under the name of Isabel, is identical with Alfonso's wife, queen Isabel (or that she was a second queen Isabel who he married in succession to the first), but Bishop Pelayo of Oviedo, writing within a few years of Alfonso's death, gives an account of Alfonso's family naming a sole queen Isabel and mistress Zaida/Isabel without any indication that they were the same woman. Zaida/Isabel died in childbirth, but the date is unknown, and it is unclear whether the child being delivered was Sancho, Sancha (if she was identical to Queen Isabel), or an additional child, otherwise unknown.

Alfonso's designated successor, his son Sancho, was slain in the Battle of Ucles in 1108, making Alfonso's widowed daughter Urraca his heir. In order to strengthen her position as his successor, Alfonso began negotiations for her to marry her second cousin, Alfonso I of Aragon and Navarre, but died before the marriage could take place.

[Alfonso VI on a Manuscript:[1]

--------------------

Alfonso VI of Castile

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Alfonso VI (before June 1040 – June 29/July 1, 1109), nicknamed the Brave, was King of León from 1065 to 1109 and King of Castile from 1072 following his brother's death. As he was the first Alfonso to be King of Castile, he is sometimes referred to as Alfonso I of Castile. In 1077, he proclaimed himself "Emperor of All Hispania". Much romance has gathered around his name.

As the second and favorite son of King Ferdinand I of Castile and Princess Sancha of León, Alfonso was allotted León, while Castile was given to his eldest brother Sancho, and Galicia to his youngest brother García. Sancho was assassinated in 1072. García was dethroned and imprisoned for life the following year.

In the cantar de gesta The Lay of the Cid, he plays the part attributed by medieval poets to the greatest kings, and to Charlemagne himself. He is alternately the oppressor and the victim of heroic and self-willed nobles — the idealized types of the patrons for whom the jongleurs and troubadours sang. He is the hero of a cantar de gesta which, like all but a very few of the early Spanish songs, like the cantar of Bernardo del Carpio and the Infantes of Lara, exists now only in the fragments incorporated in the chronicle of Alfonso the Wise or in ballad form.

His flight from the monastery of Sahagún, where his brother Sancho endeavoured to imprison him, his chivalrous friendship for his host Almamun of Toledo, caballero aunque moro, "a knight although a Moor", the passionate loyalty of his vassal, Pero (Pedro) Ansúrez, and his brotherly love for his sister Urraca of Zamora, may owe something to the poet who took him as a hero.

They are the answer to the poet of the nobles who represented the king as having submitted to taking a degrading oath at the hands of Rodrigo Díaz de Vivar (El Cid) to deny intervention in his brother's death in the church of Santa Gadea at Burgos, and as having then persecuted the brave man who defied him.

When every allowance is made, Alfonso VI stands out as a strong man fighting as a king whose interest was law and order, and who was the leader of the nation in the reconquest. He impressed himself on the Arabs as a very fierce and astute enemy, but as a keeper of his word. A story of Muslim origin, which is probably no more historical than the oath of Santa Gadea, tells of how he allowed himself to be tricked by Ibn Ammar, the favourite of Al Mutamid, the King of Seville. They played chess for an extremely beautiful table and set of men, belonging to Ibn Ammar. Table and men were to go to the king if he won. If Ibn Ammar gained he was to name the stake. The latter did win and demanded that the Christian king should spare Seville. Alfonso kept his word.

Whatever truth may lie behind the romantic tales of Christian and Muslim, we know that Alfonso represented, in a remarkable way, the two great influences then shaping the character and civilization of Hispania.

At the instigation, it is said, of his wife Constance, he brought the Cistercian Order into Hispania, established them in Sahagun, chose a French Cistercian, Bernard, as the first Archbishop of Toledo, after the reconquest on May 25, 1085. He married his daughters, Urraca, Teresa and Elvira to French princes, and in every way forwarded the spread of French influence — then the greatest civilizing force in Europe. He also drew Hispania nearer to the Papacy. It was Alfonso's decision which established the Roman ritual in place of the old missal of Saint Isidore — the Mozarabic rite.

On the other hand he was very open to Arabic influence. He protected the Muslims among his subjects and struck coins with inscriptions in Arabic letters. He also admitted to his court and to his bed the refugee Muslim princess Zaida of Seville.

Alfonso was defeated on October 23, 1086, at the battle of Sagrajas, at the hands of Yusuf ibn Tashfin, and Abbad III al-Mu'tamid, and was severely wounded in the leg.

Marriages and children

Alfonso married at least five times and had two mistresses and a fiancée:

His first wife was Agnes of Aquitaine, daughter of William VIII of Aquitaine and his second wife Mateoda. They married in 1069 and scholarly opinion is divided whether she died or they divorced due to consanguinity, in the late 1070s. They had no children.

Prior to his second marriage, he is said to have been betrothed to Agatha, one of the daughters of William I of England and Matilda of Flanders. Agatha died before the marriage could take place, reportedly out of mortification at the prospect of marriage to Alfonso (1079).

His second wife, who he married in 1081, was Constance of Burgundy, the mother of Alfonso's eldest legitimate daughter Urraca.

In 1093, he married Bertha, daughter of William I, Count of Burgundy. She had no children and died in 1097.

Following her death, Alfonso married an Isabel, by whom he had two daughters, Elvira, (who married Roger II of Sicily) and, Sancha, (wife of Rodrigo González de Lara). Later sources say she was daughter of a king Luis of France, but this is chronologically impossible. Reilly speculated she was of Burgundian origin, yet others make her identical to mistress Zaida.

His final wife was Beatrice. Some sources state she was related to Hisham III, the last Emir of Cordoba. Alternatively, it has been suggested she was niece of first wife Agnes, and daughter of William IX of Aquitaine. She had no children by Alfonso.

He also had two known mistresses.

By Jimena Muñoz, of a "most noble family", he had two illegitimate daughters, another Elvira (actually his eldest child) and Teresa.

A second mistress was Zaida of Seville, said by Hispania Muslim sources to be daughter-in-law of Al Mutamid, the Muslim King of Seville. She was mother of Alfonso's only son, Sancho, who, though illegitimate, would be named his father's heir. Several modern sources have suggested that Zaida, baptised under the name of Isabel, is identical with Alfonso's wife, queen Isabel (or that she was a second queen Isabel who he married in succession to the first). Zaida/Isabel died in childbirth, but the date is unknown, and it is unclear whether the child being delivered was Sancho, Sancha (if Zaida was identical to Queen Isabel), or an additional child, otherwise unknown.

Alfonso's designated successor, his son Sancho, was slain in the Battle of Ucles in 1108, making Alfonso's widowed daughter Urraca his heir. In order to strengthen her position as his successor, Alfonso began negotiations for her to marry her second cousin, Alfonso I of Aragon and Navarre, but died before the marriage could take place.

--------------------

Alfonso VI (before June 1040 – June 29/July 1, 1109), nicknamed the Brave, was King of León from 1065 to 1109 and King of Castile from 1072 following his brother's death. As he was the first Alfonso to be King of Castile, he is sometimes referred to as Alfonso I of Castile. In 1077, he proclaimed himself "Emperor of All Hispania". Much romance has gathered around his name.

--------------------

Alfonso VI (before June 1040 – June 29/July 1, 1109), nicknamed the Brave, was King of León from 1065 to 1109 and King of Castile from 1072 following his brother's death. As he was the first Alfonso to be King of Castile, he is sometimes referred to as Alfonso I of Castile. In 1077, he proclaimed himself "Emperor of All Hispania". Much romance has gathered around his name.

--------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfonso_VI_of_Castile

Alfonso VI of León and Castile

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

(Redirected from Alfonso VI of Castile)

Jump to:navigation, search

Alfonso VI

Alfonso VI. A 12th century painting at the Cathedral of Santiago de Compostela.

Emperor of All Spain

Reign 1077–1109

Coronation 1077

Predecessor Ferdinand I

Successor Urraca & Alfonso

King of León

Reign 1065–1072

1072–1109

Predecessor Ferdinand I

Sancho II

Successor Sancho II

Urraca

King of Castile

Reign 1072–1109

Predecessor Sancho II

Successor Urraca

King of Galicia and Portugal

Reign 1071–1072 (jointly with Sancho)

1072–1109

Predecessor García II

Sancho II

Successor Sancho II

Urraca

Spouse Agnes of Aquitaine

Constance of Burgundy

Bertha

Isabel

Beatrice

Jimena Muñoz (mistress)

Zaida of Seville (mistress and perhaps wife)

Issue

Urraca

Sancho Alfónsez

Infanta Sancha

Elvira, Queen of Sicily

Elvira, Countess of Toulouse

Theresa, Countess of Portugal

House House of Jiménez

Father Ferdinand I of León and Castile

Mother Sancha of León

Born before June 1040

Compostela

Died June 29/July 1, 1109 (aged 68-69)

Toledo

Burial Sahagún, León, San Mancio chapel in the royal monastery of Santos Facundo y Primitivo

Alfonso VI (before June 1040 – June 29/July 1, 1109), nicknamed the Brave (El Bravo) or the Valiant, was King of León from 1065, King of Castile and de facto King of Galicia from 1072, and self-proclaimed "Emperor of all Spain". Much romance has gathered around his name.

Contents

[hide]

* 1 Accession

* 2 Strong fighter

* 3 Marriages and children

* 4 Ancestry

* 5 Notes

o 5.1 Portrayal in Media

* 6 External links

* 7 References

[edit] Accession

As the middle of three sons of King Ferdinand I of León and Sancha of León, Alfonso was allotted León when the kingdom was divided following his father's death, while Castile was given to his elder brother Sancho, Galicia to younger brother García, and sisters Urraca and Elvira given the cities of Zamora and Toro respectively. Each of the brothers was also assigned a sphere of influence among the Taifa states. Alfonso appears to have taken the first step in violating this division, in 1068 invading the Galician client Taifa of Badajoz and extorting tribute. In response, Sancho attacked and defeated Alfonso at Llantada but three years later in 1071 they joined forces against García. Sancho over-marched Alfonso's León to conquer García's northern lands, while Alfonso himself is found issuing charters in the southern part of the Galician realm. García fled to taifa Seville, and the remaining brothers then turned on each other. This conflict culminated in the Battle of Golpejera in early January, 1072. Sancho proved victorious and Alfonso himself was forced to flee to his client Taifa of Toledo. Later that year as Sancho was mopping up the last of the resistance, besieging his sister Urraca at Zamora in October, he was assassinated, opening the way for Alfonso to return to claim Sancho's crown. García, induced to return from exile, was imprisoned by Alfonso for life, leaving Alfonso in uncontested control of the reunited territories of their father. In recognition of this and his role as the preeminent Christian monarch on the peninsula, in 1077 he proclaimed himself "Emperor of all Spain".

In the cantar de gesta The Lay of the Cid, he plays the part attributed by medieval poets to the greatest kings, and to Charlemagne himself. He is alternately the oppressor and the victim of heroic and self-willed nobles — the idealized types of the patrons for whom the jongleurs and troubadours sang. He is the hero of a cantar de gesta which, like all but a very few of the early Spanish songs, like the cantar of Bernardo del Carpio and the Infantes of Lara, exists now only in the fragments incorporated in the chronicle of Alfonso the Wise or in ballad form.

His flight from the monastery of Sahagún (Safagún in Leonese language), where his brother Sancho endeavoured to imprison him, his chivalrous friendship for his host Almamun of Toledo, caballero aunque moro, "a knight although a Moor", the passionate loyalty of his vassal, Pero (Pedro) Ansúrez, and his brotherly love for his sister Urraca of Zamora, may owe something to the poet who took him as a hero.

They are the answer to the poet of the nobles who represented the king as having submitted to taking a degrading oath at the hands of Rodrigo Díaz de Vivar (El Cid) to deny intervention in his brother's death in the church of Santa Gadea at Burgos, and as having then persecuted the brave man who defied him.

[edit] Strong fighter

When every allowance is made, Alfonso VI stands out as a strong man fighting as a king whose interest was law and order, and who was the leader of the nation in the reconquest. He impressed himself on the Arabs as a very fierce and astute enemy, but as a keeper of his word. A story of Muslim origin, which is probably no more historical than the oath of Santa Gadea, tells of how he allowed himself to be tricked by Ibn Ammar, the favourite of Al Mutamid, the King of Seville. They played chess for an extremely beautiful table and set of men, belonging to Ibn Ammar. Table and men were to go to the king if he won. If Ibn Ammar gained he was to name the stake. The latter did win and demanded that the Christian king should spare Seville. Alfonso kept his word.

Whatever truth may lie behind the romantic tales of Christian and Muslim, we know that Alfonso represented the two great influences then shaping the character and civilization of Hispania.

Alfonso showed a greater degree of continental integration than his predecessors. The marital practices of the Iberian royalty had been largely endogamous, previously limiting choice of partners to the peninsula and Gascony, but Alfonso married French and Italian wives, while marrying daughters to French princes and an Italian king. His second marriage was arranged, in part, through the influence of the French Cluniac Order, and Alfonso is said to have introduced them into Hispania, established them in Sahagun and choosing a French Cluniac, Bernard, as the first Archbishop of Toledo after its 1085 conquest. He also drew his kingdom nearer to the Papacy, a move which brought French crusaders to aid him in the reconquest, and it was Alfonso's decision which established the Roman ritual in place of the old missal of Saint Isidore — the Mozarabic rite.

On the other hand he was very open to Arabic influence. He protected the Muslims among his subjects and struck coins with inscriptions in Arabic letters. He also admitted to his court and to his bed the refugee Muslim princess Zaida of Seville.

Alfonso was defeated on October 23, 1086, at the battle of Sagrajas, at the hands of Yusuf ibn Tashfin, and Abbad III al-Mu'tamid, and was severely wounded in the leg.

[edit] Marriages and children

Alfonso married at least five times and had two mistresses and a fiancée:

* In 1067, two brothers from Iberia are said to have competed for the hand of Agatha, one of the daughters of William I of England and Matilda of Flanders and formerly fiancee of Harold Godwinson. Alfonso proved successful, and was betrothed to Agatha. A nun at the time, Agatha is said to have prayed for death rather than being forced to marry Alphonso, and she died before the marriage could take place.

Epitaph of Jimena Muñoz, Alfonso's mistress and progenitor of the first Portuguese royal line

* In 1069, Alfonso married Agnes of Aquitaine, daughter of William VIII of Aquitaine and his second wife Mateoda. They last appear together in May 1077, and then Alfonso appears alone. This suggests that she had died, although Orderic Vitalis reports that in 1109 Alfonso's 'relict' Agnes remarried to Elias I of Maine, leading some to speculate that Alfonso and Agnes had divorced due to consanguinity. It seems more likely that Orderic gave the wrong name to Alfonso's widow, Beatrice. Agnes and Alfonso had no children.

* Apparently between his first and second marriages he formed a liaison with Jimena Muñoz, a "most noble" (nobilissima) concubine "derived from royalty" (real generacion). She appears to have been put aside, given land in Ulver, at the time of Alfonso's remarriage. By her Alfonso had two illegitimate daughters, Elvira and Teresa.

* His second wife, who he married by May 1080, was Constance of Burgundy, daughter of Robert I, Duke of Burgundy. This marriage initially faced papal opposition, apparently due to her kinship with Agnes. Her tenure as queen consort brought significant Cluniac influences into the kingdom. She died in September or October, 1093, the mother of Alfonso's eldest legitimate daughter Urraca, and of five other children who died in infancy.

* Either before or shortly after Constance's death, Alfonso formed a liaison with a second mistress, Zaida of Seville, said by Iberian Muslim sources to be daughter-in-law of Al Mutamid, the Muslim King of Seville. She fled the fall of Seville for Alfonso's kingdom in 1091, and soon became his lover, having by him Alfonso's only son, Sancho, who, though illegitimate, was apparently not born of an adulterous relationship, and hence born after the death of Constance. He would be named his father's heir. Several modern sources have suggested that Zaida, baptised under the name of Isabel, is identical with Alfonso's later wife, Queen Isabel (or that she was a second queen named Isabel whom he married in succession to the first). Zaida/Isabel died in childbirth, but the date is unknown, and it is unclear whether the child being delivered was Sancho, an additional illegitimate child, otherwise unknown, or legitimate daughter Elvira (if Zaida was identical to Queen Isabel).

* By April 1095, Alfonso married Bertha. Chroniclers report her as being from Tuscany, Lombardy, or alternatively, say she was French. Several theories have been put forward regarding her origin. Based on political considerations, proposals make her daughter of William I, Count of Burgundy or of Amadeus II of Savoy. She had no children and died in late 1099 (Alfonso first appears without her in mid-January 1100).

* Within months, by May 1100, Alfonso again remarried, to Isabel, having by her two daughters, Sancha, (wife of Rodrigo González de Lara), and Elvira, (who married Roger II of Sicily). A non-contemporary tomb inscription says she was daughter of a "king Louis of France", but this is chronologically impossible. It has been speculated that she was of Burgundian origin, but others conclude that Alfonso married his former mistress, Zaida, who had been baptized as Isabel. (In a novel twist, Reilly suggested that there were two successive queens named Isabel: first the French (Burgundian) Isabel, mother of Sancha and Elvira, with Alfonso only later marrying his mistress Zaida (Isabel), after the death of or divorce from the first Isabel.) Alfonso was again widowed in mid-1107.

* By May 1108, Alfonso married his last wife, Beatrice. She, as widow of Alfonso, is said to have returned home to France, but nothing else is known of her origin unless she is the woman Orderic named as "Agnes, daughter of William, Duke of Poitou", who as relict of Alfonso, (Agnetem, filiam Guillelmi, Pictavorum ducis, relictam Hildefonsi senioris, Galliciae regis), remarried to Elias of Maine. If this is the case, she is likely daughter of William IX of Aquitaine and niece of Alfonso's first wife. Beatrice had no children by Alfonso.

One other woman was reported by later sources to have been Alfonso's lover. The historian Abu Bakr Ibn al Sayraff, writing before 1161, stated that Alfonso abandoned Christianity for Zoroastrianism and had carnal relations with his sister Urraca, but then repented and was absolved, making pilgrimages to holy sites as penance. This has been followed by some later historians but others dismiss it as propaganda or misunderstanding.

Alfonso's designated successor, his son Sancho, was slain after being routed at the Battle of Uclés in 1108, making Alfonso's eldest legitimate daughter, the widowed Urraca as his heir. In order to strengthen her position as his successor, Alfonso began negotiations for her to marry her second cousin, Alfonso I of Aragon and Navarre, but died before the marriage could take place, Urraca succeeding.

Notes

[edit] Portrayal in Media

* Alfonso appears heavily in the PC game Age of Empires 2: The Conquers during the Spanish El Cid campaign. During the story line, Alfonso is portrayed as being jealous of El Cid's combat ability and popularity with the people, it is also suggested that Alfonso sends El Cid into battles hoping for him to be killed.

[edit] External links

* IX Centenary of Leon-Castilla's King Alfonso VI (1109-2009)

* Alfonso VI on a Manuscript:.

[edit] References

* This entry incorporates public domain text originally from the 1911 Encyclopedia Britannica.

* The Kingdom of León-Castilla under King Alfonso VI, 1065-1109, by Bernard F. Reilly (Princeton University Press, 1988): full text online at LIBRO.

* Portugal, A Country Study, by Louis R. Mortimer, ed. Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress, 1993.

Preceded by

Ferdinand I King of León

(first reign)

1065–1072 Succeeded by

Sancho II

Preceded by

García II King of Galicia (and Portugal)

(first reign)

jointly with Sancho II

1071–1072

Preceded by

Sancho II King of León (second reign),

Castile and Galicia

(and Portugal)

(second reign)

1072–1109 Succeeded by

Urraca

Vacant

Title last held by

Ferdinand I of León Emperor of Spain

1077 – 1109 Succeeded by

Urraca

suo jure

Alfonso I

jure uxoris

This page was last modified on 3 June 2010 at 04:53

--------------------

Alfonso VI (before June 1040 – June 29/July 1, 1109), nicknamed the Brave (El Bravo) or the Valiant, was King of León from 1065 to 1109, King of Galicia since 1073 and King of Castile since 1072 and following the death of his brother Sancho II in 1077 was the self-proclaimed "Emperor of all Spain". Much romance has gathered around his name.

Marriages and children

Alfonso married at least five times and had two mistresses and a fiancée:

* In 1067, two brothers from Iberia are said to have competed for the hand of Agatha, one of the daughters of William I of England and Matilda of Flanders and formerly fiancee of Harold Godwinson. Alfonso proved successful, and was betrothed to Agatha. A nun at the time, Agatha is said to have prayed for death rather than being forced to marry Alphonso, and she died before the marriage could take place.

* In 1069, Alfonso married Agnes of Aquitaine, daughter of William VIII of Aquitaine and his second wife Mateoda. They last appear together in May 1077, and then Alfonso appears alone. This suggests that she had died, although Orderic Vitalis reports that in 1109 Alfonso's 'relict' Agnes remarried to Elias I of Maine, leading some to speculate that Alfonso and Agnes had divorced due to consanguinity. It seems more likely that Orderic gave the wrong name to Alfonso's widow, Beatrice. Agnes and Alfonso had no children.

* Apparently between his first and second marriages he formed a liaison with Jimena Muñoz, a "most noble" (nobilissima) concubine "derived from royalty" (real generacion). She appears to have been put aside, given land in Ulver, at the time of Alfonso's remarriage. By her Alfonso had two illegitimate daughters, Elvira and Teresa.

* His second wife, who he married by May 1080, was Constance of Burgundy, daughter of Robert I, Duke of Burgundy. This marriage initially faced papal opposition, apparently due to her kinship with Agnes. Her reign as queen brought significant Cluniac influences into the kingdom. She died in September or October, 1093, the mother of Alfonso's eldest legitimate daughter Urraca, and of five other children who died in infancy.

* Either late in Constance's reign or shortly after her death, Alfonso formed a liaison with a second mistress, Zaida of Seville, said by Iberian Muslim sources to be daughter-in-law of Al Mutamid, the Muslim King of Seville. She fled the fall of Seville for Alfonso's kingdom in 1091, and soon became his lover, having by him Alfonso's only son, Sancho, who, though illegitimate was apparently not born of an adulterous relationship, and hence born after the death of Constance. He would be named his father's heir. Several modern sources have suggested that Zaida, baptised under the name of Isabel, is identical with Alfonso's later wife, queen Isabel (or that she was a second queen Isabel who he married in succession to the first). Zaida/Isabel died in childbirth, but the date is unknown, and it is unclear whether the child being delivered was Sancho, an additional illegitimate child, otherwise unknown, or legitimate daughter Elvira (if Zaida was identical to Queen Isabel).

* By April 1095, Alfonso married Bertha. Chroniclers report her as being from Tuscany, Lombardy, or alternatively, say she was French. Several theories have been put forward regarding her origin. Based on political considerations, proposals make her daughter of William I, Count of Burgundy or of Amadeus II of Savoy. She had no children and died in late 1099 (Alfonso first appears without her in mid-January 1100).

* Within months, by May 1100, Alfonso again remarried, to Isabel, having by her two daughters, Sancha, (wife of Rodrigo González de Lara), and Elvira, (who married Roger II of Sicily). A non-contemporary tomb inscription says she was daughter of a "king Louis of France", but this is chronologically impossible. It has been speculated that she was of Burgundian origin, but others conclude that Alfonso married his former mistress, Zaida, who had been baptized as Isabel. (In a novel twist, Reilly suggested that there were two successive queens named Isabel: first the French (Burgundian) Isabel, mother of Sancha and Elvira, with Alfonso only later marrying his mistress Zaida (Isabel), after the death of or divorce from the first Isabel.) Alfonso was again widowed in mid-1107.

* By May 1108, Alfonso married his last wife, Beatrice. She, as widow of Alfonso, is said to have returned home to France, but nothing else is known of her origin unless she is the woman Orderic named as "Agnes, daughter of William, Duke of Poitou", who as relict of Alfonso, (Agnetem, filiam Guillelmi, Pictavorum ducis, relictam Hildefonsi senioris, Galliciae regis), remarried to Elias of Maine. If this is the case, she is likely daughter of William IX of Aquitaine and niece of Alfonso's first wife. Beatrice had no children by Alfonso.

Alfonso's designated successor, his son Sancho, was slain after being routed at the Battle of Uclés in 1108, making Alfonso's eldest legitimate daughter, the widowed Urraca as his heir. In order to strengthen her position as his successor, Alfonso began negotiations for her to marry her second cousin, Alfonso I of Aragon and Navarre, but died before the marriage could take place, Urraca succeeding.

References

* This entry incorporates public domain text originally from the 1911 Encyclopedia Britannica.

* The Kingdom of León-Castilla under King Alfonso VI, 1065-1109, by Bernard F. Reilly (Princeton University Press, 1988): full text online at LIBRO.

* Portugal, A Country Study, by Louis R. Mortimer, ed. Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress, 1993.

--------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfonso_VI_of_Le%C3%B3n
--------------------
Born in the Spring; so born before June. Aka Alfonso 1st, King of Castile. Alfonso's 1st wife was Agnes. His 3rd wife was Berta & his 4th wife was Zayda.
--------------------
Alfonso VI (before June 1040 – June 29/July 1, 1109), nicknamed the Brave (El Bravo) or the Valiant, was King of León from 1065 to 1109, King of Galicia since 1073 and King of Castile since 1072 and following the death of his brother Sancho II in 1077 was the self-proclaimed "Emperor of all Spain".

As the second and favorite son of King Ferdinand I of León and Princess Sancha of León

Alfonso married at least five times and had two mistresses and a fiancée:

* In 1067, two brothers from Iberia are said to have competed for the hand of Agatha, one of the daughters of William I of England and Matilda of Flanders and formerly fiancee of Harold Godwinson. Alfonso proved successful, and was betrothed to Agatha. A nun at the time, Agatha is said to have prayed for death rather than being forced to marry Alphonso, and she died before the marriage could take place.

* In 1069, Alfonso married Agnes of Aquitaine, daughter of William VIII of Aquitaine and his second wife Mateoda. They last appear together in May 1077, and then Alfonso appears alone. This suggests that she had died, although Orderic Vitalis reports that in 1109 Alfonso's 'relict' Agnes remarried to Elias I of Maine, leading some to speculate that Alfonso and Agnes had divorced due to consanguinity. It seems more likely that Orderic gave the wrong name to Alfonso's widow, Beatrice. Agnes and Alfonso had no children.

* Apparently between his first and second marriages he formed a liaison with Jimena Muñoz, a "most noble" (nobilissima) concubine "derived from royalty" (real generacion). She appears to have been put aside, given land in Ulver, at the time of Alfonso's remarriage. By her Alfonso had two illegitimate daughters, Elvira and Teresa.

* His second wife, who he married by May 1080, was Constance of Burgundy, daughter of Robert I, Duke of Burgundy. This marriage initially faced papal opposition, apparently due to her kinship with Agnes. Her reign as queen brought significant Cluniac influences into the kingdom. She died in September or October, 1093, the mother of Alfonso's eldest legitimate daughter Urraca, and of five other children who died in infancy.

* Either late in Constance's reign or shortly after her death, Alfonso formed a liaison with a second mistress, Zaida of Seville, said by Iberian Muslim sources to be daughter-in-law of Al Mutamid, the Muslim King of Seville. She fled the fall of Seville for Alfonso's kingdom in 1091, and soon became his lover, having by him Alfonso's only son, Sancho, who, though illegitimate was apparently not born of an adulterous relationship, and hence born after the death of Constance. He would be named his father's heir. Several modern sources have suggested that Zaida, baptised under the name of Isabel, is identical with Alfonso's later wife, queen Isabel (or that she was a second queen Isabel who he married in succession to the first). Zaida/Isabel died in childbirth, but the date is unknown, and it is unclear whether the child being delivered was Sancho, an additional illegitimate child, otherwise unknown, or legitimate daughter Elvira (if Zaida was identical to Queen Isabel).

* By April 1095, Alfonso married Bertha. Chroniclers report her as being from Tuscany, Lombardy, or alternatively, say she was French. Several theories have been put forward regarding her origin. Based on political considerations, proposals make her daughter of William I, Count of Burgundy or of Amadeus II of Savoy. She had no children and died in late 1099 (Alfonso first appears without her in mid-January 1100).

* Within months, by May 1100, Alfonso again remarried, to Isabel, having by her two daughters, Sancha, (wife of Rodrigo González de Lara), and Elvira, (who married Roger II of Sicily). A non-contemporary tomb inscription says she was daughter of a "king Louis of France", but this is chronologically impossible. It has been speculated that she was of Burgundian origin, but others conclude that Alfonso married his former mistress, Zaida, who had been baptized as Isabel. (In a novel twist, Reilly suggested that there were two successive queens named Isabel: first the French (Burgundian) Isabel, mother of Sancha and Elvira, with Alfonso only later marrying his mistress Zaida (Isabel), after the death of or divorce from the first Isabel.) Alfonso was again widowed in mid-1107.

* By May 1108, Alfonso married his last wife, Beatrice. She, as widow of Alfonso, is said to have returned home to France, but nothing else is known of her origin unless she is the woman Orderic named as "Agnes, daughter of William, Duke of Poitou", who as relict of Alfonso, (Agnetem, filiam Guillelmi, Pictavorum ducis, relictam Hildefonsi senioris, Galliciae regis), remarried to Elias of Maine. If this is the case, she is likely daughter of William IX of Aquitaine and niece of Alfonso's first wife. Beatrice had no children by Alfonso.

Alfonso's designated successor, his son Sancho, was slain after being routed at the Battle of Uclés in 1108, making Alfonso's eldest legitimate daughter, the widowed Urraca as his heir. In order to strengthen her position as his successor, Alfonso began negotiations for her to marry her second cousin, Alfonso I of Aragon and Navarre, but died before the marriage could take place, Urraca succeeding.

[edit] Notes

[edit] External links

* IX Centenary of Leon-Castilla's King Alfonso VI (1109-2009)

* Alfonso VI on a Manuscript:.

References

* This entry incorporates public domain text originally from the 1911 Encyclopedia Britannica.

* The Kingdom of León-Castilla under King Alfonso VI, 1065-1109, by Bernard F. Reilly (Princeton University Press, 1988): full text online at LIBRO.

* Portugal, A Country Study, by Louis R. Mortimer, ed. Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress, 1993.

--------------------
=Afonso VI=

Rei de Leão, Castela, Toledo e Galiza; Imperador de toda a Hispânia

Afonso VI de Leão e Castela, o Bravo (1039 — 1 de Julho de 1109) foi, até à sua morte, rei de Leão desde 27 de Dezembro de 1065, rei de Castela desde 6 de Outubro de 1072, rei da Galiza desde 1073, intitulado Imperator totius Hispaniæ (imperador de toda Hispânia) desde 1077 e rei de Toledo desde 1085.

Afonso VI terá casado cinco vezes e ficado noivo uma outra vez, para além de ter tido diversas ligações extra-matrimoniais:

O primeiro casamento em 1069 foi com Inês da Aquitânia, filha de Guilherme VIII, Duque da Aquitânia, matrimónio do qual não houve descendência, sendo anulado em 1077 devido à esterilidade da esposa.

Afonso negociou um noivado com Águeda da Normandia, filha de Guilherme I da Inglaterra, mas com o falecimento desta em 1080 - segundo algumas versões por desgosto com a perspectiva de casar com Afonso - o projecto foi frustrado.

O segundo casamento foi em 8 de Maio de 1081 com Constança da Borgonha, bisneta de Hugo Capeto. Até à sua morte em 1093, ela terá tido seis filhos, dos quais se conhecem:

# Urraca (c. 1081-1126), dada em matrimónio a Raimundo da Borgonha e futura rainha de Leão e Castela
# Elvira (1082-?), morreu jovem, tal como seus demais irmãos.

O terceiro casamento se realizou em 25 de Novembro de 1093 com Berta de Borgonha-Macon, filha de Guilherme I, Conde da Borgonha, que morreria sem gerar descendência.

O quarto casamento foi em 1098 com Isabel. Alguns historiadores defendem que seria uma nobre cristã, outros que seria a moura Zaida, viúva do rei Al-Mutamid da taifa de Sevilha, baptizada Isabel. Uma ou outra, até à sua morte em 1107 dar-lhe-ia três filhos:

# Sancho Afonses (1098-1108), putativo herdeiro, morto na batalha de Uclés
# Elvira (1100-1135), casada com Rogério II da Sicília
# Sancha de Castela (1080 - 1134) casada com Rodrigo Gonzalez de Lara, conde de Liébana

O seu quinto e último casamento terá sido com Beatriz, possivelmente da Casa de Este ou da Aquitânia (talvez meio-irmã da primeira esposa dele, Inês), em 1108. Durante o ano de casados até à morte do monarca, não tiveram descendência.

De uma ligação ilegítima com Ximena Moniz, uma senhora galega, Afonso VI teve duas filhas bastardas:

# Elvira de Castela (1071-1151), casada com o conde cruzado Raimundo IV de Toulouse
# Teresa de Leão (c. 1080-1132), condessa de Portugal casada com Henrique de Borgonha, Conde de Portugal e mãe de D. Afonso Henriques

Fora do casamento, e de outra ligação ilegítima teve pelo menos uma filha:

# N… Afonso de Leão (1045 —?) que foi casada com Fernão Mendes de Antas filho de Mendo Alão, Senhor de Bragança.

in: Wikipédia, a enciclopédia livre <http://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Afonso_VI_de_Le%C3%A3o_e_Castela>

==Veja também:==
* Alfonso VI of León and Castile <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfonso_VI_of_Castile>
* El-Rei D. Afonso VI de LEÃO <http://www.barrosbrito.com/1943.html>
* Selected Families and Individuals <http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.com/~hwbradley/aqwg879.htm#14054>
--------------------
Nota: Rey de León 1065 - 1109, de Castilla 1072 - 1109, proclamado Emperador de España 1077. Fue derrotado por su hermano Sancho, heredero de Castilla, en las batallas de Llantada en 1068 y Golpejera en 1072, A raíz de esta batalla ALfonso fue desterrado a Toledo; pero a la muerte de Sancho en el cerco de Zamora en 1072, recuperó los reinos de León, Castilla y Galicia, y ocupó La Rioja.
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfonso_VI_of_Le%C3%B3n_and_Castile

--------------------
http://genealogy.euweb.cz/iberia/iberia7.html#A6
--------------------
'''''Predecessor Ferdinand I '''''Successor Urraca & Alfonso'''''

'''''King of León''''' '''''Reign: 1065–1072 1072–1109''''' '''''Predecessor Ferdinand I, Sancho II''''' '''''Successo Sancho II, Urraca'''''

'''''King of Castile''''' '''''Reign: 1072–1109''''' '''''Predecessor Sancho II''''' '''''Successor Urraca'''''

'''''King of Galicia and Portugal''''' '''''Reign: 1071–1072 (jointly with Sancho) 1072–1109''''' '''''Predecessor García II, Sancho II '''''Successor Sancho II, Urraca'''''

'''''Spouses: Agnes of Aquitaine, Constance of Burgundy, 3 more...'''''

'''''Issue'''''

'''''Urraca''''' '''''Sancho Alfónsez''''' '''''Infanta Sancha''''' '''''Elvira, Queen of Sicily''''' '''''Elvira, Countess of Toulouse '''''Theresa, Countess of Portugal'''''

'''''House'''''

'''''House of Jiménez'''''

'''''Father: Ferdinand I of León and Castile'''''

'''''Mother: Sancha of León'''''

'''''Alfonso VI nicknamed the Brave (El Bravo) or the Valiant, was King of León from 1065, King of Castile and de facto King of Galicia from 1072. After the conquest of Toledo he also self-proclaimed victoriosissimo rege in Toleto, et in Hispania et Gallecia Much romance has gathered around his name.'''''

'''''Family'''''

'''''Alfonso was the second son of Ferdinand the Great and Sancha of León, the daughter of Alfonso the Noble and sister to Bermudo III of León. His father was King of Castile-León and Emperor of Spain. Alfonso was allotted León when the kingdom was divided following his father's death. Castile was given to his elder brother Sancho and Galicia to his younger brother García.'''''

'''''Accession'''''

'''''Political situation in the Northern Iberian Peninsula around 1065:''''' '''''Garcia II´s domains (Galicia)''''' '''''Badajoz, owing tribute to Garcia''''' '''''Seville, owing tribute to Garcia''''' '''''Alfonso VI´s domains (León)''''' '''''Toledo, owing tribute to Alfonso''''' '''''Sancho II´s domains (Castile)''''' '''''Zaragoza, owing tribute to Sancho'''''

'''''As the middle of three sons of King Ferdinand I of León and Sancha of León, Alfonso was allotted León when the kingdom was divided following his father's death, while Castile was given to his elder brother Sancho, Galicia to younger brother García, and sisters Urraca and Elvira given the cities of Zamora and Toro respectively. Each of the brothers was also assigned a sphere of influence among the Taifa states. Alfonso appears to have taken the first step in violating this division, in 1068 invading the Galician client Taifa of Badajoz and extorting tribute. In response, Sancho attacked and defeated Alfonso at Llantada but three years later in 1071 they joined forces against García. Sancho over-marched Alfonso's León to conquer García's northern lands, while Alfonso himself is found issuing charters in the southern part of the Galician realm. García fled to taifa Seville, and the remaining brothers then turned on each other. This conflict culminated in the Battle of Golpejera in early January, 1072. Sancho proved victorious and Alfonso himself was forced to flee to his client Taifa of Toledo. Later that year as Sancho was mopping up the last of the resistance, besieging his sister Urraca at Zamora in October, he was assassinated, opening the way for Alfonso to return to claim Sancho's crown. García, induced to return from exile, was imprisoned by Alfonso for life, leaving Alfonso in uncontested control of the reunited territories of their father. In recognition of this and his role as the preeminent Christian monarch on the peninsula, in 1077 Alfonso proclaimed himself "Emperor of all Spain".'''''

'''''In the cantar de gesta The Lay of the Cid, he plays the part attributed by medieval poets to the greatest kings, and to Charlemagne himself. He is alternately the oppressor and the victim of heroic and self-willed nobles — the idealized types of the patrons for whom the jongleurs and troubadours sang. He is the hero of a cantar de gesta which, like all but a very few of the early Spanish songs, like the cantar of Bernardo del Carpio and the Infantes of Lara, exists now only in the fragments incorporated in the chronicle of Alfonso the Wise or in ballad form.'''''

'''''His flight from the monastery of Sahagún (Safagún in Leonese language), where his brother Sancho endeavoured to imprison him, his chivalrous friendship for his host Almamun of Toledo, caballero aunque moro, "a knight although a Moor", the passionate loyalty of his vassal, Pero (Pedro) Ansúrez, and his brotherly love for his sister Urraca of Zamora, may owe something to the poet who took him as a hero.'''''

'''''They are the answer to the poet of the nobles who represented the king as having submitted to taking a degrading oath at the hands of Rodrigo Díaz de Vivar (El Cid) to deny intervention in his brother's death in the church of Santa Gadea at Burgos, and as having then persecuted the brave man who defied him.'''''

'''''Strong fighter'''''

'''''When every allowance is made, Alfonso VI stands out as a strong man fighting as a king whose interest was law and order, and who wa

Not Married


from &quot;Our Folk&quot; by Albert D Hart, Jr.

Conquistador de Toledo, Cintra y Santarem, el de la jura de Santa Gadea ante El Cid
Rey de León (1065-1072)
Rey de Castilla y León (1072-1109)

Conquistador de Toledo, Cintra y Santarem, el de la jura de Santa Gadea ante El Cid
Rey de León (1065-1072)
Rey de Castilla y León (1072-1109)

Acceded Dec. 27, 1065. Poss died June 20, 1109. Emperor of Spain. Suceeded Castile Oct. 6, 1072. Conquered Toledo May 25, 1085, Madrid 1085, Lisbon 1093.

1 NAME Alfonso VI, "The Valiant" King Of /CASTILE & LEON/
1 MARR
2 DATE 1096 (DIV)

PED FROM ELIZABETH ANN KELSO - BORN 27 JUN 1926

Alfonso VI, byname ALFONSO THE BRAVE, Spanish ALFONSO EL BRAVO (b. beforeJune 1040--d. 1109, Toledo, Castile), king of Leon (1065-70) and king ofreunited Castile and Leon (1072-1109), who by 1077 had proclaimed himself"emperor of all Spain" (imperator totius Hispaniae). His oppression ofhis Muslim vassals led to the invasion of Spain by an Almoravid army fromNorth Africa (1086). His name is also associated with the national heroof Spain, Rodrigo Díaz de Vivar (El Cid), who was alternatively his enemyand indifferent supporter.

Alfonso was the second son of King Ferdinand I and his wife Sancha; hewas educated by Raimundo, later the bishop of Palencia, and by PedroAnsúrez, the count of Carrión. On his death in 1065, Ferdinand left toAlfonso the kingdom of Leon together with tribute paid by the Muslimkingdom of Toledo. These possessions aroused the envious hostility ofAlfonso's elder brother, Sancho II, who had inherited the kingdom deCastile and the tribute of Saragossa. Alfonso was defeated by his brotherin two battles; after the defeat at Llantada (1068) he managed to retainhis kingdom, but after that at Golpejera (1072) he was captured andexiled, living for a short while at the court of his vassal Ma`mun, theMuslim king of Toledo. Soon Alfonso's sister Urraca stirred up arebellion in Leon, and Sancho besieged her in the walled city of Zamora.During the siege, he was killed, perhaps at Urraca's instigation. She wasclearly on Alfonso's side, and some modern historians have even suggestedthat they had an incestuous relationship.

With Sancho's death, Alfonso recovered his own kingdom of Leon andinherited (1072) that de Castile. He also occupied Galicia, which Sanchohad kept from their younger brother García; Alfonso kept García in prisonuntil his death. A late story, in which it is alleged that Alfonso tookan oath in St. Gadea's Church, Burgos, that he had had no share inSancho's murder, probably reflects Castilian reluctance to accept him asking.

Alfonso's reign now entered on a period of success. He seized the Riojaand the Basque provinces and received the feudal homage of Sancho Ramírezfor the region of Navarre to the north of the Ebro River. By 1077 he hadassumed the title imperator totius Hispaniae, in which role otherChristian kings accepted him. He then began the conquest of Toledo and,after a long siege, occupied it in May 1085. This was a vital conquest,which recovered for Christian Spain one of the most important historical,strategic, and cultural centres of the peninsula, one that had been inthe possession of the Muslims since the early 8th century.

During this period Alfonso regularly exacted parias, heavy financialtributes, from the Muslim ta`ifah kingdoms in return for protectionagainst their other enemies. By thus depriving them of their wealth, hehoped to weaken them so that they would eventually cede theirindependence without fighting. As a result of his exactions, ChristianSpain was flooded with Muslim gold, which was spent on warfare anddonations to shrines, churches, and monasteries. The de Mand for tributecaused the ta`ifah kings to tax their subjects heavily, producing populardiscontent and disturbances and contributing to the weakness that causedthe surrender of Toledo. The Muslim ruler al-Mu'tamid of Seville took adesperate decision and called for the help of Yusuf ibn Tashufin, theAlmoravid (Berber) amir of North Africa, and his Saharan tribes. The Amirdisembarked in Algeciras at the end of July 1086 and a few months later,on October 23 at Zallaqah, near Badajoz, inflicted a terrible defeat onAlfonso VI. Alfonso appealed for help to the rest of Christendom, and asmall crusade was organized as a result; the crusaders did not reachAlfonso's lands but wasted their energies and resources in anunsuccessful siege of the Muslim outpost of Tudela.

The defeat at Zallaqah seriously lessened Alfonso's influence over theta`ifah kingdoms. It also led to a reconciliation with Rodrigo Díaz deVivar, El Cid. Their relationship had been difficult from the start,because El Cid had taken a prominent part in the campaigns of Sanchoagainst Alfonso; although El Cid at first attended Alfonso's court,suspicions deepened, and since 1081 he had been in the service of theMuslim king of Saragossa. Alfonso entrusted El Cid with the occupationand defense of eastern Spain, and Rodrigo carried out this task withgreat success. Between 1086 and 1109 Alfonso suffered constant defeat bythe Almoravids; in the last battle, that of Uclés in 1108, he lost hisonly son, Sancho. It was characteristic of his indomitable spirit that heat once arranged for his daughter, Urraca, to marry Alfonso I of Aragónso that the war against the Almoravids should be continued after hisdeath, even though it meant that Leon and Castile would be ruled by anAragonese prince.

Though his reign was politically unsuccessful, Alfonso VI carried out animportant cultural task by Europeanizing his dominions. Alfonso marriedConstance of Burgundy, and influences from across the Pyrenees showedthemselves in the introduction of the Romanesque style in art, theadoption of the Roman instead of the Mozarabic liturgy, the replacementof Visigothic by Carolingian script, and the energetic support thatAlfonso gave to Cluniac monasticism, as well

He became a sort of 'hero of the people', as a result of his resistance to Moorish invasion.[Cope.FTW]

Afonso VI de Leão e Castela, o Bravo (1039 — 1 de Julho de 1109) foi, até à sua morte, rei de Leão desde 27 de Dezembro de 1065, rei de Castela desde 6 de Outubro de 1072, rei da Galiza desde 1073, intitulado Imperator totius Hispaniæ (imperador de toda Hispânia) desde 1077 e rei de Toledo desde 1085.

SOURCE NOTES:
LUH6/1823 www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal07867

Not Married

859747666. Konge Alfons VI FERDINANDSON Leon mm (20007) was born in 1040. (20008) He was a Konge in 1072 in Leon og Kastiljen. (20009) av Leon og Kastiljen, konge fra 1072, samlet efterhånden Kastiljen, Asturien og Leon under sitt herredømme og erobret 1085 fra Maurerne det viktige Tolede, hvorved han fikk navnet "Spaniens Skjold". Året etter led han nederlag ved Sallaka, men var ellers heldig like til sin død. He died on 30 Jun 1109.(20010) Hans indre styre var fortreffelig. Rettspleien ble forbedret og byer blomstret frem. He was married to Jimena NUNIEZ.(20011) Hans første g.m. Hun ble straks etter giftemålet forskutt.

"HENRIQUES"; DUKE OF PORTUGAL; 1ST KING OF PORTUGAL

KING OF GALICIA (OR CASTILE) 1072-1109 & LEON 1063-1109

Alfonso VI (1040 - 1 de julio de 1109), rey de León desde el 27 de diciembre de 1065 y de Castilla desde el 6 de octubre de 1072, fue apodado el Bravo. Hijo de Fernando I el Magno, rey deLeón y de Castilla (1035-1065) y de Doña Sancha de León.
Alfonso VI en una pintura del siglo XII en la Catedral de Santiago de Compostela.
Alfonso VI en una pintura del siglo XII en la Catedral de Santiago de Compostela.

A la muerte de su padre en 1065 recibió el Reino de León, mientras que a su hermano primogénito Sancho le correspondió Castilla, y a su hermano menor, García, Galicia. Alfonso tuvo que enfrentarse desde muy pronto con los deseos expansionistas de
su hermano Sancho. La paz solo duró mientras vivió su madre, la reina Sancha, pero tras su muerte (1067) comenzaron las disputas. Sancho no aceptó el testamento de su padre y quiso apoderarse de los territorios que habían pasado a sus hermanos.
Destronó con facilidad a su hermano García, y después de las batallas de Llantada (1068) y Golpejera en 1072, Alfonso es hecho prisionero por Sancho, el cual se hace así con la corona leonesa.

Alfonso fue encarcelado en Burgos, de donde logra fugarse y se refugia bajo la protección del rey taifa de Toledo. El asesinato de Sancho II, a manos de un caballero portugués, Vellido Dolfos en el asedio de Zamora, le permitió recuperar el trono
y reclamar para sí el de Castilla, al no tener Sancho herederos. En este momento la leyenda sitúa la jura exculpatoria de su posible participación en la muerte de Sancho, que tomó El Cida Alfonso en la iglesia de Santa Gadea de Burgos (Juras de
Santa Gadea). Estos sucesos fueron aprovechados por García para recuperar el trono gallego, pero al año siguiente, en 1073, es nuevamente depuesto y encarcelado de por vida en el castillo de Luna (en donde falleció en 1090). A partir de este mom
ento Alfonso se dedicó a engrandecer sus territorios, fundamentalmente a costa de los musulmanes, combinando la presión militar y la extorsión económica. En 1076, tras la muerte del monarca navarro Sancho Garcés IV se anexionó los territorios de
Álava, Vizcaya, Guipúzcoa y La Bureba, adoptando en 1077 el título de Emperador.

Respecto a los musulmanes, en los primeros años de su reinado, Alfonso siguió con la práctica de explotación económica mediante el sistema de parias, consiguiendo que la mayor parte de los reinos de taifas de la España musulmana fuesen sus tribut
arios. Aprovechó el llamamiento de ayuda del rey taifa de Toledo contra un usurpador para poner sitio a Toledo, la cual cayó el 25 de mayo de 1085. Tras esta victoria, el monarca se tituló emperador de las dos religiones. La ocupación del reino d
e Toledo significó la incorporación a su reino del territorio situado entre el Sistema Central y el río Tajo. De esta forma, puede iniciar una gran actividad militar contra las taifas: Córdoba, Sevilla, Badajoz y Granada estaban directamente amen
azadas por Alfonso.
Estatua de Alfonso VI en los Jardines de Sabatini de Madrid (F. Corral, 1753).
Estatua de Alfonso VI en los Jardines de Sabatini de Madrid (F. Corral, 1753).

En estas circunstancias, los reyes de taifas decidieron pedir ayuda a los almorávides, los cuales desembarcan en la península. El emir almorávide Yusuf ibn Tasfin consiguió vencer a Alfonso VI en Zalaca, cerca de Badajoz (1086). Sitiaron varias v
eces Toledo, pero siempre sin conseguir tomarla. En los últimos años de su reinado, Alfonso se esforzó en impedir que los almorávides se consolidasen en la España musulmana, sin éxito. Los reinos de taifas del sur de España, y el de Denia, fueron
ocupados por los almorávides, que derrotaron de nuevo al monarca en Uclés (1108) donde además morirá Sancho Alfónsez, su único hijo varón. La corona terminaría por ello en manos de su hija, la infanta doña Urraca, aunque su otra hija, Teresa, se
quedaría con el Reino de Portugal.

Murió en Toledo y fue enterrado en el Monasterio de Sahagún, villa ésta muy apreciada por el monarca, a la cual concedió ciertos privilegios en el denominado Fuero de Sahagún. Así mismo, fortaleció enormemente al monasterio de la orden de San Ben
ito, alcanzándose bajo su reinado la mayor prosperidad de la villa y del monasterio, que bastantes años después llegaría a fundar incluso su propia universidad.

En el terreno cultural Alfonso VI fomentó la seguridad del Camino de Santiago e impulsó la introducción de la reforma cluniacense en los monasterios de León y de Castilla.

El monarca sustituyó la liturgia mozárabe o toledana por la romana.

Vida personal editar

—Primer Matrimonio: con Inés de Aquitania en 1069. Luego de 8 años de unión, en 1077, el rey obtiene la anulación de su boda alegando la esterilidad de Ines. Ella morirá un año más tarde,en 1078.

Tras su divorcio, entabla conversaciones para un posible matrimonio con Agatha de Normandía, hija del rey Guillermo I de Inglaterra, pero su muerte prematura en 1080 frustro el proyecto.

—Segundo Matrimonio: con Constanza de Borgoña en 1081. Ella era bisnieta de Hugo Capeto, rey de Francia, y además viuda, sin hijos, del conde Hugo II de Châlon. De este matrimonio (que duró hasta su muerte en 1093) nacieron 2 hijas:

* Urraca (n. 1081 - m. 1126), la cual acabaría siendo la sucesora de su padre en el trono castellano-leones

* Elvira (n. 1082 - m. joven).

—Tercer Matrimonio: con Berta de Borgoña-Maçon en 1093. Ella morirá en 1095 sin descendencia.

—Cuarto Matrimonio: con Zaida (bautizada Isabel), viuda del rey taifa de Toledo, Al-Mamun en 1098. De este matrimonio (que dura hasta la muerte de Zaida en 1107) nacieron 3 hijos:

* Sancho (n. 1098 - m. 1108), único hijo varón y presunto heredero del rey su prematura muerte en la batalla de Uclés aceleró el fin de su padre.

* Elvira (n. 1100 - m. 8.2.1135), casada con Roger II, rey de Sicilia.

* Sancha (n. 1101 - m. ?), casada con Rodrigo de Lara, conde de Liébana.

—Quinto Matrimonio: con Beatriz (su origen es dudoso, posible miembro de la casa de Este o de la casa ducal de Aquitania). Este enlace, celebrado en 1108, durará solo un año, hasta la muerte del rey.

Además, tuvo varias relaciones extra-matrimoniales, siendo la más notoria la que tuvo con:

Jimena Muñoz (o Nuñez de Guzmán según algunos historiadores), la cual le dio 2 hijas:

* Teresa de León (n. 1070 - m. 1132), condesa de Portugal como parte de su dote nupcial, casada con Enrique de Borgoña el hijo de ambos, Alfonso I Enríquez, será el primer rey de Portugal.

* Elvira (n. 1071 - m. 1151), casada con Raimundo IV, conde de Tolosa.

Alfonso VI, el conquistador de Toledo, el gran monarca europeizador, ve, en los últimos años de su reinado, cómo la gran obra política realizada se resquebraja ante el empuje almorávide ylas debilidades internas. Alfonso VI había asumido plename
nte la idea imperial leonesa y su apertura a la influencia europea le había hecho conocer las prácticas políticas feudales, que en la Francia de su tiempo, alcanzaban su expresión más acabada. En la conjunción de estos dos elementos, ve Claudio S
ánchez-Albornoz la explicación de la concesión iure hereditario -anómala en la tradición histórica castellanoleonesa- de los gobiernos de los Reino de Galicia y Portugal a sus dos yernos borgoñones, Raimundo, primer marido de Urraca, y Enrique, c
asado con Teresa. De esa decisión, arrancó, a la vuelta de unos años, la independencia portuguesa y la perspectiva de una Galicia independiente bajo Alfonso Raimúndez, que luego no se hizo realidad al convertirse éste en Alfonso VII de Castilla y
León.


Predecesor:
Fernando I de Castilla y León Rey de León
1065 - 1109 (interregno en 1072) Sucesor:
Urraca
Predecesor:
Sancho II Rey de Castilla
1072 - 1109 Sucesor:
Urraca1072–1096
Predecesor:
Sancho II de Castilla Rey de Galicia
1072 - 1096 Sucesor:
Raimundo de Borgoña
Predecesor:
Sancho II Conde de Portugal
1072 - 1093 Sucesor:
Teresa de León

214936916. Konge Alfons I. Henrik HENRIKSØN av Portogal was born in Jul 1094. (11559) He was a Hertug in 1112 in Portugal. (11560) He was a Konge in 1139 in Portugal. (11561) Han var den første som lot seg kalle konge av Portugal etter en glimrende seier over araberne ved Qurique. Sin første forfatning fikk landet av riksdagen Cortes de Lamego 1143, og 1147 flyttet residensen fra Coimbra til Lisbabon, etterat også den by var tatt fra araberne. He died in 1185.(11562) He was married to Mathilde AMADEUSDTR av Savoyen before 1146.(11563)

Afonso I, also called AFONSO HENRIQUES, byname AFONSO THE CONQUEROR,Portuguese AFONSO O CONQUISTADOR (b. 1109/11, Guimarães, Port.--d. Dec.6, 1185, Coimbra), the first king of Portugal (1139-85), who conqueredSantarém and Lisbon from the Muslims (1147) and secured Portugueseindependence from Leon (1139).

Alfonso VI, emperor of Leon, had granted the county of Portugal toAfonso's father, Henry of Burgundy, who successfully defended it againstthe Muslims (1095-1112). Henry married Alfonso VI's illegitimatedaughter, Teresa, who governed Portugal from the time of her husband'sdeath (1112) until her son Afonso came of age. Afonso was proclaimed soleruler of Portugal in 1128, but Teresa refused to cede her power toAfonso. His party prevailed in the Battle of São Mamede, near Guimarães(1128) and he defeated his mother's troops near Guimarães, making her atthe same time his prisoner. Though at first obliged as a vassal to submitto his cousin Alfonso VII of Leon, Afonso assumed the title of king in1139.

He also vanquished Alphonso Raymond de Castile, his mother's ally, andthus freed Portugal from dependence on the crown of Leon. Next turninghis arms against the Moors, he obtained on July 26, 1139, the victory ofOurique, and immediately after was proclaimed king by his soldiers. Heasembled the Cortes of the kingdom at Lamego, where he received the crownfrom the archbishop of Braganza; the assembly also declared that Portugalwas no longer a dependency of Leon. Alphonso wrested from the MoorsSantarém in 1146, and in 1147 he further captured and, availing himselfof the services of passing crusaders, successfully laid siege to Lisbon.He carried his frontiers beyond the Tagus River, annexing Beja in 1162and Évora in 1165; in attacking Badajoz, he was taken prisoner but thenreleased. and in 1167 he was made prisoner by the soldiers of the king ofLeon, and was obliged to surrender as his ransom almost all the conquestshe had made in Galicia. In 1184, in spite of his great age, he had stillsufficient energy to relieve his son, Sancho, who was besieged inSantarém by the Moors. He died shortly after. He married Mafalda of Savoyand associated his son, Sancho I, with his power. By the time of hisdeath in 1185, he had created a stable and independent monarchy. Alphonsowas a man of gigantic stature, being, according to some authors, 7 ft.tall. He is revered as a saint by the Portuguese, both on account of hispersonal character and as the founder of their kingdom. [EncyclopaediaBritannica CD '97]

(in Portuguese, Alfonso Henriques) As an infant, he inherited his
father's title, and in 1128 he defeated his mother in battle. He began a
long struggle for independence from León soon thereafter; he won this war
in 1139. On July 25 of that year he also won a decisive victory over the
Moors at Qurique and proclaimed himself king of Portugal. His subsequent
victories over the Moors included the capture of Santarém in 1147, and,
with the help of Crusaders en route to the Holy Land, the capture of
Lisbon in October of that year.

Alfonso VI, 1030-1109, Spanish king of Leon (1065-1109) and Castile (1072-1109). He inherited Leon from his father, Ferdinand I. Defeated by his brother Sancho II of Castile, he fled to the court of Al-Mamun, Moorish ruler of Toledo. After Sancho�s assassination (1072) he succeeded to the throne of Castile and took Galicia from his brother García (1073), thus becoming the most powerful Christian ruler in Spain. He encouraged Christians in Moslem lands to migrate north. He raided Moslem territory and penetrated as far as Tarifa. After the conquest of strategic Toledo (1085), he took many other cities and reached the line of the Tagus. Aroused by his advance, Abbad III and his Moslem allies called to their aid the Almoravide Yusuf ibn Tashufin, who defeated Alfonso in 1086. Again the Spanish lost in 1108; Alfonso�s only son died in the battle. Alfonso�s reign gave a great crusading impulse to the reconquest of Spain and was notable for the exploits of the Cid. His court at Toledo became the center of cultural relations between Moslem and Christian Spain, while French influence also grew strong through his many French followers. At this time the Cluniac reform was introduced into Spain. Alfonso was succeeded by his daughter Urraca. [The Illustrated Columbia Encyclopedia, 1969]

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Leon & Castile (27 DEC 1065 - 1109), 4 marriages + 1 out-of-wedlock
kid (total 7 children). Inherited Asturias & Leon (NOT Castile) from father,
Ferdinand the Great 1065 (LUH). Warred w/ bro. Sancho II (King of Castile)
& obtained crown of Castile 1071 on Sancho's death. Recovered Toledo from
the Moors. 1095 erected Portugal into separate Earldom.

Alfonso VI (before June 1040 - June 29/July 1, 1109), nicknamed the Brave (El Bravo) or the Valiant, was King of León from 1065 to 1109 and King of Castile from 1072 following the death of his brother Sancho II. In 1077 he proclaimed himself "Emperor of all Spain". Much romance has gathered around his name.

Early life
As the second and favorite son of King Ferdinand I of León and Princess Sancha of León, Alfonso was allotted León, while Castile was given to his eldest brother Sancho, and Galicia to his youngest brother García. Sancho was assassinated in 1072. García was dethroned and imprisoned for life the following year.

In the cantar de gesta The Lay of the Cid, he plays the part attributed by medieval poets to the greatest kings, and to Charlemagne himself. He is alternately the oppressor and the victim of heroic and self-willed nobles - the idealized types of the patrons for whom the jongleurs and troubadours sang. He is the hero of a cantar de gesta which, like all but a very few of the early Spanish songs, like the cantar of Bernardo del Carpio and the Infantes of Lara, exists now only in the fragments incorporated in the chronicle of Alfonso the Wise or in ballad form.

His flight from the monastery of Sahagún (Safagún in Leonese language), where his brother Sancho endeavoured to imprison him, his chivalrous friendship for his host Almamun of Toledo, caballero aunque moro, "a knight although a Moor", the passionate loyalty of his vassal, Pero (Pedro) Ansúrez, and his brotherly love for his sister Urraca of Zamora, may owe something to the poet who took him as a hero.

They are the answer to the poet of the nobles who represented the king as having submitted to taking a degrading oath at the hands of Rodrigo Díaz de Vivar (El Cid) to deny intervention in his brother's death in the church of Santa Gadea at Burgos, and as having then persecuted the brave man who defied him.


Strong fighter
When every allowance is made, Alfonso VI stands out as a strong man fighting as a king whose interest was law and order, and who was the leader of the nation in the reconquest. He impressed himself on the Arabs as a very fierce and astute enemy, but as a keeper of his word. A story of Muslim origin, which is probably no more historical than the oath of Santa Gadea, tells of how he allowed himself to be tricked by Ibn Ammar, the favourite of Al Mutamid, the King of Seville. They played chess for an extremely beautiful table and set of men, belonging to Ibn Ammar. Table and men were to go to the king if he won. If Ibn Ammar gained he was to name the stake. The latter did win and demanded that the Christian king should spare Seville. Alfonso kept his word.

Whatever truth may lie behind the romantic tales of Christian and Muslim, we know that Alfonso represented, in a remarkable way, the two great influences then shaping the character and civilization of Hispania.

At the instigation, it is said, of his wife Constance, he brought the Cluniac Order into Hispania, established them in Sahagun, chose a French Cluniac, Bernard, as the first Archbishop of Toledo, after the reconquest on May 25, 1085. He married his daughters, Urraca, Teresa and Elvira to French princes, and in every way forwarded the spread of French influence - then the greatest civilizing force in Europe. He also drew Hispania nearer to the Papacy. It was Alfonso's decision which established the Roman ritual in place of the old missal of Saint Isidore - the Mozarabic rite.

On the other hand he was very open to Arabic influence. He protected the Muslims among his subjects and struck coins with inscriptions in Arabic letters. He also admitted to his court and to his bed the refugee Muslim princess Zaida of Seville.

Alfonso was defeated on October 23, 1086, at the battle of Sagrajas, at the hands of Yusuf ibn Tashfin, and Abbad III al-Mu'tamid, and was severely wounded in the leg.


Marriages and children
Alfonso married at least five times and had two mistresses and a fiancée:

In 1067, two brothers from Iberia are said to have competed for the hand of Agatha, one of the daughters of William I of England and Matilda of Flanders and formerly fiancee of Harold Godwinson. Alfonso proved successful, and was betrothed to Agatha. A nun at the time, Agatha is said to have prayed for death rather than being forced to marry Alphonso, and she died before the marriage could take place.
In 1069, Alfonso married Agnes of Aquitaine, daughter of William VIII of Aquitaine and his second wife Mateoda. They last appear together in May 1077, and then Alfonso appears alone. This suggests that she had died, although Orderic Vitalis reports that in 1109 Alfonso's 'relict' Agnes remarried to Elias I of Maine, leading some to speculate that Alfonso and Agnes had divorced due to consanguinity. It seems more likely that Orderic gave the wrong name to Alfonso's widow, Beatrice. Agnes and Alfonso had no children.
Apparently between his first and second marriages he formed a liaison with Jimena Muñoz, a "most noble" (nobilissima) concubine "derived from royalty" (real generacion). She appears to have been put aside, given land in Ulver, at the time of Alfonso's remarriage. By her Alfonso had two illegitimate daughters, Elvira and Teresa.
His second wife, who he married by May 1080, was Constance of Burgundy, daughter of Robert I, Duke of Burgundy. This marriage initially faced papal opposition, apparently due to her kinship with Agnes. Her reign as queen brought significant Cluniac influences into the kingdom. She died in September or October, 1093, the mother of Alfonso's eldest legitimate daughter Urraca, and of five other children who died in infancy.
Either late in Constance's reign or shortly after her death, Alfonso formed a liaison with a second mistress, Zaida of Seville, said by Iberian Muslim sources to be daughter-in-law of Al Mutamid, the Muslim King of Seville. She fled the fall of Seville for Alfonso's kingdom in 1091, and soon became his lover, having by him Alfonso's only son, Sancho, who, though illegitimate was apparently not born of an adulterous relationship, and hence born after the death of Constance. He would be named his father's heir. Several modern sources have suggested that Zaida, baptised under the name of Isabel, is identical with Alfonso's later wife, queen Isabel (or that she was a second queen Isabel who he married in succession to the first). Zaida/Isabel died in childbirth, but the date is unknown, and it is unclear whether the child being delivered was Sancho, an additional illegitimate child, otherwise unknown, or legitimate daughter Elvira (if Zaida was identical to Queen Isabel).
By April 1095, Alfonso married Bertha. Chroniclers report her as being from Tuscany, Lombardy, or alternatively, say she was French. Several theories have been put forward regarding her origin. Based on political considerations, proposals make her daughter of William I, Count of Burgundy or of Amadeus II of Savoy. She had no children and died in late 1099 (Alfonso first appears without her in mid-January 1100).
Within months, by May 1100, Alfonso again remarried, to Isabel, having by her two daughters, Sancha, (wife of Rodrigo González de Lara), and Elvira, (who married Roger II of Sicily). A non-contemporary tomb inscription says she was daughter of a "king Louis of France", but this is chronologically impossible. It has been speculated that she was of Burgundian origin, but others conclude that Alfonso married his former mistress, Zaida, who had been baptized as Isabel. (In a novel twist, Reilly suggested that there were two successive queens named Isabel: first the French (Burgundian) Isabel, mother of Sancha and Elvira, with Alfonso only later marrying his mistress Zaida (Isabel), after the death of or divorce from the first Isabel.) Alfonso was again widowed in mid-1107.
By May 1108, Alfonso married his last wife, Beatrice. She, as widow of Alfonso, is said to have returned home to France, but nothing else is known of her origin unless she is the woman Orderic named as "Agnes, daughter of William, Duke of Poitou", who as relict of Alfonso, (Agnetem, filiam Guillelmi, Pictavorum ducis, relictam Hildefonsi senioris, Galliciae regis), remarried to Elias of Maine. If this is the case, she is likely daughter of William IX of Aquitaine and niece of Alfonso's first wife. Beatrice had no children by Alfonso.
Alfonso's designated successor, his son Sancho, was slain after being routed at the Battle of Uclés in 1108, making Alfonso's eldest legitimate daughter, the widowed Urraca as his heir. In order to strengthen her position as his successor, Alfonso began negotiations for her to marry her second cousin, Alfonso I of Aragon and Navarre, but died before the marriage could take place, Urraca succeeding.


Notes

[edit] External links
IX Centenary of Leon-Castilla's King Alfonso VI (1109-2009)
Alfonso VI on a Manuscript:.

References
This entry incorporates public domain text originally from the 1911 Encyclopedia Britannica.
The Kingdom of León-Castilla under King Alfonso VI, 1065-1109, by Bernard F. Reilly (Princeton University Press, 1988): full text online at LIBRO.
Portugal, A Country Study, by Louis R. Mortimer, ed. Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress, 1993.

In 1085 he captured Toledo from the Moors. He was defeated by the Moors at Zalaca in 1086 and 1108.

In 1085 he captured Toledo from the Moors. He was defeated by the Moors at Zalaca in 1086 and 1108.

REY ALFONSO VI DE CASTILLA Y LEON Nació in 1030. He Murió in 1109. Subió al trono de León en 1065. Destronado por su hermano Sancho II de Castilla, huyó a Toledo, donde permaneció hasta la muerte del usurpador (1072). Después de jurar en Santa Gadea, en presencia del Cid, que no había tomado parte en la muerte de su hermano, volvió a subir al trono. No dejó de guerrear contra los moros; apoderose de Toledo en 1085, pero vencido en Zalaza, no pudo conservar Valencia, que tomâo el Cid en 1092. Dejó el trono a su hija Urraca.-

1 NAME the Valiant //
2 GIVN the Valiant
2 SURN
2 NICK the Valiant

1 NAME the Valiant //
2 GIVN the Valiant
2 SURN
2 NICK the Valiant

1 NAME the Valiant //
2 GIVN the Valiant
2 SURN
2 NICK the Valiant

Styled himself as Emperor of all Hispania.
Shaped the Character and civilization of Spain.
Had very bad luck with his wives dying on him. Thus he had many of them.
His romance with Zaida, baptised, Isabel and the children she bore him is still quite controversial.
He never could get along with his Moslem Vassals and as a result they called in the Berbers in an attempt to teach him some civility.
Aka: El Batallador.

200px-AfonsoI-P
http://trees.ancestry.com/rd?f=image&guid=e36c7719-8cb0-4527-a3a0-97d617622eef&tid=1013592&pid=-2015283647

Source #1: Douglas Richardson, "Plantagenet Ancestry: A Study in Colonial and Medieval Families" (Baltimore, Maryland: Genealogical Publishing Company, Inc., 2004), pp. 190-191.

Alfonso VI, byname ALFONSO THE BRAVE, Spanish ALFONSO EL BRAVO (b. before June 1040--d. 1109, Toledo, Castile), king of Leon (1065-70) and king of reunited Castile and Leon (1072-1109), who by 1077 had proclaimed himself "emperor of all Spain" (imperator totius Hispaniae). His oppression of his Muslim vassals led to the invasion of Spain by an Almoravid army from North Africa (1086). His name is also associated withthe national hero of Spain, Rodrigo Díaz de Vivar (El Cid), who was alternatively his enemy and indifferent supporter.
Alfonso was the second son of King Ferdinand I and his wife Sancha; he was educated by Raimundo, later the bishop of Palencia, and by Pedro Ansúrez, the count of Carrión. On his death in 1065, Ferdinand leftto Alfonso the kingdom of Leon together with tribute paid by the Muslim kingdom of Toledo. These possessions aroused the envious hostility of Alfonso's elder brother, Sancho II, who had inherited the kingdom of Castile and the tribute of Saragossa. Alfonso was defeated by his brother in two battles; after the defeat at Llantada (1068) he managed to retain his kingdom, but after that at Golpejera (1072) he was captured and exiled, living for a short while at the court of his vassal Ma
mun, the Muslim king of Toledo. Soon Alfonso's sister Urraca stirred up a rebellion in Leon, and Sancho besieged her in the walled city of Zamora. During the siege, he was killed, perhaps at Urraca's instigation. She was clearly on Alfonso's side, and some modern historians haveeven suggested that they had an incestuous relationship.
With Sancho's death, Alfonso recovered his own kingdom of Leon and inherited (1072) that of Castile. He also occupied Galicia, which Sanchohad kept from their younger brother García; Alfonso kept García in prison until his death. A late story, in which it is alleged that Alfonso took an oath in St. Gadea's Church, Burgos, that he had had no share in Sancho's murder, probably reflects Castilian reluctance to accept him as king.
Alfonso's reign now entered on a period of success. He seized the Rioja and the Basque provinces and received the feudal homage of Sancho Ramírez for the region of Navarre to the north of the Ebro River. By 1077 he had assumed the title imperator totius Hispaniae, in which role other Christian kings accepted him. He then began the conquest of Toledo and, after a long siege, occupied it in May 1085. This was a vital conquest, which recovered for Christian Spain one of the most important historical, strategic, and cultural centres of the peninsula, one that had been in the possession of the Muslims since the early 8th century.
During this period Alfonso regularly exacted parias, heavy financial tributes, from the Muslim ta
ifah kingdoms in return for protection against their other enemies. By thus depriving them of their wealth, he hoped to weaken them so that they would eventually cede their independence without fighting. Asa result of his exactions, Christian Spain was flooded with Muslim gold, which was spent on warfare and donations to shrines, churches, andmonasteries. The demand for tribute caused the ta
ifah kings to tax their subjects heavily, producing popular discontent and disturbances and contributing to the weakness that caused the surrender of Toledo. The Muslim ruler al-Mu'tamid of Seville took a desperate decision and called for the help of Yusuf ibn Tashufin, the Almoravid (Berber) amir of North Africa, and his Saharan tribes. The Amirdisembarked in Algeciras at the end of July 1086 and a few months later, on October 23 at Zallaqah, near Badajoz, inflicted a terrible defeat on Alfonso VI. Alfonso appealed for help to the rest of Christendom, and a small crusade was organized as a result; the crusaders did not reach Alfonso's lands but wasted their energies and resources in anunsuccessful siege of the Muslim outpost of Tudela.
The defeat at Zallaqah seriously lessened Alfonso's influence over the ta
ifah kingdoms. It also led to a reconciliation with Rodrigo Díaz de Vivar, El Cid. Their relationship had been difficult from the start, because El Cid had taken a prominent part in the campaigns of Sancho against Alfonso; although El Cid at first attended Alfonso's court, suspicions deepened, and since 1081 he had been in the service of the Muslim king of Saragossa. Alfonso entrusted El Cid with the occupation anddefense of eastern Spain, and Rodrigo carried out this task with great success. Between 1086 and 1109 Alfonso suffered constant defeat by the Almoravids; in the last battle, that of Uclés in 1108, he lost hisonly son, Sancho. It was characteristic of his indomitable spirit that he at once arranged for his daughter, Urraca, to marry Alfonso I ofAragon so that the war against the Almoravids should be continued after his death, even though it meant that Leon and Castile would be ruled by an Aragonese prince.
Though his reign was politically unsuccessful, Alfonso VI carried outan important cultural task by Europeanizing his dominions. Alfonso married Constance of Burgundy, and influences from across the Pyrenees showed themselves in the introduction of the Romanesque style in art, the adoption of the Roman instead of the Mozarabic liturgy, the replacement of Visigothic by Carolingian script, and the energetic support that Alfonso gave to Cluniac monasticism, as well as in his reconstruction and safeguarding of the pilgrim road to Santiago.

Alfonso VI, byname ALFONSO THE BRAVE, Spanish ALFONSO EL BRAVO (b. before June 1040--d. 1109, Toledo, Castile), king of Leon (1065-70) and king of reunited Castile and Leon (1072-1109), who by 1077 had proclaimed himself "emperor of all Spain" (imperator totius Hispaniae). His oppression of his Muslim vassals led to the invasion of Spain by an Almoravid army from North Africa (1086). His name is also associated withthe national hero of Spain, Rodrigo Díaz de Vivar (El Cid), who was alternatively his enemy and indifferent supporter.
Alfonso was the second son of King Ferdinand I and his wife Sancha; he was educated by Raimundo, later the bishop of Palencia, and by Pedro Ansúrez, the count of Carrión. On his death in 1065, Ferdinand leftto Alfonso the kingdom of Leon together with tribute paid by the Muslim kingdom of Toledo. These possessions aroused the envious hostility of Alfonso's elder brother, Sancho II, who had inherited the kingdom of Castile and the tribute of Saragossa. Alfonso was defeated by his brother in two battles; after the defeat at Llantada (1068) he managed to retain his kingdom, but after that at Golpejera (1072) he was captured and exiled, living for a short while at the court of his vassal Ma
mun, the Muslim king of Toledo. Soon Alfonso's sister Urraca stirred up a rebellion in Leon, and Sancho besieged her in the walled city of Zamora. During the siege, he was killed, perhaps at Urraca's instigation. She was clearly on Alfonso's side, and some modern historians haveeven suggested that they had an incestuous relationship.
With Sancho's death, Alfonso recovered his own kingdom of Leon and inherited (1072) that of Castile. He also occupied Galicia, which Sanchohad kept from their younger brother García; Alfonso kept García in prison until his death. A late story, in which it is alleged that Alfonso took an oath in St. Gadea's Church, Burgos, that he had had no share in Sancho's murder, probably reflects Castilian reluctance to accept him as king.
Alfonso's reign now entered on a period of success. He seized the Rioja and the Basque provinces and received the feudal homage of Sancho Ramírez for the region of Navarre to the north of the Ebro River. By 1077 he had assumed the title imperator totius Hispaniae, in which role other Christian kings accepted him. He then began the conquest of Toledo and, after a long siege, occupied it in May 1085. This was a vital conquest, which recovered for Christian Spain one of the most important historical, strategic, and cultural centres of the peninsula, one that had been in the possession of the Muslims since the early 8th century.
During this period Alfonso regularly exacted parias, heavy financial tributes, from the Muslim ta
ifah kingdoms in return for protection against their other enemies. By thus depriving them of their wealth, he hoped to weaken them so that they would eventually cede their independence without fighting. Asa result of his exactions, Christian Spain was flooded with Muslim gold, which was spent on warfare and donations to shrines, churches, andmonasteries. The demand for tribute caused the ta
ifah kings to tax their subjects heavily, producing popular discontent and disturbances and contributing to the weakness that caused the surrender of Toledo. The Muslim ruler al-Mu'tamid of Seville took a desperate decision and called for the help of Yusuf ibn Tashufin, the Almoravid (Berber) amir of North Africa, and his Saharan tribes. The Amirdisembarked in Algeciras at the end of July 1086 and a few months later, on October 23 at Zallaqah, near Badajoz, inflicted a terrible defeat on Alfonso VI. Alfonso appealed for help to the rest of Christendom, and a small crusade was organized as a result; the crusaders did not reach Alfonso's lands but wasted their energies and resources in anunsuccessful siege of the Muslim outpost of Tudela.
The defeat at Zallaqah seriously lessened Alfonso's influence over the ta
ifah kingdoms. It also led to a reconciliation with Rodrigo Díaz de Vivar, El Cid. Their relationship had been difficult from the start, because El Cid had taken a prominent part in the campaigns of Sancho against Alfonso; although El Cid at first attended Alfonso's court, suspicions deepened, and since 1081 he had been in the service of the Muslim king of Saragossa. Alfonso entrusted El Cid with the occupation anddefense of eastern Spain, and Rodrigo carried out this task with great success. Between 1086 and 1109 Alfonso suffered constant defeat by the Almoravids; in the last battle, that of Uclés in 1108, he lost hisonly son, Sancho. It was characteristic of his indomitable spirit that he at once arranged for his daughter, Urraca, to marry Alfonso I ofAragon so that the war against the Almoravids should be continued after his death, even though it meant that Leon and Castile would be ruled by an Aragonese prince.
Though his reign was politically unsuccessful, Alfonso VI carried outan important cultural task by Europeanizing his dominions. Alfonso married Constance of Burgundy, and influences from across the Pyrenees showed themselves in the introduction of the Romanesque style in art, the adoption of the Roman instead of the Mozarabic liturgy, the replacement of Visigothic by Carolingian script, and the energetic support that Alfonso gave to Cluniac monasticism, as well as in his reconstruction and safeguarding of the pilgrim road to Santiago.

Alfonso ?den Modige? var
konge av Leon 1065 - 1109 og
konge av Castilla 1072 - 1109.
Han samlet etter hvert Castilla, Asturien og Leon under sitt herredømme.
Alfonso erobret det viktige Toledo fra Maurerne i 1085, hvorved han fikk navnet
?Spaniens Skjold?. Året etter led han nederlag ved Sallaka, men var ellers heldig like til sin
død.
Hans indre styre var fortreffelig. Rettspleien ble forbedret og byer blomstret frem.
Jimena var hans konkibine, men ble snart forskutt. Han var gift
1. gang i 1074 med Inez av Aquitanien,
2. gang i 1080 med Constance av Burgund,
3. gang med Berta av Burgund,
4. gang med Isabel av Este og
5. gang med Beatrice av Este.

Alfonso VI, byname ALFONSO THE BRAVE, Spanish ALFONSO EL BRAVO (b. before June 1040--d. 1109, Toledo, Castile), king of Leon (1065-70) and king of reunited Castile and Leon (1072-1109), who by 1077 had proclaimed himself "emperor of all Spain" (imperator totius Hispaniae). His oppression of his Muslim vassals led to the invasion of Spain by an Almoravid army from North Africa (1086). His name is also associated withthe national hero of Spain, Rodrigo Díaz de Vivar (El Cid), who was alternatively his enemy and indifferent supporter.
Alfonso was the second son of King Ferdinand I and his wife Sancha; he was educated by Raimundo, later the bishop of Palencia, and by Pedro Ansúrez, the count of Carrión. On his death in 1065, Ferdinand leftto Alfonso the kingdom of Leon together with tribute paid by the Muslim kingdom of Toledo. These possessions aroused the envious hostility of Alfonso's elder brother, Sancho II, who had inherited the kingdom of Castile and the tribute of Saragossa. Alfonso was defeated by his brother in two battles; after the defeat at Llantada (1068) he managed to retain his kingdom, but after that at Golpejera (1072) he was captured and exiled, living for a short while at the court of his vassal Ma
mun, the Muslim king of Toledo. Soon Alfonso's sister Urraca stirred up a rebellion in Leon, and Sancho besieged her in the walled city of Zamora. During the siege, he was killed, perhaps at Urraca's instigation. She was clearly on Alfonso's side, and some modern historians haveeven suggested that they had an incestuous relationship.
With Sancho's death, Alfonso recovered his own kingdom of Leon and inherited (1072) that of Castile. He also occupied Galicia, which Sanchohad kept from their younger brother García; Alfonso kept García in prison until his death. A late story, in which it is alleged that Alfonso took an oath in St. Gadea's Church, Burgos, that he had had no share in Sancho's murder, probably reflects Castilian reluctance to accept him as king.
Alfonso's reign now entered on a period of success. He seized the Rioja and the Basque provinces and received the feudal homage of Sancho Ramírez for the region of Navarre to the north of the Ebro River. By 1077 he had assumed the title imperator totius Hispaniae, in which role other Christian kings accepted him. He then began the conquest of Toledo and, after a long siege, occupied it in May 1085. This was a vital conquest, which recovered for Christian Spain one of the most important historical, strategic, and cultural centres of the peninsula, one that had been in the possession of the Muslims since the early 8th century.
During this period Alfonso regularly exacted parias, heavy financial tributes, from the Muslim ta
ifah kingdoms in return for protection against their other enemies. By thus depriving them of their wealth, he hoped to weaken them so that they would eventually cede their independence without fighting. Asa result of his exactions, Christian Spain was flooded with Muslim gold, which was spent on warfare and donations to shrines, churches, andmonasteries. The demand for tribute caused the ta
ifah kings to tax their subjects heavily, producing popular discontent and disturbances and contributing to the weakness that caused the surrender of Toledo. The Muslim ruler al-Mu'tamid of Seville took a desperate decision and called for the help of Yusuf ibn Tashufin, the Almoravid (Berber) amir of North Africa, and his Saharan tribes. The Amirdisembarked in Algeciras at the end of July 1086 and a few months later, on October 23 at Zallaqah, near Badajoz, inflicted a terrible defeat on Alfonso VI. Alfonso appealed for help to the rest of Christendom, and a small crusade was organized as a result; the crusaders did not reach Alfonso's lands but wasted their energies and resources in anunsuccessful siege of the Muslim outpost of Tudela.
The defeat at Zallaqah seriously lessened Alfonso's influence over the ta
ifah kingdoms. It also led to a reconciliation with Rodrigo Díaz de Vivar, El Cid. Their relationship had been difficult from the start, because El Cid had taken a prominent part in the campaigns of Sancho against Alfonso; although El Cid at first attended Alfonso's court, suspicions deepened, and since 1081 he had been in the service of the Muslim king of Saragossa. Alfonso entrusted El Cid with the occupation anddefense of eastern Spain, and Rodrigo carried out this task with great success. Between 1086 and 1109 Alfonso suffered constant defeat by the Almoravids; in the last battle, that of Uclés in 1108, he lost hisonly son, Sancho. It was characteristic of his indomitable spirit that he at once arranged for his daughter, Urraca, to marry Alfonso I ofAragon so that the war against the Almoravids should be continued after his death, even though it meant that Leon and Castile would be ruled by an Aragonese prince.
Though his reign was politically unsuccessful, Alfonso VI carried outan important cultural task by Europeanizing his dominions. Alfonso married Constance of Burgundy, and influences from across the Pyrenees showed themselves in the introduction of the Romanesque style in art, the adoption of the Roman instead of the Mozarabic liturgy, the replacement of Visigothic by Carolingian script, and the energetic support that Alfonso gave to Cluniac monasticism, as well as in his reconstruction and safeguarding of the pilgrim road to Santiago.

Captured Toledo from the Moors 1085, and with it, one of the great Muslim libraries of works from the classical civilizations, that the Muslims had kept alive (and added considerably to) during the Dark Ages, he arranged for the translation of these works into Latin, reintroducing them to Western Europe, this would ultimately lead to the Renaissance and the rise of science, this moment could be seen as the beginning of the West's greatness, which continues today.

1030-1109, Spanish king of León (1065-1109) and Castile (1072-1109). He inherited León from his father, Ferdinand I. Defeated by his brother Sancho II of Castile, he fled to the Moorish court of Toledo. After Sancho's assassination (1072) Alfonso succeeded to the throne of Castile and took Galicia from his brother García (1073). He thus became the most powerful Christian ruler in Spain. He encouraged Christians in Muslim lands to migrate north, and he raided Muslim territory, penetrating as far south as Tarifa. After the conquest of strategic Toledo (1085), he took many other cities and reached the line of the Tagus River. Alarmed by his advance, Abbad III and his Muslim allies called to their aid the Almoravid Yusuf ibn Tashfin , who defeated Alfonso in 1086. Alfonso was defeated again in 1108, and his only son died in the battle. Alfonso's reign gave a great crusading impulse to the reconquest of Spain and was also notable for the exploits of the Cid . Alfonso's court at Toledo became the center of cultural relations between Muslim and Christian Spain. French influence was strong because of the king's many French followers; French monks introduced the Cluniac reform into León during his reign. Alfonso was succeeded by his daughter Urraca .

Captured Toledo from the Moors 1085, and with it, one of the great Muslim libraries of works from the classical civilizations, that the Muslims had kept alive (and added considerably to) during the Dark Ages, he arranged for the translation of these works into Latin, reintroducing them to Western Europe, this would ultimately lead to the Renaissance and the rise of science, this moment could be seen as the beginning of the West's greatness, which continues today.

1030-1109, Spanish king of León (1065-1109) and Castile (1072-1109). He inherited León from his father, Ferdinand I. Defeated by his brother Sancho II of Castile, he fled to the Moorish court of Toledo. After Sancho's assassination (1072) Alfonso succeeded to the throne of Castile and took Galicia from his brother García (1073). He thus became the most powerful Christian ruler in Spain. He encouraged Christians in Muslim lands to migrate north, and he raided Muslim territory, penetrating as far south as Tarifa. After the conquest of strategic Toledo (1085), he took many other cities and reached the line of the Tagus River. Alarmed by his advance, Abbad III and his Muslim allies called to their aid the Almoravid Yusuf ibn Tashfin , who defeated Alfonso in 1086. Alfonso was defeated again in 1108, and his only son died in the battle. Alfonso's reign gave a great crusading impulse to the reconquest of Spain and was also notable for the exploits of the Cid . Alfonso's court at Toledo became the center of cultural relations between Muslim and Christian Spain. French influence was strong because of the king's many French followers; French monks introduced the Cluniac reform into León during his reign. Alfonso was succeeded by his daughter Urraca .

Alfonso VI of Castile
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Alfonso VI (before June 1040 – July 1, 1109), nicknamed the Brave, was King of León from 1065 to 1109 and King of Castile from 1072 following his brother's death. As he was the first Alfonso to be King of Castile, he is sometimes referred to as Alfonso I of Castile. In 1077, he proclaimed himself "Emperor of All Hispania". Much romance has gathered around his name.

As the second and favorite son of King Ferdinand I of Castile and Princess Sancha of León, Alfonso was allotted León, while Castile was given to his eldest brother Sancho, and Galicia to his youngest brother García. Sancho was assassinated in 1072. García was dethroned and imprisoned for life the following year.

In the cantar de gesta The Lay of the Cid, he plays the part attributed by medieval poets to the greatest kings, and to Charlemagne himself. He is alternately the oppressor and the victim of heroic and self-willed nobles — the idealized types of the patrons for whom the jongleurs and troubadours sang. He is the hero of a cantar de gesta which, like all but a very few of the early Spanish songs, like the cantar of Bernardo del Carpio and the Infantes of Lara, exists now only in the fragments incorporated in the chronicle of Alfonso the Wise or in ballad form.

His flight from the monastery of Sahagún, where his brother Sancho endeavoured to imprison him, his chivalrous friendship for his host Almamun of Toledo, caballero aunque moro, "a knight although a Moor", the passionate loyalty of his vassal, Pero (Pedro) Ansúrez, and his brotherly love for his sister Urraca of Zamora, may owe something to the poet who took him as a hero.

They are the answer to the poet of the nobles who represented the king as having submitted to taking a degrading oath at the hands of Rodrigo Díaz de Vivar (El Cid) to deny intervention in his brother's death in the church of Santa Gadea at Burgos, and as having then persecuted the brave man who defied him.

When every allowance is made, Alfonso VI stands out as a strong man fighting as a king whose interest was law and order, and who was the leader of the nation in the reconquest. He impressed himself on the Arabs as a very fierce and astute enemy, but as a keeper of his word. A story of Muslim origin, which is probably no more historical than the oath of Santa Gadea, tells of how he allowed himself to be tricked by Ibn Ammar, the favourite of Al Mutamid, the King of Seville. They played chess for an extremely beautiful table and set of men, belonging to Ibn Ammar. Table and men were to go to the king if he won. If Ibn Ammar gained he was to name the stake. The latter did win and demanded that the Christian king should spare Seville. Alfonso kept his word.

Whatever truth may lie behind the romantic tales of Christian and Muslim, we know that Alfonso represented, in a remarkable way, the two great influences then shaping the character and civilization of Spain.

At the instigation, it is said, of his wife Constance, he brought the Cistercian Order into Spain, established them in Sahagun, chose a French Cistercian, Bernard, as the first Archbishop of Toledo, after the reconquest on May 25, 1085. He married his daughters, Urraca, Teresa and Elvira to French princes, and in every way forwarded the spread of French influence — then the greatest civilizing force in Europe. He also drew Spain nearer to the Papacy. It was Alfonso's decision which established the Roman ritual in place of the old missal of Saint Isidore — the Mozarabic rite.

On the other hand he was very open to Arabic influence. He protected the Muslims among his subjects and struck coins with inscriptions in Arabic letters. He also admitted to his court and to his bed the refugee Muslim princess Zaida of Seville.

Alfonso was defeated on October 23, 1086, at the battle of Sagrajas, at the hands of Yusuf ibn Tashfin, and Abbad III al-Mu'tamid, and was severely wounded in the leg.


[edit] Marriages and children

Statue of Alfonso VI at the Sabatini Gardens in Madrid (F. Corral, 1753).Alfonso married at least five times and had two mistresses and a fiancée:

His first wife was Agnes of Aquitaine, daughter of William VIII of Aquitaine and his second wife Mateoda. They married in 1069 and scholarly opinion is divided whether she died or they divorced due to consanguinity, in the late 1070s. They had no children.
Prior to his second marriage, he is said to have been betrothed to Agatha, one of the daughters of William I of England and Matilda of Flanders. Agatha died before the marriage could take place, reportedly out of mortification at the prospect of marriage to Alfonso (1079).
His second wife, who he married in 1081, was Constance of Burgundy, the mother of Alfonso's eldest legitimate daughter Urraca.
In 1093, he married Bertha, of Tuscany or Lombardy. She had no children.
Following her death, Alfonso married an Isabel, by whom he had two daughters, Elvira, (who married Roger II of Sicily) and, Sancha, (wife of Rodrigo González de Lara). Later sources say she was daughter of a king Luis of France, but this is chronologically impossible. Reilly speculated she was of Burgundian origin, yet others make her identical to mistress Zaida.
His final wife was Beatrice. Some sources state she was related to Hisham III, the last Emir of Cordoba. Alternatively, it has been suggested she was niece of first wife Agnes, and daughter of William IX of Aquitaine. She had no children by Alfonso.
He also had two known mistresses.
By Jimena Muñoz, of a "most noble family", he had two illegitimate daughters, another Elvira (actually his eldest child) and Teresa.
A second mistress was Zaida of Seville, said by Spanish Muslim sources to be daughter-in-law of Al Mutamid, the Muslim King of Seville. She was mother of Alfonso's only son, Sancho, who, though illegitimate, would be named his father's heir. Several modern sources have suggested that Zaida, baptised under the name of Isabel, is identical with Alfonso's wife, queen Isabel (or that she was a second queen Isabel who he married in succession to the first). Zaida/Isabel died in childbirth, but the date is unknown, and it is unclear whether the child being delivered was Sancho, Sancha (if Zaida was identical to Queen Isabel), or an additional child, otherwise unknown.
Alfonso's designated successor, his son Sancho, was slain in the Battle of Ucles in 1108, making Alfonso's widowed daughter Urraca his heir. In order to strengthen her position as his successor, Alfonso began negotiations for her to marry her second cousin, Alfonso I of Aragon and Navarre, but died before the marriage could take place.

[Alfonso VI on a Manuscript:[1]


[edit] References
This entry incorporates public domain text originally from the 1911 Encyclopedia Britannica.
The Kingdom of León-Castilla under King Alfonso VI, 1065-1109, by Bernard F. Reilly (Princeton University Press, 1988), a comprehensively documented work. Full text is online at LIBRO.
Portugal, A Country Study, by Louis R. Mortimer, ed. Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress, 1993.
Preceded by
Ferdinand I King of León
(first reign)
1065–1070 Succeeded by
Sancho II
Preceded by
Sancho II King of Castile
1072–1109 Succeeded by
Urraca
King of León
(second reign)
1072–1109
Preceded by
García II King of Galicia
1073–1109
King of Portugal
1073–1093 Succeeded by
Henry
as Count
Vacant
Title last held by
Ferdinand I of León Emperor of Spain
1077 – 1109 Succeeded by
Alfonso I

Afonso I of Portugal
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.

Afonso I of Portugal (English Alphonzo), more commonly known as Afonso Henriques (pron. IPA /?.'fõ.su e~.'?i.k??/), or also Affonso (Archaic Portuguese), Alfonso or Alphonso (Portuguese-Galician) or Alphonsus (Latin version), (Guimarães, 1109, traditionally July 25 – Coimbra, 1185 December 6), also known as the Conqueror (Port. o Conquistador), was the first King of Portugal, declaring his independence from León.

Contents [hide]
1 Life
2 Afonso's descendants
3 See also
4 References



[edit]
Life
Afonso was the son of Henry of Burgundy, Count of Portugal and Teresa of León, the illegitimate daughter of King Alfonso VI of Castile and León. He was proclaimed King on July 26, 1139, immediatly after the Battle of Ourique, and died on December 6, 1185 in Coimbra.

At the end of the 11th century, the Iberian Peninsula political agenda was mostly concerned with the Reconquista, the driving out of the Muslim successor-states to the Caliphate of Córdoba after its collapse. With European military aristocracies focused on the Crusades, Alfonso VI called for the help of the French nobility to deal with the Moors. In exchange, he was to give the hands of his daughters in wedlock to the leaders of the expedition and bestow royal privileges to the others. Thus, the royal heiress Urraca of Castile wedded Raymond of Burgundy, younger son of the Count of Burgundy, and her half-sister, princess Teresa of León, wedded his cousin, another French crusader, Henry of Burgundy, younger brother of the Duke of Burgundy, whose mother was daughter of the Count of Barcelona. Henry was made Count of Portugal, a burdensome earldom south of Galicia, where Moorish incursions and attacks were to be expected. With his wife Teresa as co-ruler of Portugal, Henry withstood the ordeal and held the lands for his father-in-law.

From this wedlock several sons were born, but only one, Afonso Henriques (meaning "Afonso son of Henry") thrived. The boy followed his father as Count of Portugal in 1112, under the tutelage of his mother. The relations between Teresa and her son Afonso proved difficult. Only eleven years old, Afonso already had his own political ideas, greatly different from his mother's. In 1120, the young prince took the side of the archbishop of Braga, a political foe of Teresa, and both were exiled by her orders. Afonso spent the next years away from his own county, under the watch of the bishop. In 1122 Afonso became fourteen, the adult age in the 12th century. He made himself a knight on his own account in the Cathedral of Zamora, raised an army, and proceeded to take control of his lands. Near Guimarães, at the Battle of São Mamede (1128) he overcame the troops under his mother's lover and ally Count Fernando Peres de Trava of Galicia, making her his prisoner and exiling her forever to a monastery in León. Thus the possibility of incorporating Portugal into a Kingdom of Galicia was eliminated and Afonso become sole ruler (Dux of Portugal) after demands for independence from the county's people, church and nobles. He also vanquished Alfonso VII of Castile and León, another of his mother's allies, and thus freed the county from political dependence on the crown of León and Castile. On April 6, 1129, Afonso Henriques dictated the writ in which he proclaimed himself Prince of Portugal.




Portuguese Royalty
House of Burgundy

Afonso Henriques (Afonso I)
Children include
Princess Urraca
Prince Sancho
Princess Teresa
Sancho I
Children include
Princess Teresa
Princess Sancha
Princess Constance
Prince Afonso
Peter, Count of Urgell
Prince Ferdinand
Branca, lady of Guadalajara
Princess Berengária
Princess Mafalda
Afonso II
Children include
Prince Sancho
Prince Afonso
Princess Leonor
Prince Ferdinand
Sancho II
Afonso III
Children include
Princess Branca
Prince Denis
Prince Afonso
Princess Maria
Princess Sancha
Denis
Children include
Princess Constance
Prince Afonso
Afonso IV
Children include
Princess Maria
Prince Peter
Princess Leonor
Peter I
Children include
Princess Maria
Prince Ferdinand
(Princess) Beatrice
(Prince) John
(Prince) Denis
John, Master of Aviz (natural son)
Ferdinand I
Children include
Princess Beatrice

Afonso then turned his arms against the everlasting problem of the Moors in the south. His campaigns were successful and, on July 26, 1139, he obtained an overwhelming victory in the Battle of Ourique, and straight after was unanimously proclaimed King of Portugal by his soldiers. This meant that Portugal was no longer a vassal county of León-Castile, but an independent kingdom in its own right. Next, he assembled the first assembly of the estates-general at Lamego, where he was given the crown from the archbishop of Braga, to confirm the independence.

Independence, however, was not a thing a land could choose on its own. Portugal still had to be acknowledged by the neighbouring lands and, most importantly, by the Roman Catholic Church and the Pope. Afonso wedded Mafalda of Savoy, daughter of Count Amadeo III of Savoy, and sent ambassadors to Rome to negotiate with the Pope. In Portugal, he built several monasteries and convents and bestowed important privileges to religious orders. In 1143, he wrote to Pope Innocent II to declare himself and the kingdom servants of the Church, swearing to pursue driving the Moors out of the Iberian peninsula. Bypassing any king of Castile or León, Afonso declared himself the direct liegeman of the Papacy. Thus, Afonso continued to distinguish himself by his exploits against the Moors, from whom he wrested Santarém and Lisbon in 1147 (see Siege of Lisbon). He also conquered an important part of the land south of the Tagus River, although this was lost again to the Moors in the following years.

Meanwhile, King Alfonso VII of Castile (Afonso's cousin) regarded the independent ruler of Portugal as nothing but a rebel. Conflict between the two was constant and bitter in the following years. Afonso became involved in a war, taking the side of the Aragonese king, an enemy of Castile. To ensure the alliance, his son Sancho was engaged to Dulce Berenguer, sister of the Count of Barcelona, and princess of Aragon. Finally, in 1143, the Treaty of Zamora established peace between the cousins and the recognition by the Kingdom of Castile and León that Portugal was an independent kingdom.


Statue of Afonso Henriques in GuimarãesIn 1169, Afonso was disabled in an engagement near Badajoz by a fall from his horse, and made prisoner by the soldiers of the king of León. Portugal was obliged to surrender as his ransom almost all the conquests Afonso had made in Galicia in the previous years.

In 1179 the privileges and favours given to the Roman Catholic Church were compensated. In the papal bull Manifestis Probatum, Pope Alexander III acknowledged Afonso as King and Portugal as an independent land with the right to conquer lands from the Moors. With this papal blessing, Portugal was at last secured as a country and safe from any Castilian attempts of annexation.

In 1184, in spite of his great age, he had still sufficient energy to relieve his son Sancho, who was besieged in Santarém by the Moors. He died shortly after, in 1185.

The Portuguese revere him as a hero, both on account of his personal character and as the founder of their nation.

[edit]
Afonso's descendants
Afonso married in 1146 Mafalda or Maud of Savoy (1125-1158), daughter of Amadeo III, Count of Savoy, and Mafalda of Albon.

Name Birth Death Notes
By Maud of Savoy (1125-1158; married in 1146)
Henrique March 5, 1147 1147
Mafalda 1148 c. 1160
Urraca c. 1151 1188 married to King Ferdinand II of León
Sancho 1154 March 26, 1212 Succeeded him as 2nd King of Portugal
Teresa 1157 1218 married to Philip I of Flanders and after his death to Eudes III of Burgundy
João 1160 1160
Sancha 1160 1160
By Elvira Gálter
Urraca Afonso c. 1130 ? Natural daughter. Married Pedro Afonso Viegas. Lady of Aveiro.
Other natural offspring
Fernando Afonso c. 1166 c. 1172 High-General of the Kingdom (Constable of Portugal)
Pedro Afonso c 1130 1169 A.k.a. Pedro Henriques. 1st Grand-Master of the Order of Aviz.
Afonso c. 1135 1207 11th Master of the Order of Saint John of Rhodes.
Teresa Afonso c. 1135 ? Married Fernando Martins Bravo.
[edit]
See also
Portugal
History of Portugal
Kings of Portugal family tree
Timeline of Portuguese history
Second County of Portugal (11th to 12th Century)
First Dynasty: Burgundy (12th to 14th Century)



House of Burgundy
Cadet Branch of the House of Capet
Born: 25 July, 1109; Died: 6 December, 1185
Preceded by:
Henrique Count of Portugal
1112–1139
with Theresa (1112–1126) Independence
from León–Castile
New Title
Independence
from León–Castile Kings of Portugal
1139–1185 Succeeded by:
Sancho I

Father to Teresa, Wife of Henry of Burgundy, he was driven from Leon by his
elder brother Sancho II in 1072, but when Henry died that year, he regained
it and inherited Castile. In 1077, he took the title: "emperor of all Spain".
His brother, Sancho II was served by Rodrigo Diaz de Vivar, or "the lord
Champion", or commonly known as El Cid, and when Sancho died in 1072, El Cid
went on to serve Alfonso as well. Rodrigo was the son of a minor Castilian
nobleman, but his mother was related to "great landowning nobility".

Father to Teresa, Wife of Henry of Burgundy, he was driven from Leon by his
elder brother Sancho II in 1072, but when Henry died that year, he regained
it and inherited Castile. In 1077, he took the title: "emperor of all Spain".
His brother, Sancho II was served by Rodrigo Diaz de Vivar, or "the lord
Champion", or commonly known as El Cid, and when Sancho died in 1072, El Cid
went on to serve Alfonso as well. Rodrigo was the son of a minor Castilian
nobleman, but his mother was related to "great landowning nobility".

As an infant, he inherited his father's title, and in 1128 he defeated his
mother, Teresa, in battle, and became the first King of Portugal. He
conquered Santarem and Lisbon from the Muslims in 1147 and secured Portuguese
independence frm Leon in 1139. By the time of his death he had created a
stable and independent monarchy, succeeded by his son, Sancho I.

Marriage: 8 MAY 1081 Atholl, Perthshire, Scotland Spouse: Capet, Constance "of Burgundy" Princess/Burgundy Birth: ABT 1046 Dijon, Core-d'Or, France Death: FEB 1093 Gender: Female Parents:

Father: Capet, Robert I "The Old" D/Burgundy & Pr/France
Mother: Semur, Hedwig (Helie or Ella) de Countess/Semur

Children:

Castile, Urraca de Q/Castile-Leon
Castile, Elvira de

Name Prefix:<NPFX> King Name Suffix:<NSFX> Vi, Of Castile And Leon "The Valiant" born before June 1040 died 1109, Toledo, Castile King of León (1065–70) and of Castile and León (1072–1109). known as Alfonso the Brave He inherited León from his father, Ferdinand I, and warred with his envious brother Sancho II.On Sancho's death he inherited Castile (1072); he also occupied Galicia and imprisoned his brother García, its rightful ruler. In 1077 Alfonso proclaimed himself emperor of all Spain. He took Toledo from the Muslims, but his demands fortribute led to the invasion of Spain by the North African Almoravids, and he was defeated at Zallaqah (1086). The Cid became an ally and defended eastern Spain, but Alfonso continued to lose ground against the Berber armies.

Father to Teresa, Wife of Henry of Burgundy, he was driven from Leon by his
elder brother Sancho II in 1072, but when Henry died that year, he regained
it and inherited Castile. In 1077, he took the title: "emperor of all Spain".
His brother, Sancho II was served by Rodrigo Diaz de Vivar, or "the lord
Champion", or commonly known as El Cid, and when Sancho died in 1072, El Cid
went on to serve Alfonso as well. Rodrigo was the son of a minor Castilian
nobleman, but his mother was related to "great landowning nobility".

Father to Teresa, Wife of Henry of Burgundy, he was driven from Leon by his
elder brother Sancho II in 1072, but when Henry died that year, he regained
it and inherited Castile. In 1077, he took the title: "emperor of all Spain".
His brother, Sancho II was served by Rodrigo Diaz de Vivar, or "the lord
Champion", or commonly known as El Cid, and when Sancho died in 1072, El Cid
went on to serve Alfonso as well. Rodrigo was the son of a minor Castilian
nobleman, but his mother was related to "great landowning nobility".

As an infant, he inherited his father's title, and in 1128 he defeated his
mother, Teresa, in battle, and became the first King of Portugal. He
conquered Santarem and Lisbon from the Muslims in 1147 and secured Portuguese
independence frm Leon in 1139. By the time of his death he had created a
stable and independent monarchy, succeeded by his son, Sancho I.

"The Valient, the Brave". King of Castile 1072, and Leon. During his reign the city of Toledo was captured from the Moors.MISC: Alfonso VI, byname ALFONSO THE BRAVE, Spanish ALFONSO EL BRAVO (b. before June 1040--d. 1109, Toledo, Castile), king of Leon (1065-70) and king of reunited Castile and Leon (1072-1109), who by 1077 had proclaimed himself "emperor of all Spain" (imperator totius Hispaniae). His oppression of his Muslim vassals led to the invasion of Spain by an Almoravid army from North Africa (1086). His name is also associated with the national hero of Spain, Rodrigo Daz de Vivar (El Cid), who was alternatively his enemy and indifferent supporter.
Alfonso was the second son of King Ferdinand I and his wife Sancha; he was educated by Raimundo, later the bishop of Palencia, and by Pedro Ansrez, the count of Carrin. On his death in 1065, Ferdinand left to Alfonso the kingdom of Leon together with tribute paid by the Muslim kingdom of Toledo. These possessions aroused the envious hostility of Alfonso's elder brother, Sancho II, who had inherited the kingdom of Castile and the tribute of Saragossa. Alfonso was defeated by his brother in two battles; after the defeat at Llantada (1068) he managed to retain his kingdom, but after that at Golpejera (1072) he was captured and exiled, living for a short while at the court of his vassal Ma`mun, the Muslim king of Toledo. Soon Alfonso's sister Urraca stirred up a rebellion in Leon, and Sancho besieged her in the walled city of Zamora. During the siege, he was killed, perhaps at Urraca's instigation. She was clearly on Alfonso's side, and some modern historians have even suggested that they had an incestuous relationship.
With Sancho's death, Alfonso recovered his own kingdom of Leon and inherited (1072) that of Castile. He also occupied Galicia, which Sancho had kept from their younger brother Garca; Alfonso kept Garca in prison until his death. A late story, in which it is alleged that Alfonso took an oath in St. Gadea's Church, Burgos, that he had had no share in Sancho's murder, probably reflects Castilian reluctance to accept him as king.
Alfonso's reign now entered on a period of success. He seized the Rioja and the Basque provinces and received the feudal homage of Sancho Ramrez for the region of Navarre to the north of the Ebro River. By 1077 he had assumed the title imperator totius Hispaniae, in which role other Christian kings accepted him. He then began the conquest of Toledo and, after a long siege, occupied it in May 1085. This was a vital conquest, which recovered for Christian Spain one of the most important historical, strategic, and cultural centres of the peninsula, one that had been in the possession of the Muslims since the early 8th century.
During this period Alfonso regularly exacted parias, heavy financial tributes, from the Muslim ta`ifah kingdoms in return for protection against their other enemies. By thus depriving them of their wealth, he hoped to weaken them so that they would eventually cede their independence without fighting. As a result of his exactions, Christian Spain was flooded with Muslim gold, which was spent on warfare and donations to shrines, churches, and monasteries. The demand for tribute caused the ta`ifah kings to tax their subjects heavily, producing popular discontent and disturbances and contributing to the weakness that caused the surrender of Toledo. The Muslim ruler al-Mu'tamid of Seville took a desperate decision and called for the help of Yusuf ibn Tashufin, the Almoravid (Berber) amir of North Africa, and his Saharan tribes. The Amir disembarked in Algeciras at the end of July 1086 and a few months later, on October 23 at Zallaqah, near Badajoz, inflicted a terrible defeat on Alfonso VI. Alfonso appealed for help to the rest of Christendom, and a small crusade was organized as a result; the crusaders did not reach Alfonso's lands but wasted their energies and resources in an unsuccessful siege of the Muslim outpost of Tudela.
The defeat at Zallaqah seriously lessened Alfonso's influence over the ta`ifah kingdoms. It also led to a reconciliation with Rodrigo Daz de Vivar, El Cid. Their relationship had been difficult from the start, because El Cid had taken a prominent part in the campaigns of Sancho against Alfonso; although El Cid at first attended Alfonso's court, suspicions deepened, and since 1081 he had been in the service of the Muslim king of Saragossa. Alfonso entrusted El Cid with the occupation and defense of eastern Spain, and Rodrigo carried out this task with great success. Between 1086 and 1109 Alfonso suffered constant defeat by the Almoravids; in the last battle, that of Ucls in 1108, he lost his only son, Sancho. It was characteristic of his indomitable spirit that he at once arranged for his daughter, Urraca, to marry Alfonso I of Aragon so that the war against the Almoravids should be continued after his death, even though it meant that Leon and Castile would be ruled by an Aragonese prince.
Though his reign was politically unsuccessful, Alfonso VI carried out an important cultural task by Europeanizing his dominions. Alfonso married Constance of Burgundy, and influences from across the Pyrenees showed themselves in the introduction of the Romanesque style in art, the adoption of the Roman instead of the Mozarabic liturgy, the replacement of Visigothic by Carolingian script, and the energetic support that Alfonso gave to Cluniac monasticism, as well as in his reconstruction and safeguarding of the pilgrim road to Santiago. [Encyclopaedia Britannica CD '97, ALPHONSO VI]Alfonso VI, by name ALFONSO THE BRAVE, Spanish ALFONSO EL BRAVO (b. before June 1040--d. 1109, Toledo, Castile), king of Leon (1065-70) and king of reunited Castile and Leon (1072-1109), who by 1077 had proclaimed himself "emperor of all Spain" (imperator totius Hispaniae). His oppression of his Muslim vassals led to the invasion of Spain by an Almoravid army from North Africa (1086). His name is also associated with the national hero of Spain, Rodrigo Daz de Vivar (El Cid), who was alternatively his enemy and indifferent supporter. [Encyclopaedia Britannica CD '97, ALPHONSO VI]

!Name is; Alfonso VI, "The Valiant" King of /CASTILE AND LEON/

SURN Jimeno
GIVN Alphonso
AFN 9HM1-KC
_UID 7B28170921AA8344A2AA3CCE212D9BFC907C
1 UID DF94EB3BDBE3044FA337F6895DAFAE6421B4
1 UID FEED6D28F8817949B7E8682954681A7F40BF
DATE 21 May 2009
TIME 19:23:43

Notes for Don Alfonso VI Rey de Castile y Léon:

Alfonso VI, byname ALFONSO THE BRAVE, Spanish ALFONSO EL BRAVO (b.before June 1040--d. 1109, Toledo, Castile), king of Leon (1065-70)and king of reunited Castile and Leon (1072-1109), who by 1077 hadproclaimed himself "emperor of all Spain" (imperator totiusHispaniae). His oppression of his Muslim vassals led to the invasionof Spain by an Almoravid army from North Africa (1086). His name isalso associated with the national hero of Spain, Rodrigo Díaz de Vivar(El Cid), who was alternatively his enemy and indifferent supporter.

Alfonso was the second son of King Ferdinand I and his wife Sancha; hewas educated by Raimundo, later the bishop of Palencia, and by PedroAnsúrez, the count of Carrión. On his death in 1065, Ferdinand left toAlfonso the kingdom of Leon together with tribute paid by the Muslimkingdom of Toledo. These possessions aroused the envious hostility ofAlfonso's elder brother, Sancho II, who had inherited the kingdom ofCastile and the tribute of Saragossa. Alfonso was defeated by hisbrother in two battles; after the defeat at Llantada (1068) he managedto retain his kingdom, but after that at Golpejera (1072) he wascaptured and exiled, living for a short while at the court of hisvassal Ma`mun, the Muslim king of Toledo. Soon Alfonso's sister Urracastirred up a rebellion in Leon, and Sancho besieged her in the walledcity of Zamora. During the siege, he was killed, perhaps at Urraca'sinstigation. She was clearly on Alfonso's side, and some modernhistorians have even suggested that they had an incestuousrelationship.

With Sancho's death, Alfonso recovered his own kingdom of Leon andinherited (1072) that of Castile. He also occupied Galicia, whichSancho had kept from their younger brother García; Alfonso kept Garcíain prison until his death. A late story, in which it is alleged thatAlfonso took an oath in St. Gadea's Church, Burgos, that he had had noshare in Sancho's murder, probably reflects Castilian reluctance toaccept him as king.

Alfonso's reign now entered on a period of success. He seized theRioja and the Basque provinces and received the feudal homage ofSancho Ramírez for the region of Navarre to the north of the EbroRiver. By 1077 he had assumed the title imperator totius Hispaniae, inwhich role other Christian kings accepted him. He then began theconquest of Toledo and, after a long siege, occupied it in May 1085.This was a vital conquest, which recovered for Christian Spain one ofthe most important historical, strategic, and cultural centres of thepeninsula, one that had been in the possession of the Muslims sincethe early 8th century.

During this period Alfonso regularly exacted parias, heavy financialtributes, from the Muslim ta`ifah kingdoms in return for protectionagainst their other enemies. By thus depriving them of their wealth,he hoped to weaken them so that they would eventually cede theirindependence without fighting. As a result of his exactions, ChristianSpain was flooded with Muslim gold, which was spent on warfare anddonations to shrines, churches, and monasteries. The demand fortribute caused the ta`ifah kings to tax their subjects heavily,producing popular discontent and disturbances and contributing to theweakness that caused the surrender of Toledo. The Muslim ruleral-Mu'tamid of Seville took a desperate decision and called for thehelp of Yusuf ibn Tashufin, the Almoravid (Berber) amir of NorthAfrica, and his Saharan tribes. The Amir disembarked in Algeciras atthe end of July 1086 and a few months later, on October 23 atZallaqah, near Badajoz, inflicted a terrible defeat on Alfonso VI.Alfonso appealed for help to the rest of Christendom, and a smallcrusade was organized as a result; the crusaders did not reachAlfonso's lands but wasted their energies and resources in anunsuccessful siege of the Muslim outpost of Tudela.

The defeat at Zallaqah seriously lessened Alfonso's influence over theta`ifah kingdoms. It also led to a reconciliation with Rodrigo Díaz deVivar, El Cid. Their relationship had been difficult from the start,because El Cid had taken a prominent part in the campaigns of Sanchoagainst Alfonso; although El Cid at first attended Alfonso's court,suspicions deepened, and since 1081 he had been in the service of theMuslim king of Saragossa. Alfonso entrusted El Cid with the occupationand defense of eastern Spain, and Rodrigo carried out this task withgreat success. Between 1086 and 1109 Alfonso suffered constant defeatby the Almoravids; in the last battle, that of Uclés in 1108, he losthis only son, Sancho. It was characteristic of his indomitable spiritthat he at once arranged for his daughter, Urraca, to marry Alfonso Iof Aragon so that the war against the Almoravids should be continuedafter his death, even though it meant that Leon and Castile would beruled by an Aragonese prince.

Though his reign was politically unsuccessful, Alfonso VI carried outan important cultural task by Europeanizing his dominions. Alfonsomarried Constance of Burgundy, and influences from across the Pyreneesshowed themselves in the introduction of the Romanesque style in art,the adoption of the Roman instead of the Mozarabic liturgy, thereplacement of Visigothic by Carolingian script, and the energeticsupport that Alfonso gave to Cluniac monasticism, as well as in hisreconstruction and safeguarding of the pilgrim road to Santiago.[Encyclopaedia Britannica CD '97, ALPHONSO VI]

In the division of his fathers domains, Alfonso received Leon. By th e death of his elder brother Sancho II,, he inherited Castile. Therei s some confusion in adding numerals to Spanish sovereigns with identic al names in the medieval era because of the fact that they sometimesru led more than one kingdom. This Alfonso was designated as Alfonso VI because his moterh was the daughter of Alfonso V of Leon, but he was a ctually Alfonso I of Castile. The strong French influence pervaded th e country as a result of his third marriage. The monks of Cluny aide d in church reform and French knights fought in the war against the Mo ors in which Alfonso won great victories. Alfonso VI and his first wi fe Agnes did not have any children.

(ref: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfonso_VI_of_Castile ) Alfonso VI( before June 1040 - July 1, 1109), nicknamed the Brave, was King of Le ón from 1065 to 1109 and King of Castile since 1072 after his brother' s death. As he was the first Alfonso to be King of Castile, he is some times referred to as Alfonso I of Castile. In 1077, he proclaimed hims elf "Emperor of All Spain". Much romance has gathered around his name.

As the second and favorite son of King Ferdinand I of Castile and Prin cess Sancha of León, Alfonso was alloted León, while Castile was give n to his eldest brother Sancho, and Galicia to his youngest brother Ga rcia. Sancho was assassinated in 1072. Garcia was dethroned and impris oned for life the following year. In the cantar de gesta The Lay of t he Cid, he plays the part attributed by medieval poets to the greates t kings, and to Charlemagne himself. He is alternately the oppressor a nd the victim of heroic and self-willed nobles - the idealized types o f the patrons for whom the jongleurs and troubadours sang. He is the h ero of a cantar de gesta which, like all but a very few of the early S panish songs, like the cantar of Bernardo del Carpio and the Infanteso f Lara, exists now only in the fragments incorporated in the chronicl e of Alfonso the Wise or in ballad form.

His flight from the monastery of Sahagun, where his brother Sancho end eavoured to imprison him, his chivalrous friendship for his host Almam un of Toledo, caballero aunque moro, "a knight although a Moor," the p assionate loyalty of his vassal, Pero (Pedro) Ansúrez, and his brother ly love for his sister Urraca of Zamora, may owe something to the poe t who took him as a hero. They are the answer to the poet of the nobl es who represented the king as having submitted to taking a degradingo ath at the hands of Rodrigo Díaz de Vivar (El Cid) to deny interventio n in his brother's death in the church of Santa Gadea at Burgos, anda s having then persecuted the brave man who defied him.

When every allowance is made, Alfonso VI stands out as a strong man fi ghting as a king whose interest was law and order, and who was the lea der of the nation in the reconquest. He impressed himself on the Arab s as a very fierce and astute enemy, but as a keeper of his word. A st ory of Muslim origin, which is probably no more historical than the oa th of Santa Gadea, tells of how he allowed himself to be tricked by Ib n Ammar, the favourite of Al Mutamid, the King of Seville. They playe d chess for an extremely beautiful table and set of men, belonging toI bn Ammar. Table and men were to go to the king if he won. If Ibn Amma r gained he was to name the stake. The latter did win and demanded tha t the Christian king should spare Seville. Alfonso kept his word. Wha tever truth may lie behind the romantic tales of Christian and Muslim , we know that Alfonso represented, in a remarkable way, the two grea t influences then shaping the character and civilization of Spain. Al fonso was defeated on October 23, 1086, at the battle of Zallaqa, at t he hands of Yusuf ibn Tashfin, and Abbad III al-Mu'tamid, and was seve rely wounded in the leg.

Alfonso married at least five times and had two mistresses and a fianc ée. His first wife was Agnes, daughter of William VIII of Aquitaine. T hey married in 1069 and divorced due to consanguinity later. They hadn o children. His second wife, who he married in 1081, was Constance of Burgundy, the mother of their daughter Urraca of Castile. Prior to hi s marriage with Constance, he was betrothed to Agatha, one of the daug hters of William I of England. In 1093, he married Bertha, hypothesize d to have been daughter of William I, Count Palatine of Burgundy. Foll owing her death, he married an Isabel (or, it has been suggested, two successive Isabels). His final wife was Beatrice, of unknown origin. B y mistress Jimena Muñoz, speculated to have been daughter of MunioGonz alez, Count of Asturias or of an otherwise obscure Munio Muñoz, he ha d two illegitimate daughters, Elvira of Castile and Teresa of Leon. A t the instigation, it is said, of his wife Constance, he brought the C istercian Order into Spain, established them in Sahagun, chose a Frenc h Cistercian, Bernard, as the first Archbishop of Toledo after the rec onquest on May 25, 1085. He married his illegitimate daughters, Urrac a of Castile and Teresa of Leon, to French princes, and in every way f orwarded the spread of French influence - then the greatest civilizin g force in Europe. He also drew Spain nearer to the Papacy. It wasAlfo nso's decision which established the Roman ritual in place of theold m issal of Saint Isidore - the Mozarabic rite.

On the other hand he was very open to Arabic influence. He protected t he Muslims among his subjects and struck coins with inscriptions in Ar abic letters. After the death of Constance, he perhaps married, and ce rtainly lived with, Zaida, said to have been a daughter-in-law of Al M utamid, the Muslim King of Seville. She was mother of his illegitimat e son, Sancho, who would be named his father's heir. It is unclear ifZ aida, baptised under the name of Isabel, is identical with Alfonso'sla ter wife, Queen Isabel, the mother by Alfonso of two daughters, Elvir a Alfonso, (who married Roger II of Sicily) and, Sancha, (wife of Rodr igo Gonzalez de Lara). Sancho, Alfonso's designated successor, was sl ain in the Battle of Ucles in 1108.

On his father's death, in 1065, he was made King of Leon while his brother Sancho was made King of Castile. Sancho, annoyed with the succession arrangements, attacked Alphonso and absorbed his realm later that year. He fled into exile at the court of Yahia I, King of Toledo, and returned after Sancho was killed at the seige of Zamora in 1072, then as King of Leon and Castile, he embarked on a series of agressive campaigns against the petty kings of Muslim Spain.
As the most powertful Christian monarch in tha peninsula, he assumed the title "Emperor of all Spain" in 1077, and achieved his greatest triumph when he captured Toledo in 1085. In his early campaigns, he was ably assisted by his talented subject, Rodrigo Diaz de Bolivar, later known as "El Cid", but Diaz' successes made Alphonso jealous, so he sent Diaz into exile in 1081.
The fall of Toledo so frightened the remaining Muslim kingdoms o fSpain that they called on the fearsome and fanatic Almorvid tribes of Morocco for aid in 1085-6.
Most of Alphonso's conquests were lost in the ensuing bitter struggle with the Moorish invaders, beginning with his defeat by Yusefibn Tashfin at Sagrajas on Oct. 23, 1086. Although El Cid defeated Tashfin's Almorvids at Valencia in 1094, Alphonso suffered a second Defeat at Ucles, where his son and heir, (the offspring of Alphonso's laison with the daughter of the Muslim king of Seville) was killed in 1108. Desperate for a strong ruler to succeed him, he married his daughter, Urraca, to Alphonso I of Aragon soon after, and died.
A vigourous and resourceful ruler, he was able and broad-minded. Concerned with reforming the Spanish church, he brought in monks from the Clusiac order to help him restructure it, but these monks and the French knights who came to help fight the Muslims opposed his easygoing religious tolerance.
He left behind a strong and well-governed realm.

Alfonso ble hertug i 1112, og han var den første som lot seg kalle konge av Portugal.
Det skjedde i 1139 etter en stor seier over araberne ved Qurique.
Sin første forfatning fikk landet av riksdagen Cortes de Lamego i 1143. I 1147 ble
residensen flyttet fra Coimbra til Lisboa etter at også denne by var tatt fra araberne.

Marriage: 8 MAY 1081 Atholl, Perthshire, Scotland Spouse: Capet, Constance "of Burgundy" Princess/Burgundy Birth: ABT 1046 Dijon, Core-d'Or, France Death: FEB 1093 Gender: Female Parents:

Father: Capet, Robert I "The Old" D/Burgundy & Pr/France
Mother: Semur, Hedwig (Helie or Ella) de Countess/Semur

Children:

Castile, Urraca de Q/Castile-Leon
Castile, Elvira de

-- MERGED NOTE ------------

Wikidata: https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q235080 | Geni: https://www.geni.com/people/6000000000665380375

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]