== Notes for [[Item:Q116622|Q116622]] ==

Raymond II (died 924) was the Count of Toulouse, Nîmes, and Albi. He was the, probably elder, son of Odo of Toulouse and Garsenda.

In 886, at the death of Bernard the Calf, he succeeded to the comital title in Nîmes and Albi while Odo his father received the county of Toulouse. In 898, his father made him Count of Rouergue. In 906, Odo gave Rouergue to his younger son Ermengol and made Raymond co-count in Toulouse. In 918, Odo died and Toulouse went to Raymond, while Rouergue, along with Nîmes and Albi, went to Ermengol. Raymond also received his father's title of Duke of Septimania. He died in 924 and left his titles to his son Raymond Pons.

Raymond married Guinidilda, daughter of Wilfred II Borrel, Count of Barcelona. Their only child was Raymond Pons.

Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raymond_II_of_Toulouse

--------------------

Raymond II, Count of Toulouse

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Raymond II (died 924) was the Count of Toulouse, Nîmes, and Albi. He was the, probably elder, son of Odo of Toulouse and Garsenda.

In 886, at the death of Bernard the Calf, he succeeded to the comital title in Nîmes and Albi while Odo his father received the county of Toulouse. In 898, his father made him Count of Rouergue. In 906, Odo gave Rouergue to his younger son Ermengol and made Raymond co-count in Toulouse. In 918, Odo died and Toulouse went to Raymond, while Rouergue, along with Nîmes and Albi, went to Ermengol. Raymond also received his father's title of Duke of Septimania. He died in 924 and left his titles to his son Raymond Pons.

Raymond married Guinidilda, daughter of Wilfred II Borrel, Count of Barcelona. Their only child was Raymond Pons.

Sources

* Lewis, Archibald R. The Development of Southern French and Catalan Society, 718–1050. University of Texas Press: Austin, 1965.

* Foundation for Medieval Genealogy: Toulouse.

___________________________

RAYMOND de Toulouse (-[923/24]). His parentage is confirmed by a charter dated 16 Jun 918, which records an audience at Ausonne in the diocesis of Carcassonnne held by "Aridemandus episcopus sedis Tolosæ civitatis...missus advocatus Raymundo comite Tolosæ civitatis et marchio" with the consent of "Odone comite genitore suo"[223]. The Vita Sancti Geraldi Aureliacensis Comitis records that "Raimundum…comitem filium…Odonis" captured "nepotem domni Geraldi…Benedictum, Tolosæ…vicecomitem" and that "Geraldus…cum sorore sua Avigerna" requested his release[224]. The Histoire Générale de Languedoc dates the event to [894/909], the earlier date being when the monastery of Aurillac was founded and the latter the date of death of Benoît´s maternal uncle[225]. If the estimated date is correct, this was before the death of Raymond´s father and therefore before his succession as comte de Toulouse. If at that date Raymond already held the comital title in his own right, it tends to corroborate the co-identity of Raymond II Comte de Toulouse with Raymond Comte d´Albi, as discussed below.

He succeeded his father in [918] as RAYMOND II Comte de Toulouse. [same person as…? RAYMOND Comte d´Albi (-after 915). It is not certain whether the following documents all refer to the future Raymond II Comte de Toulouse:

Comte de [Nîmes]. A bull of Pope John VIII dated 18 Aug 878, relating to papal authority over the monastery of Saint-Gilles, is subscribed by "Raimundus comes, Berengarius vicecomes…Emenus vicecomes, Oddo vicecomes, Ugo comes"[226]. A charter dated Aug 878 records an audience held by "Reymundo comite" at Albi[227]. A charter dated Apr 890 records a judgment in the court of "Raimundus…comes ipsius pagi…Allidulfo suo viciscomiti" relating to a claim by "Bligardis…in comitatu Nemausensi"[228]. A charter dated 23 May 898 records business in the presence of "Bernardo vices-comite…Regemundo comite…Berengario comite"[229]. "Regimundo comite" subscribed a charter dated Jul 902 recording a donation to Nîmes Notre-Dame[230]. A charter dated 18 Jul 915 records business in the presence of "Regemundo comite" and "Daruardus vicecomes Rotenensi" as judge in "Andusie…castello"[231].

It is possible that Raymond inherited Albi from his mother´s family. In later documentation, Albi and Nîmes are recorded under the same vicomtes, and it is also possible that they were linked under the same count in the late 9th century and that Nîmes was also inherited by Raymond. The fact that no further record is found relating to Raymond in Nîmes after 915 could be explained by his succession in Toulouse, after which Nîmes would have ceased to be one of his main centres of activity. No other Comte Raymond has so far been identified who could be this comte de Nîmes. "Ugo comes" who also subscribed the 878 papal bull has not yet been identified.]

No document has been identified that Comte Raymond II also held the title Marquis de Gothie. The death of Guillaume I "le Pieux" Duke of Aquitaine, Marquis de Gothie, is dated to 918. The son of Comte Raymond II, Comte Raymond Pons, is recorded with the title in 924. As shown below, Ermengaud, supposed brother of Comte Raymond II is referred to as "princeps Gothiæ" by Flodoard in 932. It is suggested that Raymond II and his supposed brother received the title jointly in [918/19] from Charles III "le Simple" King of the West Franks. No close family connection has been traced between Comte Raymond II and Duke Guillaume I. It is therefore unlikely that the two supposed brothers succeeded to the title by inheritance.

m --- (-[after 28 Sep 926]). The name and origin of the wife of Comte Raymond II are unknown. She may have been GUINIDILDA, daughter of ---, as suggested by the charter dated 28 Sep 926, under which "Teudericus et uxor mea…Sposia" donated property to Narbonne cathedral, signed by "Vulveradus vicecomes…Widinildis comitissa, Richildis vicecomitissa…"[232]. As Narbonne was under the suzerainty of the comtes de Toulouse, it is possible that "Widinildis comitissa" was the legal representative of the county at the time, widow of the former comte and acting in the capacity of guardian for her minor son. According to Europäische Stammtafeln[233], she was [Guinidilda] [de Barcelona, daughter of Guifré [I] "el Velloso/el Pilós/the Hairy" Conde de Barcelona & his wife Guinidilda ---]. As Guinidilda was also the name of the wife of Conde Guifré I, a connection seems likely, although it is also possible that "Vuidinildis comitissa" belonged to the same family as Guinidilda senior (about whose family nothing is known either). Comte Raymond II & his wife had one child:

a) RAYMOND ([900/10]-[944/69], bur Saint-Pons-de-Thomières). His parentage is confirmed by the charter under which "Pontius…comes Tolosanus, primarchio et dux Aquitanorum et uxor mea Garsindis" donated property to the abbey of Saint-Pons de Thomières, for the souls of "genitore nostro Raimundo et genetrice mea"[234]. He succeeded his father in [923/24] as RAYMOND PONS Comte de Toulouse.

http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/TOULOUSE.htm

--------------------

Raimond II, Comte de Toulouse (1)

M, #150416, d. 924

Last Edited=11 Jul 2005

Raimond II, Comte de Toulouse was the son of Eudes, Comte de Toulouse. (1)

He died in 924. (1)

Raimond II, Comte de Toulouse succeeded to the title of Comte de Toulouse in 919. (1)

Child of Raimond II, Comte de Toulouse

-1. Raimond III Pons, Comte de Toulouse+ d. c 960 (1)

Forrás / Source:

http://www.thepeerage.com/p15042.htm#i150416

Data From Lynn Jeffrey Bernhard, 2445 W 450 South #4, Springville UT 84663-4950
email - bernhardengineer@@netscape.net

Line 5256 from GEDCOM File not recognizable or too long:
NAME Raimond II Count Of /TOULOUSE/

SOURCE NOTES:
www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal07786

RESEARCH NOTES:
Count of Toulouse (919-924)

887182724. Greve/lensherre Raimund II ODOSON av Gohien (21151) was born between 850 and 860. (21152) He was a Greve before 909 in Toulouse. (21153) Han ble greve av T. før faren døde
He was a Greve eller lensherre in 918 in Gothien. (21154) Var 878 greve av Albi samt 890 og 909 av Nimes. Varr i 918 blitt greve eller lensherre av Gothien og hadde ca 900 også grevskapene Carcasona og Rasez. Gothien hadde han sammen med sin bror Ermangaud. Begge var Karl den Enfoldies tilhengere (922). He died in 923. (21155) Han slo saracenerne som i 920 var kommet halt til Toulose, og slo ungarerne i 923. I 922 usurperer han Gothiens kirkeeiendommer. Kom også i strid med de store vasaller og utmerket seg ved en stor seier over normanerne i Auvergne. He was married to Gudinilde N.NSDTR. (21156) hun overlevet ham

Line 5256 from GEDCOM File not recognizable or too long:
NAME Raimond II Count Of /TOULOUSE/

_P_CCINFO 1-20792

Name Prefix:<NPFX> Count Name Suffix:<NSFX> Ii, Of Toulouse

Raimond var greve av Toulouse før 909, innen hans far, Odo, døde.
I 878 var han greve av Albi og i 890 og 909 av Nismes. Ca. 900 hadde han
grevskapene Carcasona og Raséz.
I 918 hadde Raimond blitt greve eller lensherre av Gothien sammen med sin bror
Ermanguad. Begge var Karl ?den Enfoldiges? tilhengere. Han slo sarasenerne som i 920
hadde kommet helt til Toulouse, og slo ungarerne i 923. Han kom også i strid med de store
vasaller og utmerket seg ved en stor seier over normannerne i Auvergne.
I 922 usurperer han Gothiens kirkeeiendommer.
Raimond døde i slutten av 923.
Han var gift med Gudinilde som overlevde ham.

[s2.FTW]

[Brøderbund WFT Vol. 2, Ed. 1, Tree #1241, Date of Import: May 8, 1997]

!COUNT OF TOULOUSE[Brøderbund WFT Vol. 2, Ed. 1, Tree #1241, Date of Import: May 8, 1997]

!COUNT OF TOULOUSE

Raymond II of Rouergue
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Raymond II (also Ramon or Raimundo and sometimes numberred Raymond I) (died 961 or 965) was the count of Rouergue and Quercy from 937 to his death. Under Raymond, Rouergue achieved a suzerainty over neighbouring counties and he successfully titled himself marchio (margrave) of Septimania.

Raymond's lordship extended over Albi and Nîmes and, at least around 960, as far north as the Limousin. Raymond was the head of his family, which also ruled Toulouse. Even in his time, his family appeared to be declining. He willed a Gascon fief to Duke Sancho V and allowed it to become allodial after his death. Nonetheless, his power was such that he could command lands as far north as Auvergne and was the most powerful lord of Aquitaine, even holding a "vicar's court" in the Limousin.

His will of 961 is presereved. In it, not only does he reference the aforementioned lands in Auvergne and Gascony, but he mentions seventeen castles and a rocheta. Some castles were given to his wife and heirs and some to the churches of Albi and Cahors and to various abbeys.

Raymond married Bertha, daughter of Boso of Tuscany. He was succeeded by his son Raymond III.

[edit]
Sources
Lewis, Archibald R. The Development of Southern French and Catalan Society, 718-1050. [1] [2]

Rootsweb Feldman
URL: http://worldconnect.genealogy.rootsweb.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=:3044567&id=I15144
# D: I15144
# Name: Raimond II Count of TOULOUSE 1 2 3 4 5
# Sex: M
# Birth: ABT 895 in France 1 2 3 4 5
# Death: 960 1 2 3 4 5
# Change Date: 15 JAN 2004 5
# Change Date: 2 OCT 2001 2 3 4 5
# Note:

[Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED]

2 SOUR S332582
3 DATA
4 TEXT Date of Import: 14 Jan 2004

[daveanthes.FTW]

GIVN Raimond Ii, Count of
SURN Toulouse
AFN 9HMG-3Q
DATE 28 AUG 2000
TIME 23:01:20

OCCU Count de Toulouse ...
SOUR gendex.com/users/daver/rigney/D0001 says ABT 895;
www.public.asu.edu/bgertz/family/d0000 says ABT 895, France;
al7fl.abts.net/green-page/greenged.html says ABT 880, Toulouse, France;
SOUR COMYN4.TAF (Compuserve) says ABT 923;
HAWKINS.GED says 919;
Royalty for Commoners, Roderick W. Stuart, p. 232 says occ 919-923;
Count of Albi, Count of Provence, Mar. of Gothie - COMYNI.GED (Compuserve);
Ragnvald (Reinold), one of the Norse invaders of Burgundy who remained there;
occ 924/925. Note: ES, 675A, does not accept this generation - Royalty for
Commoners - Royalty for Commoners, Roderick W. Stuart, p. 127; Count of Albi,
Marquis of Gothie; occ 919-923 - p. 232; Rognvald of Norway, b. ABT 896 -
HAWKINS.GED

DATE 5 MAY 2000



Father: Odo DE TOULOUSE b: ABT 869 in Toulouse, France
Mother: Garsinde Compte D' ALBY b: ABT 871 in France

Marriage 1 Guidinhlde of CARCASSONNE b: 897 in France

* Married: ABT 919 in France 1 2 3 4 5

Children

1. Has Children Raimond III Count of TOULOUSE b: ABT 920 in France


Sources:

1. Title: daveanthes.FTW
Note: ABBR daveanthes.FTW
Note: Source Media Type: Other
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Book
Text: Date of Import: 14 Jan 2004
2. Title: daveanthes.FTW
Note: ABBR daveanthes.FTW
Note: Source Media Type: Other
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Book
Text: Date of Import: Jan 13, 2004
3. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Jan 18, 2004
4. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: 21 Jan 2004
5. Title: Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Feb 6, 2004

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]