== Notes for [[Item:Q78332|Q78332]] ==

=Aelia Galla Placidia Augusta=

* Daughter of Theodosius I "the Great", Roman Emperor and Flavia Galla
* Galla Placidia (388-89 / 392-93 – 27 November 450), daughter of the Roman emperor Theodosius I, was a mother and advisor to Valentinian III from 423 until his majority in 437, and a major force in Roman politics for most of her life. She was queen consort to Ataulf, king of the Visigoths from 414 until his death in 415, and briefly empress consort to Constantius III in 421.
* Place of Burial: Ravenna, Ravenna, Emilia-Romagna, Italy

==[http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/ITALY,%20Kings%20to%20962.htm#GallaPlacidiadied450 Project MedLands ITALY Kings]

a) THEODOSIUS (Cauca, near Valladolid 11 Jan 347-Milan 17 Jan 395, bur 8 Nov 395 Constantinople).
*The Chronicon of Bishop Idatius records that Theodosius was “natione Hispanus, de provincial Gallæciæ, civitate Cauca”[51]. After campaigning with his father, he retired to Cauca after his father was executed.
*He was named master of cavalry by Emperor Gratian, and led the victory against the Visigoths in Pannonia in end 378[52]. The Pauli Historiæ Romanæ names "Theodosius genitus patre Theodosio matre Thermantia"[53]. Iordanes records the accession of "Theodosius Spanus" as emperor at Sirmium and his reigning for 17 years[54]. He was proclaimed co-Emperor THEODOSIUS I in the East 19 Jan 379 by Emperor Gratian, ruling jointly with the latter and with Emperor Valentinian II until 392. The Chronicon Paschale records that "Theodosius Augustus" was proclaimed emperor "in Sirmio…XIV Kal Feb" by "Gratiano uxoris fratre" and entered Constantinople "VIII Kal Dec"[55]. Ruling first from Thessaloniki, he entered Constantinople 24 Nov 380[56]. The Chronicle of Marcellinus records that "Valentinianus Gratiani frater et Theodosius imperatores" defeated the rebel "Maximum tyrannum et Victorem filius eius" at Aquileia in 388[57]. Theodosius eliminated the division of the empire, ruling in both east and west after this victory[58]. The Chronicon Paschale records the death "Mediolani…XVI Kal Feb" in 394 (presumably O.S.) of "Theodosius Augustus", and the return of his body to Constantinople and burial "V Id Nov"[59].

m firstly (end 376) PLACILLA, daughter of --- (-Autumn 386).
*Theophanes names "Placilla" as the first wife of "magnus Theodosius"[60]. Iordanes names "Flacilla" as the first wife of Emperor Theodosius, recording that she died before his second marriage[61]. The Pauli Historiæ Romanæ also names "Flacilla" as the first wife of Emperor Theodosius[62].

m secondly (387) GALLA, daughter of Emperor VALENTINIAN I & his second wife Justina --- (-May 394).
*Theophanes names "Iustam, Gratam et Gallam" as the three daughters of "Valentinianus senior" and his second wife "Iustinam", adding that "magnus Theodosius" married Galla as his second wife[63]. Iordanes names "Valentinianum…Gratam Iustamque et Gallam" as the four children of "Valentinianus senior" & his second wife, specifying that Galla married Emperor Theodosius after the death of his first wife[64].
*The Chronicle of Marcellinus records that "Galla Theodosii regis altera uxor" came to Constantinople in 386[65]. The Chronicle of Marcellinus also records that "Gallia Theodosii uxor" was expelled by "Arcadio privigno suo" in 390[66].
*She died in childbirth.

Emperor Theodosius & his first wife had three children:

i) ARCADIUS (end 377-1 May 408).
*Theophanes names "Arcadius…et Honorius" as the sons of "magnus Theodosius" and his first wife[67]. Iordanes names "Archadium Honoriumque" as the children of Emperor Theodosius & his first wife, recording in a later passage that they later divided the empire, Arcadius ruling in Constantinople for 13 years after the death of their father[68].
*His father proclaimed him co-Emperor ARCADIUS at Constantinople 19 Jan 383. The Chronicon Paschale records that "Arcadius" was proclaimed emperor "Constantinopoli a patre suo Theodosio Augusto in Tribunali Hebdomi…XIV Kal Feb"[69]. The Chronicon of Bishop Idatius records that Theodosius installed “Arcadium filium suum” as emperor in 383[70].
*He succeeded as Emperor in the East in 395.

ii) HONORIUS (Constantinople 9 Sep 384-15 Aug 423).
*Theophanes names "Arcadius…et Honorius" as the sons of "magnus Theodosius" and his first wife[71]. The Chronicon Paschale records the birth "V Id Sep" in 384 of "Honorius, Arcadii germanus frater"[72]. The Chronicon of Bishop Idatius records the birth in 384 of “Honorius filius Theodosii”[73]. Iordanes names "Archadium Honoriumque" as the children of Emperor Theodosius & his first wife, recording in a later passage that they later divided the empire with his brother, Honorius ruling in Rome[74].
*His father proclaimed him co-Emperor HONORIUS at Constantinople 10 Jan 393, he ruled as Emperor in the West after the death of his father in 395.
*m firstly (398) MARIA, daughter of STILICO & his wife Serena --- (-[Feb/Mar] 407). Zosimus records that "Honorio principi" married "Stelicho…filiam…ex Serena", naming her "Mariam" in a later passage[75]. Iordanes records that "Stilico…comis…duæ filiæ Maria et Hermantia" were both wives of Emperor Honorius but died as virgins[76].
*m secondly (408, repudiated end 408) HERMANTIA, daughter of STILICO & his wife Serena --- (-415). Zosimus records that "Imperator…Honorius" married "sororem eius Thermantiam" after the death of "Maria coniuge"[77]. Iordanes records that "Stilico…comis…duæ filiæ Maria et Hermantia" were both wives of Emperor Honorius but died as virgins[78]. The Chronicle of Marcellinus also names the two sisters and records the same information[79].

Emperor Theodosius & his second wife had one child:

iii) GALLA PLACIDIA ([388/early May 394][80]-Rome 27 Nov 450).
*Theophanes names "Placidia" as the daughter of "magnus Theodosius" and his second wife[81]. Iordanes names "Placidiam" as the daughter of Emperor Theodosius & his second wife, recording in a later passage that she was captured by "Halaricus rex Vesegotharum" and later married his successor "Atauulfo"[82]. The Chronicle of Marcellinus also records that "Placidia Honorii principis sorore" was abducted by "Halaricus" and later married "Athaulfo propinquo suo"[83].
*The Chronicon of Bishop Idatius records that “Ataulfus” married “Placidiam” at Narbonne in 414[84]. Her first husband married her after failing to establish an alliance with Emperor Honorius[85].
*As part of the peace negotiated by King Walia with the Romans in 416, Galla Placidia was returned to her brother Honorius in early 416[86]. The Chronicon Albeldense names “Ballia” as successor of “Sigericus”, adding that he made peace with Emperor Honorius and returned his sister Placidia to him[87].
*Iordanes records the marriage of "Constantio patricio" and Placidia after the latter was returned to Rome by Walia King of the Visigoths[88]. Iordanes records that Placidia was created "Augustam" and her son Valentinian "Cæsar" to lead the opposition to Iohannes who invaded the western empire[89].
*The Chronicon of Bishop Idatius records the death in 450 of “Valentiniani Imperatoris mater Placidia…apud Romam”[90].

m firstly (Narbonne 1 Jan 414) as his third wife, ATAULF King of the Visigoths, son of --- (-murdered Barcelona [Aug/Sep] 416).

m secondly (1 Jan 417) FLAVIUS CONSTANTIUS, son of --- (-2 Sep 421). He succeeded 8 Feb 421 as Emperor CONSTANTIUS III.

==[http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/TOULOUSE.htm#AtaulfVisigothdied416 From the Foundation for Medieval Genealogy page on Toulouse Kings, Dukes, and Counts (covering her first marriage)]

ATAULF, son of --- (-murdered Barcelona [Aug/Sep] 416).
*Iordanes names "Ataulfo" as "eius [Alaricus rex Vesegotharum] consanguineo" but does not specify the precise relationship[23]. He is first mentioned in 408 in relation to a military campaign in upper Pannonia[24].
*He succeeded his brother-in-law in 410 as ATAULF King of the Visigoths. Procopius records that Ataulf succeeded on the death of Alaric[25].
*The Chronica Regum Visigotthorum records that the Goths left Italy during the reign of “Ataulphus” and occupied “Gallias, ac postea Hispanias”, adding that Ataulf reigned for six years[26]. He led his people out of Italy and established his court at Narbonne[27]. He crossed the Pyrenees into Spain from the Visigoth base in Toulouse with a small army, charged by the enfeebled Roman State in Hispania with expelling the Vandal invaders from the south and the Suevi from the north west[28]. They occupied Barcelona in 414[29].
*He was assassinated by Dubius or Eberwolf in revenge for the earlier killing of Sarus, the brother of Ataulf's successor Sigeric[30]. The Chronicon of Bishop Idatius records that “Ataulfus” was murdered at Barcelona “per quemdam Gothum…inter familiars fabulas” in 416[31].
*m firstly ---. The name of Ataulf's first wife is not known.
*m secondly ([410]) --- of the Visigoths, sister of ALARIC King of the Visigoths, daughter of ---.

m thirdly (Narbonne 1 Jan 414) as her first husband, GALLA PLACIDIA, daughter of Emperor THEODOSIUS I & his second wife Galla ([388/early May 394][32]-27 Nov 450).
*Iordanes names "Placidiam" as the daughter of Emperor Theodosius & his second wife, recording in a later passage that she was captured by "Halaricus rex Vesegotharum" when he attacked Rome and later married his successor "Atauulfo"[33]. The Chronicle of Marcellinus also records that "Placidia Honorii principis sorore" was abducted by "Halaricus" and later married "Athaulfo propinquo suo"[34].
*Captured by Alaric King of the Visigoths during the sack of Rome in Aug 409, she passed to Ataulf on his accession as king[35]. The Chronicon of Bishop Idatius records that “Ataulfus” married “Placidiam” at Narbonne in 414[36]. Her first husband married her after failing to establish an alliance with Emperor Honorius[37].
*As part of the peace negotiated by King Walia with the Romans in 416, Galla Placidia was returned to her brother Honorius in early 416[38]. The Chronicon Albeldense names “Ballia” as successor of “Sigericus”, adding that he made peace with Emperor Honorius and returned his sister Placidia to him[39].
*She married secondly (1 Jan 417) Flavius Constantius, who succeeded in 421 as Emperor CONSTANTIUS III. Iordanes records that Placidia was created "Augustam" and her son Valentinian "Cæsar" to lead the opposition to Iohannes who invaded the western empire[40]. The Chronicon of Bishop Idatius records the death in 450 of “Valentiniani Imperatoris mater Placidia…apud Romam”[41].

King Ataulf & his first wife had six children[42]:

a) six children (-murdered Barcelona [Aug/Sep] 415).
*Sigesar, Bishop of the Goths, tried in vain to protect these children after their father's death[43].

King Ataulf & his third wife had one child:

b) THEODOSIUS (Barcelona end 414-Barcelona before Aug 415).
*The primary source which confirms his parentage has not yet been identified.

==[http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/ITALY,%20Kings%20to%20962.htm#Constantiusdied421 From the Foundation for Medieval Genealogy page on Italy Kings (covering her second marriage)]

FLAVIUS CONSTANTIUS (-2 Sep 421).
*He succeeded 8 Feb 421 as Emperor CONSTANTIUS III.

m (1 Jan 417) as her second husband, GALLA PLACIDIA, widow of ATAULF King of the Visigoths, daughter of Emperor THEODOSIUS I & his second wife Galla (-Rome 27 Nov 450).
*Iordanes records the marriage of "Constantio patricio" and Placidia after the latter was returned to Rome by Walia King of the Visigoths[103].
*The Chronicon of Bishop Idatius records the death in 450 of “Valentiniani Imperatoris mater Placidia…apud Romam”[104].

Emperor Constantius & his wife had two children:

a) HONORIA ([417/18]-).
*The Pauli Historiæ Romanæ names "Honoria et Valentiniano" as the children of Placidia Augusta[105]. The order in which the children are named suggests that Honoria was the older child but this is not certain.
*Iordanes records that Attila unsuccessfully proposed marriage to "Honoriam Valentiniani principis germanam, filiam Placidiæ Augustæ"[106].

b) VALENTINIAN (Ravenna 2 Jul 419-murdered 16 Mar 455).
*The Chronicle of Marcellinus records the birth "419 V Non Iul" at Ravenna of "Valentinianus iunior…patre Constantio et Placidia matre"[107]. The Pauli Historiæ Romanæ records his birth "VI Non Iul"[108]. Iordanes names "Placidiam" as the mother of "Valentiniani iunioris imperatoris"[109].
*Iordanes records that Placidia was created "Augustam" and her son Valentinian "Cæsar" to lead the opposition to Iohannes who invaded the western empire, and that after Iohannes was defeated Valentinian was created joint emperor at Ravenna by his maternal uncle[110]. The Chronicle of Marcellinus also records the event, dating it to 424[111]. He succeeded in 423 as Emperor VALENTINIAN III, jointly with his maternal uncle, Emperor in the West. The Chronicle of Marcellinus records that "Valentinianus iunior" was made emperor at Ravenna in 425[112]. The Chronicon Paschale records that "Valentinianus junior" was named augustus "X Kal Nov" in 425 by "Theodosio juniore Augusto"[113].


*Iordanes records that Emperor Valentinian was murdered by Maximus who had invaded the empire[114]. The Chronicon Paschale records that "Valentinianus Augustus" was murdered in 455[115].
*m (29 Oct 437) as her first husband, EUDOXIA, daughter of Emperor THEODOSIUS II, Emperor in the East & his wife Eudoxia --- (422-after 462). The Chronicle of Marcellinus records the betrothal in 424 of "Valentinianus cæsar" and "Theodosii imperatoris Eudoxiam filiam"[116]. Ioannes Malalas records the marriage of "Valentinianus iunior…Constantii Imperatoris et Placidiæ magnæ filius" and "Theodosio…filiam Eudoxiam…ex Eudocia Augusta, Philosophi filia"[117]. Theophanes records the marriage of "Valentinianus Gallæ Placidiæ et Constantini filius" and "Eudoxiam Theodosii imperatoris filiam ex Eudocia coniuge" in 426[118]. Iordanes records the marriage of Emperor Valentinian III in the third year of his reign to "Eudoxiam Theodosii principis filiam", specifying that her father transferred Illyria to the western empire as her dowry[119]. The Chronicon Paschale records the marriage "Constantinopolim…XII Kal Nov" in 437 of "Valentinianus junior Augustus" and "Eudoxia filia Theodosii et Eudocæ Augustæ"[120]. She married secondly ([Mar] 455) Emperor Petronius Maximus. After the murder of her first husband, she was forced to marry his successor, but was captured during the Vandal invasion and taken to north Africa with her two daughters[121]. Iordanes records that "Eudoxia Valentiniani uxore" invited "Gizericus…rex Vandalorum" to Rome from Africa, but was taken back to Africa by him with her two daughters[122]. She was freed in 462[123].
*Emperor Valentinian & his wife had two children.

==[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galla_Placidia English Wikipedia page on Galla Placidia]

Galla Placidia was born in 392 and died 27 Nov. 450, daughter of of the Roman Emperor Theodosius I, was the consort of Ataulf king of the Goths and after his death the Empress consort of Constantius III, Western Roman Emperor.

'''Her brother was Honorius'''.

Placidia was the daughter of Roman Emperor Theodosius I and his second wife Galla.[1] Her older brother Gratian died young. Her mother died in childbirth in 394, giving birth to John, who died with their mother.[2] Placidia was a younger, paternal half-sister of Emperors Arcadius and Honorius. Her older half-sister Pulcheria predeceased her parents as mentioned in the writings of Gregory of Nyssa, placing the death of Pulcheria prior to the death of Aelia Flaccilla, first wife of Theodosius I, in 385.[3] Her paternal grandparents were Count Theodosius and his wife Thermantia, as mentioned in the "Historia Romana" by Paul the Deacon. Her maternal grandparents were Valentinian I and his second wife Justina, as mentioned by Jordanes.[

'''First Marriage'''

In the disturbances that followed the fall of Stilicho, throughout the Italian Peninsula the wives and children of the foederati were slain. The foederati were considered loyalists of Stilicho and treated accordingly. The natural consequence of all this was that these men, to the number of 30,000, flocked to the camp of Alaric I, King of the Visigoths, clamouring to be led against their cowardly enemies. Alaric accordingly led them across the Julian Alps and, in September 408, stood before the Aurelian Walls and began a strict blockade.[11] Rome was under siege , with minor interruptions, from 408 to August 24, 410. Zosimus records that Placidia was within the city during the siege. When Serena was accused of conspiring with Alaric, "the whole senate therefore, with Placidia, uterine sister to the emperor, thought it proper that she should suffer death".[12] Her reasons for concurring to the execution of her cousin are not stated in the account.[5]

Prior to the fall of Rome, Placidia was captured by Alaric. Her captivity was recorded by both Jordanes and Marcellinus Comes, though the exact circumstances are not mentioned.[1] She followed the Visigoths in their move from the Italian Peninsula to Gaul in 412. Their ruler Ataulf, having succeeded Alaric, entered an alliance with Honorius against Jovinus and Sebastianus, rival Western Roman emperors located in Gaul. He managed to defeat and execute both Gallo-Roman emperors in 413.[13]

After the heads of Sebastianus and Jovinus arrived at Honorius' court in Ravenna in late August, to be forwarded for display among other usurpers on the walls of Carthage, relations between Ataulf and Honorius improved sufficiently for Ataulf to cement them by marrying Galla Placidia at Narbonne on January 1, 414. The nuptials were celebrated with high Roman festivities and magnificent gifts from the Gothic booty. Priscus Attalus gave the wedding speech, a classical epithalamium. The marriage was recorded by Hydatius.[1] The historian Jordanes states that they married earlier, in 411 at Forum Livii (Forlì). Jordanes's date may actually be when she and the Gothic king first became more than captor and captive.

Placidia and Ataulf had a single known son, Theodosius. He was born in Barcelona by the end of 414. Theodosius died early in the following year, thus eliminating an opportunity for a Romano-Visigothic line.[5][14] Years later the corpse was exhumed and reburied in the imperial mausoleum in St. Peter's Basilica, Rome. In Hispania, Ataulf imprudently accepted into his service a man identified as "Dubius" or "Eberwolf", a former follower of Sarus. Sarus was a Germanic chieftain who was killed while fighting under Jovinus and Sebastianus. His follower harbored a secret desire to avenge the death of his beloved patron. And so, in the palace at Barcelona, the man brought Ataulf's reign to a sudden end by killing him while he bathed in August/September, 415.[15]

The Amali faction proceeded to proclaim Sigeric, a brother of Sarus, as the next king of the Visigoths. According to the The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire by Edward Gibbon, the first act of Sigeric's reign "was the inhuman murder" of Ataulf's six children from a former marriage "whom he tore, without pity, from the feeble arms of a venerable bishop." (the later being Sigesar, Bishop of the Goths[16]). As for Galla Placidia, as Ataulf's widow, she was "treated with cruel and wanton insult" by being forced to walk more than twelve miles on foot among the crowd of captives driven ahead of the mounted Sigeric. Seeing the noble widow's sufferings, however, became one of the factors that roused indignant opponents of the usurper, who quickly assassinated Sigeric and replaced him with Wallia, Ataulf's relative.[17]

'''Second Marriage'''

Interior of the Mausoleum of Galla Placidia in Ravenna

According to the Chronicon Albeldense, included in the Roda Codex, Wallia was in desperate need of food supplies. He surrendered to Constantius III, at the time magister militum of Honorius, negotiating terms giving foederati status for the Visigoths. Placidia was returned to Honorius as part of the peace treaty.[18] Her brother Honorius forced her into marriage to Constantius III on January 1, 417.[5] Their daughter Justa Grata Honoria was probably born in 417 or 418. The history of Paul the Deacon mentions her first when mentioning the children of the marriage, suggesting she was the eldest. Their son Valentinian III was born on July 2, 419.[19]

Placidia intervened in the succession crisis following the death of Pope Zosimus on December 26, 418. Two factions of the Roman clergy had proceeded to elect their own Popes, the first electing Eulalius (27 December) and the other one electing Boniface I (28 December). They acted as rival Popes while situated in the same city, Rome. Said city was thrown into tumult as both factions clashed. Symmachus, Prefect of Rome, sent his report to the imperial court at Ravenna, requesting an imperial decision on the matter.[20] Placidia and, presumably, Constantius petitioned the emperor in favor of Eulalius.[5] This was arguably the first intervention by an Emperor in the Papal election.

Honorius initially confirmed Eulalius as the legitimate Pope. As this failed to put an end to the controversy, Honorius called a Synod of Italian bishops at Ravenna to decide on the matter. The Synod convened from February to March 419 but failed to reach a conclusion. Honorius decided to call a second Synod in May, this time calling Gaulish and African bishops to participate. In the mean time, the two rival Popes were ordered to leave Rome. However, as Easter approached, Eulalius returned to the city and attempted to seize the Basilica of St. John Lateran in order to "preside at the paschal ceremonies". Imperial troops managed to repel him and on Easter (March 30, 419) the ceremonies were presided by Achilleus, Bishop of Spoleto. The conflict cost Eulalius' imperial favor and Boniface was proclaimed the legitimate Pope as of April 3, 419, returning to Rome a week later.[20] Placidia had personally written to the African bishops, summoning them to the second synod. Three of her letters are known to have survived.[5]

On February 8, 421, Constantius was proclaimed an Augustus, becoming a co-ruler with the childless Honorius. Placidia was proclaimed an Augusta. She was the only Empress in the West, since Honorius had divorced Thermantia, his second wife, in 408 and never remarried. Both titles were not recognised by Theodosius II, Eastern Roman Emperor. Constantius reportedly complained about the loss of personal freedom and privacy that came with the imperial office. He died of an illness on September 2, 421.[21]

=Links=

* http://vandermerwede.net/, (http://vandermerwede.net/).
* http://genealogy.richardremme.com/tng/getperson.php?personID=I10641&tree=tree01
* http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galla_Placidia
* http://www.ffish.com/family_tree/Descendants_Valerius_Licinianus/D1.htm
* http://familytrees.genopro.com/318186/jarleslekt/default.htm?page=toc_families.htm4
* http://mosaicartsource.wordpress.com/2007/02/05/galla-placidia-mausoleum-in-ravenna/
* http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galla_%28wife_of_Theodosius_I%29
* http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I21415
* http://www.roman-emperors.org/galla.htm

=Sources=

* Crisis of Legitimacy: Honorius, Galla Placidia, and the Struggles for Control of the Western Roman Empire, 405-425 C.E. - https://trace.tennessee.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?referer=https://www.google.com/&httpsredir=1&article=2780&context=utk_graddiss
* LDS FHL Ancestral File # (familysearch.org) "Ancestors/Descendants of Royal Lines" (Contributors: F. L. Jacquier (History of Charlemagne by Christian Settipani); L. Orlandini, Manuel Abranches de Soveral, Reynaud de Paysac, F.L. J P de Palmas (Aurejac et Tournemire; Frankish line; The Complete Peerage, Jacquier (Genealogy of Lewis Carroll, Justin Swanstrom, The Royal Families of England Scotland & Wales by Burkes Peerage; Debrett's Peerage & Baronage; Table of descendants French Canadian Genealogical Society; Families of Monfort-sur-Risle & Bertrand de Bricquebec; The Dukes of Normandy, XXXXI), A. Brabant ("Dynastie Montmorency, Michel d'Herbigny), Paul Leportier, Claude Barret, H.R. Moser (Burke Peerage), O.Guionneau, L.B. de Rouge, E. Polti, N. Danican (Britain's Royal Families; Buthlaw, Succession of Strathclyde, the Armorial 1961-62) A.Terlinden (Genealogy of the existing British Peerage, 1842), L. Gustavsson, C. Cheneaux, E. Lodge, S. Bontron (Brian Tompsett), R. Dewkinandan, H. de la Villarmois, C. Donadello; Scevole de Livonniere, H. de la Villarmois, I. Flatmoen, P. Ract Madoux (History of Morhange; Leon Maujean; Annuaire de Lorraine, 1926; La Galissonniere: Elections d'Arques et Rouen), Jean de Villoutreys (ref: Georges Poull), E. Wilkerson-Theaux (Laura Little), O. Auffray, A. Brabant (Genealogy Chauvigny of Blot from "Chanoine Prevost Archiviste du Diocese de Troyes Union Typographique Domois Cote-d'Or 1925), Emmanuel Arminjon (E Levi-Provencal Histoire de l'Espagne Andalouse), Y. Gazagnes-Gazanhe, R. Sekulovich and J.P. de Palmas ("notes pierfit et iconographie Insecula", Tournemire)........... http://geneastar.org. "Neuman-Smith-Goodale Family and Ancestors" Michael R. Neuman michaelneuman@@earthlink.net.
* AUREJAC.GED, http://arnaud.aurejac.free.fr, (Internet.).
* royal_lineage.ged, June 2006.
* jean-pierre_masson.
* Vergy_Hugo_I.
*[103] Iordanes Romanorum, MGH Auct. ant. V.1, p. 42.
*[104] Idatii Episcopi Chronicon, España Sagrada III, p. 367.
*[105] Pauli Historiæ Romanæ Liber XII, MGH SS Auct. ant. II, p. 192.
*[106] Iordanes Getarum, MGH Auct. ant. V.1, p. 115.
*[107] Marcellini v. c. comitis Chronicon 410, MGH Auct. ant. XI, p. 70.
*[108] Pauli Historiæ Romanæ Liber XII, MGH SS Auct. ant. II, p. 192.
*[109] Iordanes Romanorum, MGH Auct. ant. V.1, p. 40.
*[110] Iordanes Romanorum, MGH Auct. ant. V.1, p. 42.
*[111] Marcellini v. c. comitis Chronicon 424, MGH Auct. ant. XI, p. 76.
*[112] Marcellini v. c. comitis Chronicon 425, MGH Auct. ant. XI, p. 76.
*[113] Chronicon Paschale, Vol. I, p. 580.
*[114] Iordanes Getarum, MGH Auct. ant. V.1, p. 118.
*[115] Chronicon Paschale, Vol. I, p. 592.
*[116] Marcellini v. c. comitis Chronicon 424, MGH Auct. ant. XI, p. 76.
*[117] Dindorf, L. (ed.) (1831) Ioannes Malalas, Corpus Scriptorum Historiæ Byzantinæ (Bonn) XIV, p. 355.
*[118] Theophanes, Vol. I, 5926/426, p. 142.
*[119] Iordanes Romanorum, MGH Auct. ant. V.1, p. 42.
*[120] Chronicon Paschale, Vol. I, p. 582.
*[121] Zosso and Zingg (1995), p. 192.
*[122] Iordanes Romanorum, MGH Auct. ant. V.1, p. 43.
*[123] Zosso and Zingg (1995), p. 200.

RESEARCH NOTES:
Roman Princess; Empress of Constance III
She was granted her own household, which made her financially independent.5
She was summoned to Milan, and there she witnessed the death of her father in
395.5 She was named Most Noble Girl (Nobilissima Puella) circa 400. She seems
to have been raised in the care of her cousin Serena, the wife of the western
general Stilicho, and presumably received a classical education, and also knew
how to weave and embroider.5 She was carried off with the Visigoths who sacked
Rome to Gaul.5 She married King of the Visigoths Athaulf Balthi, son of
Modares Balthi, in 414 in Narbonne, Gaul; His 2nd. Her 1st.2,1,3,6 She was
finally restored to the Romans following the death of her Visigoth husband
Athaulf in 416.5 She married Constantius III, imperator in 417 in Rome, Italy;
Her 2nd.2,3,4,7 She and Constantius III, imperator became involved -- on the
losing side -- in the controversy over the election of a new bishop of Rome in
419. She was made Augusta (Empress) in 421.

Galla Placidia, half-sister of Roman Emperor Honorius (b. 384- d. 423), was the daughter of Roman Emperor Theodosius ( 346-395).(father of Honorius) and his 2nd wife Galla.
Galla Placidia, as it has been stated, was half-sister of Honorius, who married her off, first to Ataulf of the Visigoths (414) , then to Honorius favorite General, Constantius in 417.

Six years after she retired as Regent and Empress of the Western Roman Empire, acting for her son Valentianian III, Empress Galla Placidia, daughter of Emperor Theodosius and Galla, died in 450AD. She was age 66. She had been a widow for more than twenty-nine years, and Empress-Regent for more than 19 of those years.

Shortly after the marriage of Ataulf of the Visigoths to Galla Placidia, half sister of the Roman Emperor Honorius, he died in 415 AD while invading Spain, and trying to take Barcelona.

Shortly after he had been named AUGUSTUS of ROME, General Constantius died, leaving his wife Galla Placidia a widow for the 2nd time in 6 years.

Alaric I of the Visigoths captured Galla Placidia, daughter of Emperor Theodosius, in 410. She was held captive, and as a hostage until 414, when she was released and returned to her half-brother Honorius. She then married Alaric's successor, Ataulf, new king of the Visigoths.

After the death of Honorius, Roman Emperor in 423, the son of Galla Placidia and General Constantius, named Valentinian III, succeeded as Roman Emperor following the short reign of Johannes from 423-425. During his minority, his mother Galla Placidia acted as Regent between 425 until about 444.

Galla Placidia had married the Roman General Constantius, shortly the death of her 1st husband Ataulf of the Visigoths (d. 415 invading Barcelona) in 417. She became the mother of Valentinian in 419 who became Valentinaian III the Roman Emperor from 425-455AD.

After her relase as hostage of Alaric of the Visigoths from 41-414, Galla Placidia was returned to the care of her half-brother Honorius, who then promptly married her off.

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.art-science.com/Ken/Genealogy/PD/ch43_Early_Goths.html
http://www.claude.barret.net/html/dat0.htm#2

_P_CCINFO 2-2438

_P_CCINFO 2-2438

This person, the grandaughter of Valentian I, genealogy was a tough research project to unravel.
1: She became a captive of the Visigoths under Alaric I who invaded Rome in 410.
2: The historian Jordans gives the date of 411 she married Athaulf in the Forum Livii (Forli)
3: Another source gave the date of marriage of Galla and Athaulf at Narbo in January of 414.
5: After Athaulf dies in 415, she was traded by the King of the Visigoths, Wallia back to the Romans in return for a treaty and supplies in 416.
6: To her disgust she is forced to marry the Roman, Constantius.
7: The historical records didn't separate Galla I and Galla II and one can make the mistake of thinking that the two are one and the same when they aren't To confuse things a little more Aelia Galla Placida was the half sister of Honorius and Arcadius by way of her father, Theodosius I's first marriage.

Source: Vito Antonio Sirago: Galla Placidia:
e la trasformazione politca dell' occidente Louvain, 1961, Pp XXV + 556.
(Universite' de Louvain, Recueil de Travaux d' Histoire et philogie, 4e Serie, Frasc 25.)

1 NAME /Placida/ 2 SOUR S033320 3 DATA 4 TEXT Date of Import: Jan 17, 2001 1 NAME Galla /Placida/, Regent of Rome 1 NAME Nn. of the Saxon /Shores/ 1 BIRT 2 DATE ABT. 355 2 SOUR S033320 3 DATA 4 TEXT Date of Import: Jan 17, 2001


[De La Pole.FTW]

Sources: Kraentzler 1794; AF.

1 NAME /Placida/ 2 SOUR S033320 3 DATA 4 TEXT Date of Import: Jan 17, 2001 1 NAME Galla /Placida/, Regent of Rome 1 NAME Nn. of the Saxon /Shores/ 1 BIRT 2 DATE ABT. 355 2 SOUR S033320 3 DATA 4 TEXT Date of Import: Jan 17, 2001


[De La Pole.FTW]

Sources: Kraentzler 1794; AF.

1 NAME /Placida/ 2 SOUR S033320 3 DATA 4 TEXT Date of Import: Jan 17, 2001 1 NAME Galla /Placida/, Regent of Rome 1 NAME Nn. of the Saxon /Shores/ 1 BIRT 2 DATE ABT. 355 2 SOUR S033320 3 DATA 4 TEXT Date of Import: Jan 17, 2001


[De La Pole.FTW]

Sources: Kraentzler 1794; AF.

[blended.FTW]
[mergebase.FTW]
Galla Placida married the Master of the Soldiers Constantius (who ruled briefly as co-Emperor with Honorius, Galla's brother) when he was at the height of his career, and their son Valentinian III reigned in the West. When the Visigoths under King Alaric I sacked Rome in 410, they carried off Galla with them as hostage. She was of course returned, and later went on to rule the empire when her son was very young with the formal title of "piissima et perpetua Augusta mater" which translates to "most pius and eternal Empress."
---------------------------
A visit to the mausoleum of Galla Placidia in Ravenna is quite enoughin itself to inspire one with a desire to know more of this remarkable woman. Daughter to Theodosius the Great, and half-sister to Honorius, the Emperor under whom Britain was finally lost to Rome, she lived to see the great empire of the known world become the battleground of marauding barbarians, and the court that had ruled that empire sheltering disconsolently in the last territory it could call its own---Ravenna, an island of security surrounded by a waste of marshland and the sea.
She first storms onto the stage of history in 408 when Alaric the Goth was laying siege to Rome. The Senate consulted her as to the reliability of her cousin Serena, widow of Stilicho, the Vandal general who had served her father, and she advised that the woman be strangled forconniving with the enemy. Though a very devout Catholic, she lived ina world of treachery and sudden death, and witnessed many such scenes---and worse, for the most usual form of execution then was clubbing to death.
When Alaric sacked Rome, he carried off Placidia as a part of his booty but afforded her imperial honours. He died soon afterwards, and hisbrother-in-law Ataulf became king. Ataulf carried on for a short timeAlaric's policy of attempting to convert the Roman Empire into a Gothic one, but rapidly became convinced of the superiority of a Roman structure. In 412 he offered to join with Honorius and to give up Placidia in return for supplies, but neither cooperation nor supplies came, and in 414 he married Placidia. This was be no means a forced marriage, and the description we have of the ceremony shows an interesting union of Roman and barbaric ideas: they dressed in the Roman manner, andthe proper wedding hymns were sung, but the bridegroom's gift to the bride was fifty handsome youths dressed in silk, each carrying two platters, the one piled high with gold, the other with precious stones---the booty from the sack of Rome. Ataulf declared 'I hope to be handed down to posterity as the initiator of a Roman restoration.' (Olympiodorus fragment 24, and Orosius, vii, 42.)
We cannot tell what might have resulted from such a cooperation, but it was foiled by Honorius, who was deeply shocked by his sister's marriage with a barbarian and also was strongly influenced by the advice of his leading general, Constantius, who longed to marry Placidia himself.
In 415 Placidia bore Ataulf a son, and called him Theodosius, after her father. But the child died, and almost as soon as they had buried their hope for the future in his silver coffin in Barcelona, Ataulf wasmurdered. His immediate successor treated her as a common prisioner, driving her before his horse on foot for twelve miles. Luckily for herthis man only lasted a week, and his successor handed her over to Constantius in return for 600,000 measures of corn, as her husband had instructed on his death-bed.
In 417 she was married, much against her will, to Constantius. She soon settled down, bearing him a son and a daughter, and exercising her powerful influence on Honorius to raise her husband's status. Honoriuswas not keen on human beings---he loved poultry best of all but his sister he adored, and scandal ensued from their constant kissing. In 421 Placidia was elevated to the rank of Augusta, and her husband as Agusutus became joint ruler of the Western Empire with Honorius.
Shortly afterwards Constantius died, and tensions began to arise between the brother and sister. Still she hankered after an arrangement with the Goths, and a 'barbarian' party built up round her to oppose the'Roman' party of Honorius. Difficulties came to a head as to who should succeed to the post once held by Constantius of magister militum, Generalissimo of the Roman troops. Placidia favoured Boniface, a fine man with a great military skill, but Honorius appointed another. Boniface fled to Africa to build up an independent position for himself there, where he got to know Augustine very well, and Placidia and her children were exiled to Constantinople where her nephew Theodosius II ruled.
In 423 Honorius died, and an obscure civil servant called John was pushed in as Emperor of the West. The proper heir was Placidia's son Valentinian III, who was only four years old and Theodosius decided to back his claim with troops. In 425 the child was clothed with the imperial robes in Ravenna. This was a great triumph for Placidia, but she had to contend for power with one of the most able men this century produced---Aëtius, a Roman general who led a Hunnish army, 60,000 strong.In 432 Placidia recalled Boniface from Africa to help oust Aëtius; hebeat him, but shortly afterwards died, and Aëtius romped back to supreme power the next year, a control he exercised without interruption or challenge until his murder in 454.
These last years must have been sad ones for Placidia, who was not a woman to submit easily to such control, and had been more used to the bustle and plotting of power. However, the year of her death, 450, wasto prove an exciting one for her, and one which showed that her daughter had much the same spirit. Honoria had fallen in love with her butler who had been put to death for his imprudence, whilst she was deprived of her royal rank, and a steady marriage was arranged for her. So she sent to Attila begging him to come and avenge her, and sending hima ring, promising her hand. Attila immediately made ready to invade Rome and fetch her, and everyone advised Valentinian to give his sisterto the Hun in order to buy him off; but, at the insistent prayers of his mother, he refused. Two years later Attila was still demanding hisroyal bride, but this time there was no jointure between noble Roman and barbarian king.

[blended.FTW]
[mergebase.FTW]
Galla Placida married the Master of the Soldiers Constantius (who ruled briefly as co-Emperor with Honorius, Galla's brother) when he was at the height of his career, and their son Valentinian III reigned in the West. When the Visigoths under King Alaric I sacked Rome in 410, they carried off Galla with them as hostage. She was of course returned, and later went on to rule the empire when her son was very young with the formal title of "piissima et perpetua Augusta mater" which translates to "most pius and eternal Empress."
---------------------------
A visit to the mausoleum of Galla Placidia in Ravenna is quite enoughin itself to inspire one with a desire to know more of this remarkable woman. Daughter to Theodosius the Great, and half-sister to Honorius, the Emperor under whom Britain was finally lost to Rome, she lived to see the great empire of the known world become the battleground of marauding barbarians, and the court that had ruled that empire sheltering disconsolently in the last territory it could call its own---Ravenna, an island of security surrounded by a waste of marshland and the sea.
She first storms onto the stage of history in 408 when Alaric the Goth was laying siege to Rome. The Senate consulted her as to the reliability of her cousin Serena, widow of Stilicho, the Vandal general who had served her father, and she advised that the woman be strangled forconniving with the enemy. Though a very devout Catholic, she lived ina world of treachery and sudden death, and witnessed many such scenes---and worse, for the most usual form of execution then was clubbing to death.
When Alaric sacked Rome, he carried off Placidia as a part of his booty but afforded her imperial honours. He died soon afterwards, and hisbrother-in-law Ataulf became king. Ataulf carried on for a short timeAlaric's policy of attempting to convert the Roman Empire into a Gothic one, but rapidly became convinced of the superiority of a Roman structure. In 412 he offered to join with Honorius and to give up Placidia in return for supplies, but neither cooperation nor supplies came, and in 414 he married Placidia. This was be no means a forced marriage, and the description we have of the ceremony shows an interesting union of Roman and barbaric ideas: they dressed in the Roman manner, andthe proper wedding hymns were sung, but the bridegroom's gift to the bride was fifty handsome youths dressed in silk, each carrying two platters, the one piled high with gold, the other with precious stones---the booty from the sack of Rome. Ataulf declared 'I hope to be handed down to posterity as the initiator of a Roman restoration.' (Olympiodorus fragment 24, and Orosius, vii, 42.)
We cannot tell what might have resulted from such a cooperation, but it was foiled by Honorius, who was deeply shocked by his sister's marriage with a barbarian and also was strongly influenced by the advice of his leading general, Constantius, who longed to marry Placidia himself.
In 415 Placidia bore Ataulf a son, and called him Theodosius, after her father. But the child died, and almost as soon as they had buried their hope for the future in his silver coffin in Barcelona, Ataulf wasmurdered. His immediate successor treated her as a common prisioner, driving her before his horse on foot for twelve miles. Luckily for herthis man only lasted a week, and his successor handed her over to Constantius in return for 600,000 measures of corn, as her husband had instructed on his death-bed.
In 417 she was married, much against her will, to Constantius. She soon settled down, bearing him a son and a daughter, and exercising her powerful influence on Honorius to raise her husband's status. Honoriuswas not keen on human beings---he loved poultry best of all but his sister he adored, and scandal ensued from their constant kissing. In 421 Placidia was elevated to the rank of Augusta, and her husband as Agusutus became joint ruler of the Western Empire with Honorius.
Shortly afterwards Constantius died, and tensions began to arise between the brother and sister. Still she hankered after an arrangement with the Goths, and a 'barbarian' party built up round her to oppose the'Roman' party of Honorius. Difficulties came to a head as to who should succeed to the post once held by Constantius of magister militum, Generalissimo of the Roman troops. Placidia favoured Boniface, a fine man with a great military skill, but Honorius appointed another. Boniface fled to Africa to build up an independent position for himself there, where he got to know Augustine very well, and Placidia and her children were exiled to Constantinople where her nephew Theodosius II ruled.
In 423 Honorius died, and an obscure civil servant called John was pushed in as Emperor of the West. The proper heir was Placidia's son Valentinian III, who was only four years old and Theodosius decided to back his claim with troops. In 425 the child was clothed with the imperial robes in Ravenna. This was a great triumph for Placidia, but she had to contend for power with one of the most able men this century produced---Aëtius, a Roman general who led a Hunnish army, 60,000 strong.In 432 Placidia recalled Boniface from Africa to help oust Aëtius; hebeat him, but shortly afterwards died, and Aëtius romped back to supreme power the next year, a control he exercised without interruption or challenge until his murder in 454.
These last years must have been sad ones for Placidia, who was not a woman to submit easily to such control, and had been more used to the bustle and plotting of power. However, the year of her death, 450, wasto prove an exciting one for her, and one which showed that her daughter had much the same spirit. Honoria had fallen in love with her butler who had been put to death for his imprudence, whilst she was deprived of her royal rank, and a steady marriage was arranged for her. So she sent to Attila begging him to come and avenge her, and sending hima ring, promising her hand. Attila immediately made ready to invade Rome and fetch her, and everyone advised Valentinian to give his sisterto the Hun in order to buy him off; but, at the insistent prayers of his mother, he refused. Two years later Attila was still demanding hisroyal bride, but this time there was no jointure between noble Roman and barbarian king.

Rootsweb Feldman
URL: http://worldconnect.genealogy.rootsweb.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=:3044567&id=I07823
# ID: I07823
# Name: Alaric I King of the VISIGOTH 1 2 3 4 5 6
# Sex: M
# Birth: ABT 370 in Peuce Island Danube River now in Romania 1 2 3 4 5 6
# Change Date: 15 JAN 2004 6
# Change Date: 7 OCT 2001 2 3 4 5 6
# Note:

[Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED]

2 SOUR S332582
3 DATA
4 TEXT Date of Import: 14 Jan 2004

# Marriage 1 Spouse Unknown

Children

1. Has Children Theodorick I King of the VISIGOTH b: ABT 395


Sources:

1. Title: daveanthes.FTW
Note: ABBR daveanthes.FTW
Note: Source Media Type: Other
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Book
Text: Date of Import: 14 Jan 2004
2. Title: daveanthes.FTW
Note: ABBR daveanthes.FTW
Note: Source Media Type: Other
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Book
Text: Date of Import: Jan 13, 2004
3. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Jan 17, 2004
4. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Jan 18, 2004
5. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: 21 Jan 2004
6. Title: Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Feb 6, 2004

She was twenty years old when the Visigoth Alaric attacked Rome and took her prisoner. Four years later she was married to Ataulfo, Alaric's successor, who was later assassinated. She was allowed to leave the 'barbarians' and took refuge with her brother, Honorius. Aged twenty-seven, she married a general of the empire and succeeded in having him proclaimed co-emperor as Constantius III. When widowed a second time, and after the death of her brother Honorius, she had her own son, Valentinian III, placed on the imperial throne of the west, while she exercised the power of a regent. She died aged sixty and was buried in Rome. Source: Leo van de Pas. Stammtafeln zu Europaeischen Staaten by Prinz von Isenburg. The Roman Emperors 31BC-AD476 by Michael Grant.

#Générale#Faite prisonnière par Alaric en 410, puis epouse de son
successeur.
Elle fonde la basilique Saint-Jean l'Evangeliste OE Rome.
Profession : Imperatrice de Rome de 421 OE 450.

inhumation : Ravenne

#Générale#vve d'Athaulf de Wisigothie
s:R.Lenormand

#Générale#Faite prisonnière par Alaric en 410, puis épouse de sonsuccesseur.
Elle fonde la basilique Saint-Jean l'Evangéliste à Rome.
Profession : Impératrice de Rome de 421 à 450.

[blended.FTW]
[mergebase.FTW]
Galla Placida married the Master of the Soldiers Constantius (who ruled briefly as co-Emperor with Honorius, Galla's brother) when he was at the height of his career, and their son Valentinian III reigned in the West. When the Visigoths under King Alaric I sacked Rome in 410, they carried off Galla with them as hostage. She was of course returned, and later went on to rule the empire when her son was very young with the formal title of "piissima et perpetua Augusta mater" which translates to "most pius and eternal Empress."
---------------------------
A visit to the mausoleum of Galla Placidia in Ravenna is quite enoughin itself to inspire one with a desire to know more of this remarkable woman. Daughter to Theodosius the Great, and half-sister to Honorius, the Emperor under whom Britain was finally lost to Rome, she lived to see the great empire of the known world become the battleground of marauding barbarians, and the court that had ruled that empire sheltering disconsolently in the last territory it could call its own---Ravenna, an island of security surrounded by a waste of marshland and the sea.
She first storms onto the stage of history in 408 when Alaric the Goth was laying siege to Rome. The Senate consulted her as to the reliability of her cousin Serena, widow of Stilicho, the Vandal general who had served her father, and she advised that the woman be strangled forconniving with the enemy. Though a very devout Catholic, she lived ina world of treachery and sudden death, and witnessed many such scenes---and worse, for the most usual form of execution then was clubbing to death.
When Alaric sacked Rome, he carried off Placidia as a part of his booty but afforded her imperial honours. He died soon afterwards, and hisbrother-in-law Ataulf became king. Ataulf carried on for a short timeAlaric's policy of attempting to convert the Roman Empire into a Gothic one, but rapidly became convinced of the superiority of a Roman structure. In 412 he offered to join with Honorius and to give up Placidia in return for supplies, but neither cooperation nor supplies came, and in 414 he married Placidia. This was be no means a forced marriage, and the description we have of the ceremony shows an interesting union of Roman and barbaric ideas: they dressed in the Roman manner, andthe proper wedding hymns were sung, but the bridegroom's gift to the bride was fifty handsome youths dressed in silk, each carrying two platters, the one piled high with gold, the other with precious stones---the booty from the sack of Rome. Ataulf declared 'I hope to be handed down to posterity as the initiator of a Roman restoration.' (Olympiodorus fragment 24, and Orosius, vii, 42.)
We cannot tell what might have resulted from such a cooperation, but it was foiled by Honorius, who was deeply shocked by his sister's marriage with a barbarian and also was strongly influenced by the advice of his leading general, Constantius, who longed to marry Placidia himself.
In 415 Placidia bore Ataulf a son, and called him Theodosius, after her father. But the child died, and almost as soon as they had buried their hope for the future in his silver coffin in Barcelona, Ataulf wasmurdered. His immediate successor treated her as a common prisioner, driving her before his horse on foot for twelve miles. Luckily for herthis man only lasted a week, and his successor handed her over to Constantius in return for 600,000 measures of corn, as her husband had instructed on his death-bed.
In 417 she was married, much against her will, to Constantius. She soon settled down, bearing him a son and a daughter, and exercising her powerful influence on Honorius to raise her husband's status. Honoriuswas not keen on human beings---he loved poultry best of all but his sister he adored, and scandal ensued from their constant kissing. In 421 Placidia was elevated to the rank of Augusta, and her husband as Agusutus became joint ruler of the Western Empire with Honorius.
Shortly afterwards Constantius died, and tensions began to arise between the brother and sister. Still she hankered after an arrangement with the Goths, and a 'barbarian' party built up round her to oppose the'Roman' party of Honorius. Difficulties came to a head as to who should succeed to the post once held by Constantius of magister militum, Generalissimo of the Roman troops. Placidia favoured Boniface, a fine man with a great military skill, but Honorius appointed another. Boniface fled to Africa to build up an independent position for himself there, where he got to know Augustine very well, and Placidia and her children were exiled to Constantinople where her nephew Theodosius II ruled.
In 423 Honorius died, and an obscure civil servant called John was pushed in as Emperor of the West. The proper heir was Placidia's son Valentinian III, who was only four years old and Theodosius decided to back his claim with troops. In 425 the child was clothed with the imperial robes in Ravenna. This was a great triumph for Placidia, but she had to contend for power with one of the most able men this century produced---Aëtius, a Roman general who led a Hunnish army, 60,000 strong.In 432 Placidia recalled Boniface from Africa to help oust Aëtius; hebeat him, but shortly afterwards died, and Aëtius romped back to supreme power the next year, a control he exercised without interruption or challenge until his murder in 454.
These last years must have been sad ones for Placidia, who was not a woman to submit easily to such control, and had been more used to the bustle and plotting of power. However, the year of her death, 450, wasto prove an exciting one for her, and one which showed that her daughter had much the same spirit. Honoria had fallen in love with her butler who had been put to death for his imprudence, whilst she was deprived of her royal rank, and a steady marriage was arranged for her. So she sent to Attila begging him to come and avenge her, and sending hima ring, promising her hand. Attila immediately made ready to invade Rome and fetch her, and everyone advised Valentinian to give his sisterto the Hun in order to buy him off; but, at the insistent prayers of his mother, he refused. Two years later Attila was still demanding hisroyal bride, but this time there was no jointure between noble Roman and barbarian king.

Pulcheria
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.
(Redirected from Pulcheria (daughter of Theodosius I))
Jump to: navigation, search
Pulcheria (January 19, 399 – 453) was the daughter of the Eastern Roman Emperor Arcadius and Aelia Eudoxia.

As the elder sister of Theodosius II, she held much of the power when he came to the throne as a child in 408. She took a vow of virginity to avoid being forced into a marriage, and tended to rely on the support of the various Germanic military officers she appointed, such as the Alan Aspar. By 416 Theodosius was capable of ruling by himself, but she remained a very strong influence, having had herself proclaimed Empress in 414. That year she had Theodosius remove all pagans from the civil service; she was a devout Christian and under her influence both Theodosius and his wife Aelia Eudocia (a former pagan) became devout Christians as well. In 421 Theodosius declared war on Persia, due to Pulcheria's influence, apparently because the Persians were persecuting Christians. She did not oppose Arianism, the form of Christianity practised by the Germanic tribes. Theodosius originally supported Patriarch Nestorius, but Pulcheria, with the help of Archbishop Cyril of Alexandria, convinced him to return to Orthodoxy. Nestorius was exiled in 435. Pulcheria also convinced her brother to exile the Jews and destroy their synagogues in Constantinople.

In 441 Chrysaphius, a eunuch, convinced Theodosius to dismiss Pulcheria, although Chrysaphius simply took her place leaving Theodosius with little power. Pulcheria became a nun, but by 450, when Theodosius died, Pulcheria had been allowed to return to court. Chrysaphius and Pulcheria struggled for control after Theodosius' death; Pulcheria allied with the Germanic military officers, and married one of Aspar's generals, Marcian, declaring that Theodosius had declared Marcian his successor. The marriage was arranged with the understanding that he respect Pulcheria's vow of chastity. Pulcheria then had Marcian execute Chrysaphius.

In 451 she helped organize the Council of Chalcedon to condemn Nestorianism. The Council also condemned the Robber Synod of 449, which had supported the Monophysite heresy and the Monophysite abbot Eutyches, who was deposed and exiled at Chalcedon. At Chalcedon Pulcheria declared Flavian of Constantinople a martyr, after his deposition at the Robber Synod and his death at the hands of the supporters of Eutyches, whom he had opposed.

Pulcheria also commissioned many new churches in Constantinople, especially to the Virgin Mary. She died in July, 453, leaving Aspar as the dominant influence on Marcian, who himself died in 457. Pulcheria is recognized as a saint by the Roman Catholic Church and the Eastern Orthodox Church.

[edit]
Aunt and namesake
Pulcheria was also the name of a daughter of Theodosius I and Aelia Flaccilla. She was born in 378 and died in 385.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]