== Notes for [[Item:Q113681|Q113681]] ==

=Dona Gontinha Soares de Riba de Vizela=

* Daughter of Soeiro Raimundes de Riba de Vizela and Urraca Viegas Barroso
* [https://www.geni.com/photo/view?album_type=photos_of_me&id=6000000003024405533&photo_id=6000000137044626840&position=0 '''Que contem a historia dos primeiros 23. annos del Rey D. Dinis: 5 By Francisco Brandao''']
* [https://our-royal-titled-noble-and-commoner-ancestors.com/p3357.htm#i100827 '''Our Royal Titled Noble Ancestors''']

=Married=

* Married: '''João Pires Redondo,''' son of Pedro Soares Velho, the Escaldado , and Maria Vasques of Coimbra. After Gontinha's death, João married for the second time to Mayor Pires Pereira , widow of Vicente Pires de Urgueses , daughter of Dom Pedro Rodrigues Pereira and his second wife, Maria Pires Gravel .

=Children=

* '''Maria Annes Redondo,''' married to Raimundo Viegas de Siqueira , son of Egas Pires Coronel and [...] . After Raimundo's death, Maria married Gomes Pires Correa , son of Dom Pedro Paes Correa and Dona Dordia Pires de Aguiar , for the second time . Gomes died before 1258, and Maria married Vasco Affonso for the third time. Mary died after 1297.
* '''Theresa Annes Redondo,''' married to Pedro Pires Homem , son of Dom Pedro Rodrigues Pereira and Maria Pires Gravel . [note that Theresa's husband was her stepmother's brother]
* '''Beatriz Annes Redondo,''' married to Pedro Soares Coelho , son of Dom Soeiro Viegas Coelho and Dona Mayor Mendes de Candarei . After Pedro's death, Beatriz married for the second time to Ruy Martins de Nomães (Rodrigo Martins de Nomães), son of Dom Martim Gonçalves de Nomães and Dona Mayor Soares Galego .
* '''Guiomar Annes Redondo,''' Guiomar was Abbess at the Semide convent.
* '''Urraca Annes Redondo,''' Urraca was Abbess at the convent of Lorvão.

=D. João Pires Redondo=

Governor of Neiva, Refojos and Riba de Ave, Portuguese knight who participated in the Conquest of Seville (1248) alongside Fernando III, King of Leon and Castile ...

D. João Pires Redondo, Governor of Neiva, Refojos and Riba de Ave, Knight of the Conquest of Seville (1248), * 1198 - † before 05.05.1272, was the son of D. Pedro Soares Velho, the Escaldado (* 1170) and D. Maria Vasques Ramiroa, (* 1170); Paternal grandson of D. Soeiro Nunes Velho, (* 1150) and D. Teresa Anes de Penela, (* 1150) and maternal grandson of D. Vasco Pais, Alcaide-Mor de Coimbra (* 1115) and D. Ermezenda Martins (* 1130).

D. João Pires Redondo was a nobleman and medieval knight from the Kingdom of Portugal.

In 1248, he participated in the Conquest of Seville (1248) alongside Fernando III, King of Leon and Castile. He held the position of Governor of the localities of Neiva, Refojos and Riba de Ave. He died before May 5, 1272, as on this date his second wife shares the assets with her children.

About D. João Pires Redondo and his ancestors, Dr. Francisco Oliveira Simões mentions the following in his Master's Thesis in Medieval History, entitled “The Portuguese Cavalry in the Siege of Seville in 1248”:

"... Participated in the siege D. Pero Soares Escaldado, grandson of D. Nuno Soares, the Elder, the Prestameira, descendant of D. Arnaldo de Baião, who was a knight alongside D. Gonçalo Mendes da Maia, at the time of D. Afonso Henriques Being D. Pero a member of the oldest Portuguese lineages, since the Baião were already established in this territory since the 10th century. He was married to D. Maria Vasques Ramiroa, daughter of the mayor of Coimbra, D. Vasco Pais, and D. Ermesenda Martins, who was the daughter of D. Martim Anaia, from this marriage were born: D. João Pires Redondo, knight who participated in the siege of Seville, D. Pedro Velho, D. Martim Peres Zote, D. Pedro Pires Bravo, noble who also joined the knight group that set out to conquer Seville, D. Maria Bravo, and D. Sancha Peres, who became abbess of Vairão, a common destination for women who were unable to marry D. Pero Soares Escaldado was the son of D. Soeiro Nunes and D. Teresa Anes de Penela. shoots: D. Pero Soares Escaldado, they gave him this nickname due to having little, if any, beard; D. Maria Soares; and Dª. Mor Soares, who married D. Pero Novais, the Elder ... ".

'''Family Relationships:'''

He was the son of Pedro Soares Velho, "the Escaldado" and of D. Maria Vasques Ramiroa, daughter of D. Vasco Pais, Mayor of Coimbra and D. Ermezenda Martinse.

He married twice, the first with D. Gontinha Soares de Melo, daughter of D. Soeiro Raimundes de Riba de Vizela and D. Urraca Viegas Barroso, of whom he had:

D. Maria Soares de Melo Anes Redondo, c.c. Gomes Pires Correia. D. Teresa Anes Redondo, c.c. D. Pedro Pires Homem. D. Brites Anes Redondo (* 1230), c.c. D. Rodrigo Martins de Nomães, and c.c. Pero Soares Coelho

and the second time he married D. Mor Peres da Pereira, daughter of D. Pedro Rodrigues Pereira, Governor of Viseu and D. Maria Pires Gravel, of whom he had:

Gonçalo Anes Redondo, c.c. D. Teresa Esteves de Freitas

=Links=

* https://pt.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jo%C3%A3o_Pires_Redondo
* https://www.genearc.net/index.php?op=ZGV0YWxoZVBlc3NvYS5waHA=&id=MTE1NTg=
* https://peoplepill.com/people/joao-pires-redondo/
* https://charters.one-name.net/p445.htm
* https://ler.letras.up.pt/uploads/ficheiros/2041.pdf
* https://www.genearc.net/index.php?op=ZGV0YWxoZVBlc3NvYS5waHA=&id=MTE1NTk=
* https://genearc.net/index.php?op=ZGV0YWxoZVBlc3NvYS5waHA=&id=MTA5MTI=

=Sources=

* Pizarro, José Augusto de Sotto Mayor , Portuguese Medieval Lineages - 3 vols, Modern University, 1st Edition, Porto, 1999. vol. 2-pg. 202 and vol. 2-pg. 300.
* Visitante no: 119262
* Linhagens Medievais Portuguesas - vol. 1 - pg. 352;
* Nobiliário das Famílias de Portugal - vol. IX - pg. 349 (Sequeiras);
* Livro do Deão 1-J7; 2-W4; 4-O6; 9-A6;
* Livro Linhagens do Conde D. Pedro 30-H4; 33-A4; 34-A2, 34-I2,34-O3; 36-A8, 36BB10; 41-M3; 56-B6;
* Felgueiras Gayo Nobiliário de Famílias de Portugal 1941.
* José Augusto de Sotto Mayor Pizarro , Portuguese Medieval Lineages - 3 vols, Modern University, 1st Edition, Porto, 1999. vol. 1-pg. 352.
* Manuel José da Costa Felgueiras Gayo , Furniture for Families of Portugal, Carvalhos de Basto, 2nd Edition, Braga, 1989. vol. IX-pg. 349 (Backwoods).
* Provas da Historia genealogica da casa real portugueza: tirados dos, By António Caetano de Sousa - https://books.google.com/books?id=rQVYAAAAcAAJ&pg=PA220-IA18&lpg=PA220-IA18&dq=Jo%C3%A3o+Pires+Redondo&source=bl&ots=HDi_uZcP_i&sig=ACfU3U1x3c75DJj5JHYLaBV1_RJznWTitw&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjR3c-P2tnpAhVCoFsKHatVBWoQ6AEwBnoECAcQAQ#v=onepage&q=Jo%C3%A3o%20Pires%20Redondo&f=false
* Tr ovadores galecio-portuguezes, By Teófilo Braga - https://books.google.com/books?id=G2kuAAAAYAAJ&pg=PA122&lpg=PA122&dq=Jo%C3%A3o+Pires+Redondo&source=bl&ots=rJyOXfuoy4&sig=ACfU3U1S8jl490XGNYMd-zQOacwiDwfyIg&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjR3c-P2tnpAhVCoFsKHatVBWoQ6AEwEnoECAYQAQ#v=onepage&q=Jo%C3%A3o%20Pires%20Redondo&f=false
* Glosas marginais ao cancioneiro medieval português, By Carolina Michaëlis de Vasconcellos, Yara Frateschi Vieira - https://books.google.com/books?id=pKcWrTz853EC&pg=PA579&lpg=PA579&dq=Jo%C3%A3o+Pires+Redondo&source=bl&ots=LCNTLbL16T&sig=ACfU3U0ntr7Vu4uHC0UoBlPW0w6xksE3Mg&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwimx8PM3dnpAhVLFTQIHRQFDRg4ChDoATAAegQIBRAB#v=onepage&q=Jo%C3%A3o%20Pires%20Redondo&f=false
* Que contem a historia dos primeiros 23. annos del Rey D. Dinis: 5, By Francisco Brandao - https://books.google.com/books?id=1xJUAAAAcAAJ&pg=PA35-IA1&lpg=PA35-IA1&dq=Jo%C3%A3o+Pires+Redondo&source=bl&ots=0TsE_CKdRs&sig=ACfU3U1bRGN-KOMMfVQdQysmNzPYXk9TMQ&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwiS4deS3tnpAhXkIzQIHVnSD6Q4ChDoATADegQIBRAB#v=onepage&q=Jo%C3%A3o%20Pires%20Redondo&f=false
* A Touch of Fortune: Catarina Pires Folgada, aunt of the 1st Duke of Bragança Action and social insertion (14th-15th centuries) 1.Introduction 1.1.Origin of the Municipality of Redondo - https://www.academia.edu/41911885/Um_Toque_da_Fortuna_Catarina_Pires_Folgada_tia_do_1o_Duque_de_Bragan%C3%A7a_A%C3%A7%C3%A3o_e_inser%C3%A7%C3%A3o_social_s%C3%A9culos_XIV_XV_1_Introdu%C3%A7%C3%A3o_1_1_Origem_do_Concelho_de_Redondo
* Livº do Deão 1-BB9; 2-M3; 2-W4; 9-A6
* Livº Linhagens do Conde D.Pedro 30-H4

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]