== Notes for [[Item:Q116634|Q116634]] ==

GOTRUDA de Cerdanya, illegitimate daughter of MIRÓN [II] Conde de Cerdanya & his mistress Vigilia de Ampurias (-[956/63]). "Gollegod comitissa" donated property "in comitatu Ausona" to Vic by charter dated 18 May 953[15]. The primary source which confirms her parentage has not yet been identified. Lope & his wife had four children:

a) RAIMUNDO [II] (-after 7 Nov 1007). His parentage is indicated by a charter dated 30 Dec 1035 under which "Stephania…cometissa et filio suo Bernardo chomite" donated property to Santa Maria de Gerri, for the souls of "suscensoribus nostrorum vel Ramundo comite filio Goldergoto et Suniario filio Goldergoto, Wilelmo comite filio Ermetruit"[16].

b) BORELL [I] (-before 994). Conde de Pallars. m as her first husband, ERMENTRUDE, daughter of ---. She married secondly as his first wife, her first husband's brother, Sunyer [I] Conde de Pallars. Her name and second marriage are indicated by a charter dated 30 Dec 1035 under which "Stephania…cometissa et filio suo Bernardo chomite" donated property to Santa Maria de Gerri, for the souls of "suscensoribus nostrorum vel… Wilelmo comite filio Ermetruit"[17]. According to Europäische Stammtafeln[18], she was Ermentrude de Rouergue (there called "Ermengarde"), daughter of Raymond [I] Comte de Rouergue & his wife Richarde ---, but the primary source on which this is based has not yet been identified. The primary source which confirms her first marriage has not yet been identified. Borell [I] & his wife had six children:

i) ARMENGOL (-after 1030). The primary source which confirms his parentage has not yet been identified. Conde de Pallars. m ---. The name of Armengol's wife is not known. Armengol & his wife had one child:

(a) RAIMUNDO (-after 1030). The primary source which confirms his parentage has not yet been identified.

ii) GUILLERMO . The primary source which confirms his parentage has not yet been identified.

iii) ISARN . The primary source which confirms his parentage has not yet been identified.

iv) MIRON . The primary source which confirms his parentage has not yet been identified.

v) ABA . The primary source which confirms her parentage has not yet been identified.

vi) ERMENGARDA . The primary source which confirms her parentage has not yet been identified.

c) SUNYER (-1010). A Fragmentum historicum in the cartulary of Alaon names “Sumarius” as the son of “Lupus”[19]. "Suniarius…comes hac marchisus" confirmed earlier donations to the abbey of la Grasse by "avus meus Raimundus comes et patruus meus Ysarnus hac frater illius Atonis episcopus…frater meus Raimundus comes" by charter dated 7 Nov 1007 subscribed by "Raimundus comes, Guillelmus suo fratre"[20]. Conde de Pallars.

- see below.

d) SUNIFREDO .

e) RIQUILDA .

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]