== Notes for [[Item:Q88173|Q88173]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apama

------------------------------------------------------

* ID: I62205
* Name: '''Apama of Bactria'''
* Prefix: Princess
* Given Name: Apama
* Surname: of Bactria
* Sex: F
* _UID: 3543E0B938AB0A4B8CAE9C3F0B477DEB18CD
* Change Date: 26 Nov 2005
* Death: Y
* Father: '''Spitamenes of Bactria'''
* Mother: '''of Bactria'''
* Marriage 1 '''Seleucus I of Syria''' b: ABT 358 BC
* Married:
* Children
# '''Achaeus I of Syria'''
# '''Antiocus I of Syria''' b: ABT 324 BC

Forrás / Source: http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I62205
--------------------
Birth: 345 B.C.

General Notes

Apama II of Bactria married King of Syria Seleucus I Nicator of Macedonia, son of Antiochus of Macedonia and Laodice (?) , 0324 BC in Susa.1,2 She was born 0340 B.C.. She was the daughter of Satrap Spitamenes of Bactria and N. N. of Bithynia. Sources: 2. Bryan, K. 'Davidic Descents to the House of Plantagenet' Augustan, Vol. XXV, 16-23. ; 3. Yarshater, E. 'The Cambridge History of Iran' Vol.3#1, pp.4. ; 4. Green, P. 'Alexander to Actium' pp.734.

Children of Apama II of Bactria and King of Syria Seleucus I Nicator of Macedonia:

Prince of Syria Achaeus Seleucid + b. 0320 B.C.

King of Syria Antiochos I Soter Seleucid + b. 0324 B.C., d. 0261 B.C.

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, Royalty for Commoners: The Complete Lineage of John of Gaunt, Son of Edward III, Kings of England, and Queen Philippa (.: ., 3rd Ed., 1998), 414-80. Hereinafter cited as RfC.

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 415-80.

--------------------
'''
=Apama=
'''

Apama (Ancient Greek: Ἀπάμα Apáma), sometimes known as Apama I or Apame I was the wife of the first ruler of the Seleucid Empire, Seleucus I Nicator. They married at Susa in 324 BC. According to ancient sources, Apama was the daughter of the Sogdian baron Spitamenes (Arr. VII, 4, 6, from Ptolemy I).

Apama and Seleucus had two daughters, Apama and Laodice, and two sons, Antiochus I Soter who inherited the Seleucid throne, and Achaeus. After the death of Apama, Seleucus married Stratonice, daughter of Demetrius I of Macedon, Seleucus had a daughter by Stratonice, who was called Phila. Several towns were named Apamea after her.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apama

son of Seleucus I Nicator, King of Syria 305-280, by his 1st wife, Apama,daughter of Sitamenes, a satrap, &, wife, Apama, daughter of Pharnakes, asatrap, &, wife, Apama, daughter of Artaxerxes II, Shah of Persia, son ofDarius II "Nothus", Shah of Persia, &, wife, Parysatis, daughter ofArtaxerxes I, by his 4th wife, Andria, the Babylonian heiress].

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per00574.htm#0

1 NAME Apama of /Baktria/

RESEARCH NOTES:
Queen of Syria

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]