== Notes for [[Item:Q87359|Q87359]] ==

'''
=Publius Mucius Scaevola=
'''

Publius Mucius Scaevola (died ca. 115 B.C.) was a prominent Roman politician and jurist. He was the son of Publius Mucius Scaevola, the consul of 175 BC, and brother of Publius Licinius Crassus Dives Mucianus. He was tribune in 141 BC, praetor in 136 BC, and consul in 133 BC.

During his consulship, Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica Serapio opposed Tiberius Gracchus running for a second consecutive tribuneship. Mucius said that he would allow Gracchus to run since that seemed to be the wishes of the people and he did not want to resort to violence to prevent him from running. Scipio though continued to protest and led the mob that killed Gracchus. Mucius did not condemn Scipio for these actions despite his earlier comments.

He later became Pontifex Maximus in 131 BC after the death of his brother, Publius Licinius Crassus Dives Mucianus. He is the last Pontifex Maximus to have published the Annales Maximi, the list of events of the year.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Publius_Mucius_Scaevola

Publius Mucius Scaevola
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Publius Mucius Scaevola (c. 115 BC) was a prominent Roman politician and jurist. He was tribune in 141 BC, praetor in 136 BC, and consul in 133 BC.

During his consulship, Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica Serapio opposed Tiberius Gracchus running for a second consecutive tribuneship. Mucius said that he would allow Gracchus to run since that seemed to be the wishes of the people and he did not want to resort to violence to prevent him from running. Scipio though continued to protest and led the mob that killed Gracchus. Mucius did not condemn Scipio for these actions despite his earlier comments.

He later became Pontifex Maximus in 131 BC after the death of his brother, Publius Licinius Crassus Dives Mucianus. He is the last Pontifex Maximus to have published the Annales Maximi, the list of events of the year.

Preceded by
Gaius Fulvius Flaccus and Publius Cornelius Scipio Aemilianus Africanus Consul of the Roman Republic
with Lucius Calpurnius Piso Frugi
133 BC Succeeded by
Publius Popillius Laenas and Publius Rupilius

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]