== Notes for [[Item:Q90959|Q90959]] ==

'''Marcus Valerius Messalla Messallinus''' was the son of the Roman famous orator Marcus Valerius Messalla Corvinus, whom he resembled in character, and wife Calpurnia.

He was a senator and consul in 3 BC and AD 3. Messallinus suggested to Roman Emperor Tiberius an oath of allegiance should be sworn to him yearly; he also suggested two golden statues be placed in two temples, in celebration of Rome's foreign victories and in memory of Germanicus, which Tiberius rejected.

Messalinus was governor (praepositus) of Illyricum, where he was involved in fighting Pannonian uprising (Great Illyrian Revolt). With half-filled legion XX defeated the Pannonii led by Bato I (Bato the Daesitiate) and prevented spread of the uprising. He married Roman Emperor Augustus' niece Claudia Marcella Minor, her second husband. Their son Marcus Valerius Messalla Barbatus was the father of Marcus Valerius Messala Corvinus (consul 58) and Roman Empress Valeria Messalina who was Roman Emperor Claudius' third wife. Their daughter Valeria, born ca 10 BC, married Lucius Vipstanus Gallus (ca 15 BC - 17), Praetor in 17, and had issue.

===Source===

English Wikipedia: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Valerius_Messalla_Messallinus Marcus Valerius Messalla Messallinus]

Marcus Valerius Messalla Messallinus
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.

Marcus Valerius Messalla Messallinus was the son of the famous orator Marcus Valerius Messalla Corvinus, whom he resembled in character. He was a senator and consul in 3 BC and AD 3. Messallinus suggested to Tiberius an oath of allegiance should be sworn to him yearly; he also suggested two golden statues be placed in two temples, in celebration of Rome's foreign victories and in memory of Germanicus, which Tiberius rejected. He married Caesar Augustus' niece Claudia Marcella Minor, her second husband. Their son Marcus Valerius Messalla Barbatus was the father of Claudius' wife Valeria Messalina.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]