== Notes for [[Item:Q118403|Q118403]] ==

=Mafalda de Saboia, rainha consorte de Portugal=

* Daughter of Amadeus III, count of Savoy "the crusader" and Adelaide
* Mafalda of Savoy ( Savoie , c. 1125 [ 1 ] - Coimbra , 3 of December of 1157 , [ 2 ] also known as Mahaut or Matilda (Portuguese always as Mafalda ), daughter Amedeo III of Savoy , was the first Queen consort of Portugal after her marriage in 1146 with Alfonso I —of the house of Burgundy and also known as Alfonso Enríquez—, the first King of Portugal
* [https://www.geni.com/photo/view/6000000000666780234?album_type=photos_of_me&photo_id=6000000174343718967 '''Coat of Arms of Mafalda of Savoy''']

==[https://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/PORTUGAL.htm#Berengariadied1221 Project MedLands, Portugal]

'''AFONSO Henriquez, son of HENRIQUE Conde de Portugal & his wife Teresa de Castilla y León''' (Guimaraes 25 Jul [1106/12]-Coimbra 6 Dec 1185, bur Coimbra, Church of the Cross). The Chronicon Regum Legionensium names (in order) "Urraca, Elvira and Afonso" as the children of Count Henrique & his wife[53]. The year in which Afonso was born is uncertain. Barbosa quotes a document dated “XVII Kal Oct” in 1173 which records the transfer of the body of San Vicente which states “Regni autem regis Alfonsi 45 vitæ vero eiusdem 67”, which would place his birth in 1106, and another document dated “era 1222” [1184] which records the death of “Rex Portugallensium doñus Alfonsus año vitæ suæ 78”[54]. The former would place his birth in [1106], and the latter in [1107/08] assuming that Alfonso´s death can be dated to 1185. Brandaõ quotes a breviary from Alcobaça which records the birth “era 1147” [1109] of “Aldefonsus primus rex Portugaliæ, filius comitis Henrici”, a manuscript about the works of San Fulgencio which records events in “era 1186 [1148]...37 ætatis annum et regni 19” [1110/11], and a historia dos Godos which records “era 1163 [1125] Infans Alfonsus Henrici comitis filius ætatis anno 14” [1111][55]. The Chronicon Lusitanum records the birth in 1151 (1113) of “Infans Alfonsus Comitis Henrici et Reginæ D. Tarasiæ filius, Regis D. Alfonsi nepos”[56], although a posthumous birth would probably have been noted. As can be seen, the full range of years from 1106 to 1112 is covered by these various contradictory sources. There appears no way of deciding which is more accurate than the others, although Brandaõ suggests that 1110 is correct. '''He succeeded his father in 1112 as AFONSO I Conde de Portugal.''' "…Infanta dna Sancia, Infans dns Adefonsus regis consanguineus…" subscribed the charter dated 13 Nov 1127 under which King Alfonso VII donated "el castillo de San Jorge en la Sierra del Pindo" to Santiago de Compostela[57]. It is probable that the second subscriber was Afonso de Portugal. Ruling through his mother, he overthrew and expelled her from Portugal in 1128. In 1135 he refused to swear homage to Alfonso VII King of Castile, from that time using the title 'Prince of Portugal'. He moved his capital to Coimbra. In 1139 he won a notable victory against the Muslims in Santarem who were reduced to tributary status. He proclaimed himself AFONSO I "the Conqueror" King of Portugal in 1139. His establishment of the archbishopric of Braga gave Portugal ecclesiastical independence. “Alfonsus, Portugaliæ rex, comitis Henrici et reginæ Theresiæ filius, magni quoque regis Alfonsi nepos…cum uxore mea regina donna Malfada, filia comitis Amedei de Moriana” confirmed donations to La Charité-sur-Loire by his father by charter dated Jul 1145[58]. He swore allegiance to the Pope, although Papal recognition of his title of king of Portugal was only given in 1179. He expanded his territory to the south, capturing Lisbon in 1147 with the help of a force of English, French and Flemish crusaders[59]. The De Rebus Hispaniæ of Rodericus Ximenes records that "Aldefonsus" was buried "Coimbræ in Monasterio S. Crucis"[60]. The Chronicon Conimbricensi records the death “VIII Id Dec” in [1185] of “Rex Ildefonsus Portugalensis”[61]. '''married ([Jan/Jun] 1146) MATHILDE de Savoie, daughter of AMEDEE III Comte de Maurienne et de Savoie & his first wife Adélaïde''' --- ([1125]-Coimbra 4 Nov 1157, bur Coimbra, Church of the Cross). The Chronicle of Alberic de Trois-Fontaines refers to the wife of "Aldefonsus rex Portugallie" as "filia comitis Sabaudie" but does not name her[62]. The De Rebus Hispaniæ of Rodericus Ximenes records the marriage of "Aldefonsum" and "Mafaldam filiam Comitis Maurienæ"[63]. The Chronicon Lusitanum records the marriage in 1183 (1145) of “Rex Donnus Alfonsus” and “Donnam Matildam, Comitis Amadæi de Moriana filiam”, adding that they had three sons, of whom two died young, and three daughters[64]. Brandaõ quotes a charter of the king dated 1146 which records “anno...quo duxeramt Mahaldam” and a charter dated Jul 1146 in which he records a donation “cum uxore mea Regina Dona Mafalda”[65]. Her origin was evidently not widely known in Portugal, as a Chronica Breve records that King Alfonso I married "dona Maffalda Manrique, filha do conde dom Manrrique de Lara e senhor de Mollina e de dona Ermesenda filha do Almerique primeiro senhor de Barbona"[66]. '''She was known as dona MAFALDA in Portugal.''' “Alfonsus, Portugaliæ rex, comitis Henrici et reginæ Theresiæ filius, magni quoque regis Alfonsi nepos…cum uxore mea regina donna Malfada, filia comitis Amedei de Moriana” confirmed donations to La Charité-sur-Loire by his father by charter dated Jul 1145[67]. The Chronicon Lusitanum records the death “III Non Dec” in 1196 (1158) of “Regina D. Matilda…Comitis Amadæi filia, uxor D. Alfonsi Portugallensium Regis”[68]. '''Mistress (1): ELVIRA Gualtar,''' daughter of ---. The Nobiliario of Pedro Conde de Barcelos names "D. Elvira Gualtar" as the mother of "D. Urraca Alonso, D. Teresa Alonso" daughters of "D. Alonso Enriquez"[69].

'''King Afonso I & his wife MATHILDE de Savoie had seven children:'''

* 1. '''Infante dom HENRIQUE de Portugal''' (5 Mar 1147-[before 1156]). Brandaõ quotes a manuscript about the works of San Fulgencio in the archives of Alcobaça which records the birth “III Non [Mar]” of “primogenitus...Henricus filius”, which from the context refers to March 1147[70].
* 2. '''Infanta dona MAFALDA de Portugal''' ([1149]-[1173/74]). A Chronica Breve names "dona Mafalda" first among the daughters of King Afonso I, adding that she married "comde Reymon de Barcelona" (although this source is inaccurate in other details)[71]. Betrothed ([30 Jan 1160]) to RAMÓN de Barcelona, Infante de Aragón, son of RAMÓN BERENGUER IV Conde de Barcelona & Petronilla Queen of Aragon (Villamayor del Valle, Huesca 1/25 Mar 1157-Perpignan 25 Apr 1195, bur Poblet, monastery of Nuestra Señora), '''who succeeded his father in 1162 as Conde de Barcelona and his mother in 1174 as don ALFONSO II King of Aragon.'''
* 3. '''Infanta dona URRACA de Portugal''' ([1151]-Valladolid 16 Oct 1188). The De Rebus Hispaniæ of Rodericus Ximenes names "Sancium et Urracam…et aliam filiam…Tarasia" as the children of "Aldefonsum" & his wife, specifying that Urraca married "Fernandi Regis Legionensis"[72]. The Chronicon Lusitanum records that “D. Orracam” daughter of “Rex Donnus Alfonsus” and his wife “Donnam Matildam, Comitis Amadæi de Moriana filiam” married “Regi Legionensium Donno Fernando”, adding in a later passage that they married in Aug 1209 (1171)[73]. The Crónica Latina records that “el rey Fernando” married “Urraca, hija de Alfonso rey de Portugal” but that they were related in the third degree of consanguinity[74]. "Regina Sancia comitis Raymundi et regine Urrache regia proles" donated an inn near Mucientes to Sahagún monastery by charter dated 15 Mar 1158, subscribed by "Regina Urracha de Asturias, Stephania Infantissa filia imperatoris…"[75]. The dating clause of a charter dated 13 Feb 1171 records "regnante Rege Donno F. in Legione, Galesia, Asturiis et Extrematus…cum uxore sua regina donna Urracha"[76]. Lucas de Tuy records that "Rex Fernandus" repudiated "uxorem suam Urracam filiam Regis Adefonsi, eo quod erat consanguinea eius propinquo gradu"[77]. '''married ([May/Jun] 1165, repudiated [Feb 1171/1172]) as his first wife, FERNANDO II King of León, son of ALFONSO VII "el Emperador" King of Castile and León & his first wife Berenguela de Barcelona''' (1137-Benavente 22 Jan 1188, bur Santiago de Compostela, Cathedral Santiago el Mayor).
* 4. '''Infanta dona SANCHA de Portugal''' ([1152/53]-14 Feb). Sousa says that the necrology of Santa Cruz de Coimbra records the death “14 Feb” of “Infanta D. Sancha” daughter of King Afonso I but does not quote the original text or give the precise citation reference[78].
* 5. '''Infante dom SANCHO Martino de Portugal''' (Coimbra 11 Nov 1154-Coimbra 26 Mar 1212, bur Coimbra, Church of the Cross). The De Rebus Hispaniæ of Rodericus Ximenes names "Sancium et Urracam…et aliam filiam…Tarasia" as the children of "Aldefonsum" & his wife[79]. '''He succeeded his father in 1185 as SANCHO I “o Poblador” King of Portugal.'''
* 6. '''Infante dom JOÃO''' ([1156]-25 Aug ). Brandaõ quotes the necrology of Santa Cruz de Coimbra which records the death “VIII Kal Sep” of “Ioannes infans donni Alfonsi regis Portugalliæ et donnæ Mafaldæ reginæ filius”[80].
* 7. '''Infanta dona TERESA de Portugal''' ([1157]-drowned off Furnes, Flanders 6 May 1218, bur Abbaye de Clairvaux, Jura). The De Rebus Hispaniæ of Rodericus Ximenes names "Sancium et Urracam…et aliam filiam…Tarasia" as the children of "Aldefonsum" & his wife, specifying that Teresa married "Philippo Comiti Flandriæ et Hannoniæ" and died childless[81]. The Chronicon Lusitanum records that “D. Tarasiam” daughter of “Rex Donnus Alfonsus” and his wife “Donnam Matildam, Comitis Amadæi de Moriana filiam” married “Consuli Flandrensium D”[82]. Known as TERESA from birth, she adopted the name MAFALDA in [1173/74] after the death of her older sister of that name, and was later known as MATHILDE. Senhora de Montemayor el Viejo e Ourem. The Flandria Generosa specifies that on her (first) marriage she was given "Insulam et Duacum et plures…villas…iacentes, Caslethuin, Watenes, Bergas, Burburgium, totamque maritimmam regionem"[83]. The Flandria Generosa names "Mathildis regine Portusequalis" as wife of Count Philippe, specifying that she arranged the repatriation of her husband's body to "Claramvallem"[84]. After the death of her husband, she received her widow's portion in southern and coastal Flanders but increased taxes so much that she provoked rebellions at Veurne [Furnes] and the castellany of Bourbourg[85]. A charter dated 1195 records an agreement between the French king and "M. regina comitissa Flandrie" which records that the latter promised not to remarry after separating from "Odone duce Burgundie"[86]. The Flandria Generosa records that she was "amita" of "Fernando filio regis Portusequalis" and instrumental in arranging his marriage to her first husband's great-niece Jeanne Ctss of Flanders[87]. The Chronicle of Alberic de Trois-Fontaines records the death in 1218 of "comitissa vetus de Flandria relicta comitis Philippi" and her burial next to her husband at Clairvaux[88]. She died when her carriage accidentally fell into a marsh near Furnes[89]. '''married firstly (Aug 1183) as his second wife, PHILIPPE Count of Flanders, son of THIERRY I Count of Flanders & his second wife Sibylle d'Anjou''' (-Acre 1 Jul 1191, bur Abbaye de Clairvaux, Jura). '''married secondly (1193, divorced on grounds of consanguinity 1195) as his first wife, EUDES III Duke of Burgundy, son of HUGUES III Duke of Burgundy & his first wife Alix de Lorraine''' (1166-Lyon 6 Jul 1218, bur Abbaye de Cîteaux).

'''King Afonso I had [two] illegitimate children by Mistress (1): ELVIRA Gualtar'''

* 8. '''URRACA Afonso de Portugal''' The Nobiliario of Pedro Conde de Barcelos names "D. Elvira Gualtar" as the mother of "D. Urraca Alonso, D. Teresa Alonso" daughters of "D. Alonso Enriquez"[90]. The Livro Velho records that "Pero Affonso", son of "D. Moço Veegas", married "D. Urraca Affonso filha d´elrey D. Afonso o primeiro…e de Eluira Gualter"[91]. Salazar y Castro records her marriage, adding that she was the sister of Sancho II (presumably an error for Sancho I) King of Portugal and that the couple´s daughter married don Pedro Rodríguez Girón (see the document CASTILE NOBILITY)[92]. '''married PEDRO Afonso, son of AFONSO Egas "Moço" de Riba Douro & his wife doña Aldara [Ilduara] Pérez de Traba.'''
* 9. ['''TERESA Afonso de Portugal''' The Nobiliario of Pedro Conde de Barcelos names "D. Elvira Gualtar" as the mother of "D. Urraca Alonso, D. Teresa Alonso" daughters of "D. Alonso Enriquez", and in a later passage records that “D. Fernan Mendez el Bravo Bragançon” married “D. Teresa Alonso”, adding that the king separated her from her previous husband “don Sancho Nuñez” with whom he had fought, and that she brought “la tierra de Bragança” to her second husband but that it reverted to the crown because she died childless[93]. As discussed more fully above, this passage echoes the marriages of the sisters of King Afonso I and is probably inaccurate as written. It is not known whether this also means that the king´s illegitimate daughter named Teresa never existed.]

'''King Afonso I had three illegitimate children by unknown mistresses:'''

* 10. '''FERNANDO Afonso de Portugal''' (-after Aug 1172). The Livro Velho names "D. Fernando Affonso" as the son of King Alfonso I by "D. Chamoa", daughter of "el conde D. Gomes de Pombeiro" and his wife "filha del conde D. Pero Peres de Trava", and wife of "D. Payo Soares, filho de D. Soeiro Mendes o bom e de D. Gontroude Moniz que era filha del conde D. Monio de Biscaya"[94]. Brandaõ quotes a charter dated 1166 for Santa Cruz de Coimbra which records a donation confirmed by King Alfonso I and “Fernandus Alfonsi filius eius, Comes Velascus filius sororis eius...”[95]. Alferes 1166-69.
* 11. '''PEDRO Afonso de Portugal''' (-after May 1206, bur Cistercian monastery of Santa Maria de Alcobaça). Maestre of the Order of Aviz: “...Petrus proles Regis Par Francorum et Magister novæ militiæ...” subscribed the charter dated 1162 issued by the Cistercians which confirmed the rules of the Order of Aviz, in the presence of “regis Aldephonsi” donated “loco illo...Avis” to its monks by charter[96]. “Petrus Alfonsi filius magni regis Alfonsi Portugalliæ” donated property near “villa de Tomar” to the abbot of Alcobaça by charter dated May 1206[97]. Monk in monastery of Alcobaça 1206.
* 12. '''AFONSO Afonso de Portugal''' (-Santarem 1 Mar 1207, bur São João Santarem). Brandaõ says that he was an illegitimate son of King Afonso I but does not quote the primary source which confirms this statement[98]. The primary source which confirms his parentage has not yet been identified. Knight of the Order of St John of Jerusalem 1194. Grand Master of the Order of St John of Jerusalem 1202-04. Sousa quotes an epitaph at São João de Santarem which records the death “Era 1235 Kal Mar” of “Alphonsus magister Hospitalis Hierusalem”[99].

==[https://es.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mafalda_de_Saboya Mafalda of Savoy, Queen Consort of Portugal, by Wikipedia]

'''Origins'''

Mafalda was the second or third daughter of Amadeo III, count of Savoy , and of his wife Matilde de Albon , [ 1 ] (sister of Guigues IV , count of Albon, "the Dauphin"). An aunt of Mafalda, Adela de Savoya , was queen consort of France by her marriage to King Louis VI and a great-uncle of hers had been pope between 1119 and 1124 under the name of Calixto II . [ 3 ]

'''Possible Reasons for her Marriage to Alfonso Enríquez'''

His father had participated in the Second Crusade and this could have been one of the reasons for the choice of Mafalda as consort of the first king of Portugal with the purpose of forming an alliance between the new kingdom and the house of Savoy for the expulsion of the Muslims from the Portuguese territory and, at the same time, demonstrate their independence by choosing a wife outside the scope and influence of the Leonese monarchy . [ 4 ]

It is also possible that Alfonso Enríquez could not choose one of the infantas of the Iberian kingdoms for kinship reasons [ 5 ] or that the wedding was suggested by Cardinal Guido de Vico, papal legate in the Iberian Peninsula and one of the witnesses in 1143 of the Treaty of Zamora .

'''Life as Queen Consort'''

Mafalda's presence is recorded for the first time in Portugal on May 23, 1146 when, together with her husband, she confirmed a donation made by her mother-in-law, Teresa de León , to the Order of Cluny . [ 6 ] She was the patron saint of the Cistercians and founded the Costa monastery in Guimarães , as well as a hospital for pilgrims , the poor and the sick in Canaveses . [ 6 ]

The medieval English historian , Walter Map , in his work De nugis curialium , tells that "the king of Portugal who now lives", almost certainly that Alfonso I, had been convinced by bad advisers to murder his pregnant wife out of jealousy. However, there is no other source for this story, which is not generally accepted. She probably died from the aftermath of her last childbirth, that of Sancha, [ 7 ] if Queen Mafalda died in 1157.

'''Death and Burial'''

Queen Mafalda died in Coimbra on December 3, 1157 or 1158 [ a ] and was buried in the monastery of Santa Cruz in that city where her husband, who survived her more than twenty-seven years, would be buried. [ 11 ] He was survived by six of his seven children, of which only Sancho, Urraca and Teresa would reach adulthood.

=Links=

* https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mafalda_de_Saboya
* http://genealogics.org/getperson.php?personID=I00020557&tree=LEO
* http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/SAVOY.htm#Mathildedied1157
* https://www.wikizero.com/pt/Mafalda_de_Saboia
* https://digitalis-dsp.uc.pt/bitstream/10316.2/32329/1/Portugal%20e%20Piemonte_artigo1.pdf
* https://amarantemagazine.sapo.pt/sociedade-e-cultura/d-mafalda-de-saboia-uma-rainha-no-baixo-tamega/
* http://www.geocities.ws/atoleiros/Rainhas.htm
* http://monizvieira.weebly.com/mahaut-de-savoie.html

=Sources=

* Arco y Garay, Ricardo del (1954). Sepulcros de la Casa Real de Castilla. Madrid: Instituto Jerónimo Zurita. Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas. OCLC 11366237.
* Caetano de Souza, Antonio (1735). Historia Genealógica de la Real Casa Portuguesa (PDF) (in Portuguese). Vol. I. Lisbon: Lisboa Occidental, na oficina de Joseph Antonio da Sylva. ISBN 978-84-8109-908-9.
* La Friganiére, Frederico Francisco de (1859). Memorias da rainhas de Portugal (in Portuguese). Lisbon: Typographia Universal. OCLC 680459800.
* Mattoso, José (2014). D. Afonso Henriques (in Portuguese). Lisbon: Temas e Debates. ISBN 978-972-759-911-0.
* Rodrigues Oliveira, Ana (2010). Rainhas medievais de Portugal. Dezassete mulheres, duas dinastias, quatro séculos de História (in Portuguese). Lisbon: A esfera dos livros. ISBN 978-989-626-261-7.
* Rodrigues Oliveira, 2010 , p. 67.
* A b Mattoso, 2014 , p. 227.
* Rodrigues Oliveira, 2010 , p. 69.
* a b Rodrigues Oliveira, 2010 , pp. 67–68.
* Rodrigues Oliveira, 2010 , p. 80.
* a b Rodrigues Oliveira, 2010 , p. 75.
* Mattoso, 2014 , pp. 224-225 and 227.
* Mattoso, 2014 , p. 223.
* Rodrigues Oliveira, 2010 , p. 612, n. 33.
* La Figanière, 1859 , p. 231.
* Rodrigues Oliveira, 2010 , p. 76.
* Rodrigues Oliveira, 2010 , p. 77.
* a b c d e f g h i Rodrigues Oliveira, 2010 , p. 71.
* Mattoso, 2014 , p. 220.
* a b c d e f g Mattoso, 2014 , p. 226.
* Rodrigues Oliveira, 2010 , p. 79.
* Arco and Garay, 1954 , p. 168.
* Rodrigues Oliveira, 2010 , p. 72.
* Mattoso, 2014 , pp. 227 and 383.
* Caetano de Souza, 1735 , p. 60.

DIED 4 NOV/DEC 1157

SOURCE NOTES:
www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal10671

OR "MATHILDE"; "OF SAVOY"

Also have birth as 1111. [Our Family Museum]

also known by these names, Maud, Matilde, Mafalda.
Can you just imagine the problems I encountered by finding so many women with the name Mahaut, Mafalda, Maud, Matilde? Sorting them out was just as bad as sorting out the mystery of other women in this family tree. If I have duplicates in my tree now you know why.

Maud of Savoy
http://trees.ancestry.com/rd?f=image&guid=eb832da9-e555-4d40-b19d-053bb85fd0a2&tid=1013592&pid=-2015283648

Name Suffix:<NSFX> Of Savoy

Maud of Savoy
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.
Jump to: navigation, search

Maud of Savoy, Queen of PortugalMaud of Savoy (1125–1158), also known as Mafalda, Mahaut or Matilda (in Portuguese always as Mafalda), was Queen consort of Portugal through her marriage to King Afonso I of Portugal (of the House of Burgundy; first king of Portugal) in 1146. She was the second or third daughter of Amadeus III of Savoy, Count of Savoy and Maurienne, and Mahaut of Albon (the sister of Guigues IV, Comte d'Albon, "le Dauphin").

[edit]
Afonso's and Maud descendants
Henrique (died 1147).
Mafalda, Princess of Portugal (1148-c.1160).
Urraca, princess of Portugal (1151–1188), married to King Ferdinand II of León.
Sancho I, King of Portugal (1154–1212), married to Dulce Berenguer of Barcelona, Princess of Aragon (daughter of Ramon Berenguer IV, Count of Barcelona and Queen Petronila of Aragon).
Teresa, Princess of Portugal (1157–1218), married to Philip I of Flanders and next to Eudes III of Burgundy.
João (?-?).
Sancha (?-?).

-- MERGED NOTE ------------

Wikidata: https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q234234 | Geni: https://www.geni.com/people/6000000000666780234

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]