== Notes for [[Item:Q91185|Q91185]] ==

'''Marcus Valerius Messalla Niger''' was a senator of the Roman Republic.

He was praetor in the year of Cicero's consulship, 63 BC, and consul in 61, the year in which Publius Clodius profaned the mysteries of the Bona Dea, and Gnaeus Pompeius triumphed for his several victories over the Cilician pirates, Tigranes the Great and Mithridates VI of Pontus. Messalla, as consul, took an active part in the prosecution of Clodius. Messalla was censor in 55 BC.

As an orator, Messalla was thought to be respectable. In 80 BC he was engaged in collecting evidence for the defence in the cause of Sextus Roscius of Ameria. In 62 BC he solicited Cicero to undertake the defence of his kinsman, Publius Cornelius Sulla. And in 54 BC he was one of the six orators whom Marcus Aemilius Scaurus retained on his trial.

Messalla married a woman named Polla, by whom he had a son, Marcus Valerius Messalla Corvinus and two daughters, both named Valeria, who married Quintus Pedius and Servius Sulpicius Rufus, the son of the consul of 51 BC, respectively.

===Sources===

English Wikipedia: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Valerius_Messalla_Niger Marcus Valerius Messalla Niger]

Marcus Valerius Messalla
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.
Jump to: navigation, search
Marcus Valerius Messalla was the father of Marcus Valerius Messalla Corvinus, consul in 53 BC.

He was twice accused of illegal practices in connection with the elections; on the first occasion he was acquitted, in spite of his obvious guilt, through the eloquence of his uncle Quintus Hortensius; on the second he was condemned. He took the side of Caesar in the civil war. Nothing appears to be known of his later history. He was augur for fifty-five years and wrote a work on the science of divination.

Cicero, Ad Fam. vi. i8, viii. 4, ad Alticum, iv. 16; Dio Cassius xl, 17, 45; Bellum africanum, 28; Macrobius, Saturnalia, i. 9, 14 Aulus Gellius xiii. 14, 3.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]