== Notes for [[Item:Q116538|Q116538]] ==

https://sv.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sancho_I_av_Aragonien

http://www.biografiasyvidas.com/biografia/s/sancho_i_ramirez.htm

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sancho_Ram%C3%ADrez

http://www.friesian.com/perifran.htm#basque

http://genealogics.org/getperson.php?personID=I00020524&tree=LEO

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Sancho Ramírez (c. 1042 – 4 June 1094) was King of Aragon (1063–1094, not formally until 1076) and King of Navarre (from 1076, as Sancho V). He was the son of Ramiro I of Aragon and Ermesinda of Bigorre, and he succeeded his father in 1063.

Between 1067 and 1068, the War of the Three Sanchos involved him in a conflict with his first cousins, both also named Sancho: Sancho IV the king of Navarre and Sancho II the king of Castile, respectively. The Castilian Sancho was trying to retake Bureba and Alta Rioja, which his father had given away to king of Navarre and failed to retake. The Navarrese Sancho begged the aid of the Aragonese Sancho to defend his kingdom. Sancho of Castile defeated the two cousins and retook both Bureba and Alta Rioja, as well as Álava.

Sancho Ramírez followed his father's practice, not using the royal title early in his reign even though his state had become fully independent. This changed in 1076, when Sancho IV of Navarre was murdered by his own siblings, thus prompting a succession crisis in this neighboring kingdom that represented Aragon's nominal overlord. At first, the murdered king's young son, García, who had fled to Castile, was recognized as titular king by Alfonso VI, while Sancho Ramírez recruited to his side noblemen of Navarre who resented their kingdom falling under Alfonso's influence. The crisis was resolved by partition. Sancho Ramírez was elected King of Navarre, while he ceded previously contested western provinces of the kingdom to Alfonso. From this time, Sancho refers to himself as king not only of Navarre but also Aragon.

Sancho conquered Barbastro in 1064, Graus in 1083, and Monzón in 1089. He was defeated by El Cid, who was raiding his lands and those of his Muslim allies, at the Battle of Morella, probably in 1084. He perished in 1094 at the Siege of Huesca, supposedly from an arrow while inspecting the walls of the Muslim stronghold.

Sancho contracted his first marriage in c.1065, to Isabel (died c.1071), daughter of Count Armengol III of Urgel. They were divorced 1071. His second marriage, in 1076, was with Felicia (died 3 May 1123), daughter of Count Hilduin III of Roucy. A third marriage—to Philippa of Toulouse—is sometimes given,[1] but other evidence records him as still married to Felicia at the time of his death.[2] He was father of three sons: by Isabel, he had Peter, his successor; by Felicia he had Alfonso, who succeeded Peter, and Ramiro, who succeeded Alfonso.[3]

References

1. ^ Richard, Alfred, Histoire de Comtes de Poitou, 778-1204

2. ^ Szabolcs de VAJAY, "Ramire II le Moine, roi d'Aragon et Agnes de Poitou dans l'histoire et la légende", in Mélanges offerts à René Crozet, 2 vol, Poitiers, 1966, vol 2, p 727-750; and Ruth E Harvey, "The wives of the first troubadour Duke William IX of Aquitaine", in Journal of Medieval History, vol 19, 1993, p 315. Harvey states that, contrary to prior assumptions, William IX was certainly Philippa of Toulouse's only husband. Vajay states that the marriage to an unnamed king of Aragon reported by a non-contemporary chronicler is imaginary, even though it has appeared broadly in modern histories, and likewise he cites J de Salarrullana de Dios, Documentos correspondientes al reinado de Sancho Ramirez, Saragossa, 1907, vol I, nr 51, p 204-207 to document that Felicie was clearly still married to Sancho months before his death, making the marriage to Philippa several years earlier, as reported in several modern popular biographies of her granddaughter, completely unsupportable.

3. ^ An origin legend of the house of Ayala gives him another son, Vela or Velasgutto de Ayala, by a Barcelonan lady. An alternative version makes the father Ramiro I. This story is without solid foundation, and may represent a confused memory of a feudal relationship with Sancho Ramírez of Viguera and his Vela clan vassals.

--------------------

Konge av Aragon 1063 - 1094.

Konge av Navarra 1076 - 1094 (som Sancho V).

Sancho var gift 2. gang med Mathilde Philippa av Toulouse.173

173 Erich Brandenburg: Die Nachkommen Karls des Grossen. Leipzig 1935. Mogens Bugge: Våre forfedre, nr. 1071. Bent og

Vidar Billing Hansen: Rosensverdslektens forfedre, side 16, 87, 97.

The origins of The Kingdom of Aragon go back to the 11th Century, when the Aragonese counties, Sobrarbe and Ribagorza in the Central Pyrenees were controlled by The King of Pampalona, Sancho Garcés III “El Mayor”(The Elder). He owned an immense territory which extended from land in Zamora on the shore of the Pisuerga as far as the county of Pallás in Cataluña.

On his death in 1035 his Kingdom was shared out by testament to all his children, converting each county into a Kingdom. This way his son Ramiro inherited the county of Aragón, and his other son Gonzalo inherited Sobrarbe and Ribargorza.

This was the birth of the future Kingdom of Aragón, because Gonzalo was killed soon after and all the land he owned went to his brother Ramiro.

Ramiro I (1035-1064) was the first King of Aragón. He strengthened the defense of his properties, which doubled in extension in less than three decades, advancing towards the South and the East. By doing so he recaptured land from the Muslims and impeded the excessive expansion of the Catalan territory. In fact he lost his life in one of these battles.

After his death, his son Sancho Ramírez (1064 – 1094) inherited the Kingdom. His military exploits followed those of his father, although he advanced further politically. He realized that the best thing for his Kingdom would be modernization and to become more European. So, not only did he pledge loyalty to the Vatican in Rome, but he also brought about the Gregorian and Cluniacense reform, and installed the Roman faith to the detriment of that of the Mozarabics.

He gained possession of more land, because when his cousin The King of Pamplona died, he inherited that Kingdom. This was why Jaca became the capital. Also he tried to recapture cities like Barbastro, Tudela or Huesca. In fact , in 1094 he died at the foot of the wall of Huesca.

It was his son, King Pedro I (1094 –1104) who finally conquered the capital of Oscense after the Battle of Alcoraz, turning Huesca into the new capital. The reign of Pedro I only lasted 10 years. He died without leaving any descendants, which meant the Kingdom was inherited by his brother Alfonso I (1104- 1134), whose nickname “El Batallador”( The Warrior) alludes to his conquests, because he captured more than 25,000 square kilometres from the Muslims, including the city of Zaragoza.

He was the one who realized how important it was to find a way out to sea for the Kingdom, and for that reason he set out down the river Ebro with his armies.

Nevertheless, he did not reach his destination as he died leading his troops through the city of Fraga. Just like his predecessor he died childless, and according to his testament he left the Kingdom to the Military Order of the Temple, San Juan del Hospital and The Holy Grave. However, his last wish was not carried out, because the Aragon Assembly opposed it, and handed over the throne to another of the Ramirez brothers, the future King Ramiro II “El Monje”(The Monk).

--------------------

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

For the king of Viguera, see Sancho Ramírez of Viguera.

Sancho (Sanciu filius, Sancho the son) with his father, King Ramiro (Ranimirus rex)

From a thirteenth-century manuscript of JacaSancho Ramírez (c. 1042 – 4 June 1094) was King of Aragon (1063–1094, not formally until 1076) and King of Navarre (from 1076, as Sancho V). He was the son of Ramiro I of Aragon and Ermesinda of Bigorre, and he succeeded his father in 1063.

Between 1067 and 1068, the War of the Three Sanchos involved him in a conflict with his first cousins, both also named Sancho: Sancho IV the king of Navarre and Sancho II the king of Castile, respectively. The Castilian Sancho was trying to retake Bureba and Alta Rioja, which his father had given away to king of Navarre and failed to retake. The Navarrese Sancho begged the aid of the Aragonese Sancho to defend his kingdom. Sancho of Castile defeated the two cousins and retook both Bureba and Alta Rioja, as well as Álava.

Sancho Ramírez followed his father's practice, not using the royal title early in his reign even though his state had become fully independent. This changed in 1076, when Sancho IV of Navarre was murdered by his own siblings, thus prompting a succession crisis in this neighboring kingdom that represented Aragon's nominal overlord. At first, the murdered king's young son, García, who had fled to Castile, was recognized as titular king by Alfonso VI, while Sancho Ramírez recruited to his side noblemen of Navarre who resented their kingdom falling under Alfonso's influence. The crisis was resolved by partition. Sancho Ramírez was elected King of Navarre, while he ceded previously contested western provinces of the kingdom to Alfonso. From this time, Sancho refers to himself as king not only of Navarre but also Aragon.

Sancho conquered Barbastro in 1064, Graus in 1083, and Monzón in 1089. He was defeated by El Cid, who was raiding his lands and those of his Muslim allies, at the Battle of Morella, probably in 1084. He perished in 1094 at the Siege of Huesca, supposedly from an arrow while inspecting the walls of the Muslim stronghold.

Sancho contracted his first marrige in c.1065, to Isabel (died c.1071), daughter of Count Armengol III of Urgel. They were divorced 1071. His second marriage, in 1076, was with Felicia (died 3 May 1123), daughter of Count Hilduin III of Roucy. A third marriage—to Philippa of Toulouse—is sometimes given,[1] but other evidence records him as still married to Felicia at the time of his death.[2] He was father of three sons: by Isabel, he had Peter, his successor; by Felicia he had Alfonso, who succeeded Peter, and Ramiro, who succeeded Alfonso.[3]

--------------------

Sancho Ramírez (c. 1042 – 4 June 1094, Huesca) was king of Aragon (1063-1094, as Sancho I) and king of Navarre (1076-1094, as Sancho V). He was the son of Ramiro I of Aragon and Ermesinde of Bigorre, and he succeeded his father in 1063.

Between 1067 and 1068, the War of the Three Sanchos involved him in a conflict with his first cousins, both also named Sancho: Sancho IV the king of Navarre and Sancho II the king of Castile, respectively. The Castilian Sancho was trying to retake Bureba and Alta Rioja, which his father had given away to king of Navarre and failed to retake. The Navarrese Sancho begged the aid of the Aragonese Sancho to defend his kingdom. Sancho of Castile defeated the two cousins and retook both Bureba and Alta Rioja, as well as Álava.

Sancho Ramírez was elected king of Navarre in 1076 after Sancho IV of Navarre was murdered by his own siblings, thus prompting a succession crisis. Sancho's young son, García, was recognized as titular king in León and Castile, where he lived in exile.

Sancho conquered Barbastro in 1064, Graus in 1083, and Monzón in 1089.

He married first in c.1065 (divorced 1071), Isabel of Urgel (d. c.1071), daughter of Count Armengol III of Urgel and second in 1076, Felicie of Roucy (d May 3, 1123), daughter of Count Hilduin III of Roucy. A third marriage - to Philippa of Toulouse - is sometimes given [1] but other evidence records him as still married to Felicie at the time of his death.[2]

He perished in 1094 at the Siege of Huesca.

His three sons: by Isabel, he had Peter; by Felicie he had Alfonso and Ramiro. All three succeeded in turn to the throne of Aragon.
--------------------
Sancho Ramírez (ca. 10431 – 4 de junio de 1094), rey de Aragón entre 1063–1094, y de Aragón y Pamplona entre 1076–1094. Conocido como Sancho I de Aragón y como V de Pamplona.

Hijo de Ramiro I y Ermesinda de Foix. Se casó en primeras nupcias, posiblemente en 1062 o 1063, con Isabel de Urgel de la que nacería el futuro rey Pedro I.

--------------------
En mi nuevo libro LA SORPRENDENTE GENEALOGÍA DE MIS TATARABUELOS, encontrarán a este y muchos otros de sus ancestros con un resumen biográfico de cada uno. El libro está disponible en: amazon.com barnesandnoble.com palibrio.com. Les será de mucha utilidad y diversión. Ramón Rionda

In my new book LA SORPRENDENTE GENEALOGÍA DE MIS TATARABUELOS, you will find this and many other of your ancestors, with a biography summary of each of them. The book is now available at: amazon.com barnesandnoble.com palibrio.com. Check it up, it’s worth it. Ramón Rionda


from &quot;Our Folk&quot; by Albert D Hart, Jr.

859747676. Kong Sancho IV RAMIROSON av Aragon was born in 1045.(20035) He was a Konge in 1067 in Aragon.(20036) He was a Konge in 1076 in Navarra.(20037) He died in Jun 1094.(20038) He was married to Felicitas HILDUINSDTR av Roucy in 1063.

Rey de Aragón (1063-1094)
Rey de Navarra (1076-1094): Sancho V de Pamplona

Conquered Barbastro in 1064,
Conquered Graus in 1083,
and then conquered Monzon in 1089.
Conquered Huesca in 1094
ES.28079.AHN/1.3.1.2.3.281//CLERO-SECULAR_REGULAR,CAR.785,NUM.11
Donacion de diversoso bienes.
Fecha Creacion:
1077 - 1078
Urraca, hija del rey Ramiro I, dona al monasterio tras su muerte, de los bienes que recibio de su padre y que posteriormente confirmo su hermano Sancho Ramirez, la villa de Arrienda ingenua, la iglesia de Arresella, un tercio del resto de sus bienes y algunas cosas mas como ovejas, vacas y unos vasos de plata.
Research Copyright 2008 John J. Browne Ayes

Rey de Aragón (1063-1094)
Rey de Navarra (1076-1094): Sancho V de Pamplona

Ancestral File Number:<AFN> 9HM1-GT

--Other Fields

Ref Number: 4282

Line 6888 from GEDCOM File not recognizable or too long:
NAME Sancho V, King Of /ARAGON/

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Aragon (1063-1094), king of Pamplona (1076-1094) expanded Aragon

Sancho Ramirez (Sancho Ramírez em espanhol) rei de Aragão entre 1063-1094 e de Navarra entre 1076-1094. Conhecido como Sancho I de Aragão e como V de Navarra. Filho de Ramiro I e Ermesinda de Foix. Casou-se em primeiras núpcias, possivelmente em 1065, com Isabel de Urgel de onde nasceria o futuro rei Pedro I.

Sucedeu a seu pai com 18 anos de idade. Tomou Barbastro aos muçulmanos, em 1064, em união com Armengol III, conde de Urgel, que morreu na contenda, ainda que no ano seguinte, Al-Muqtadir, rei da Taifa de Saragoça, reagiu solicitando a ajuda de todo o Al-Andalus, convocando à jihad e voltando a recuperar Barbastro em 1065. Há que recordar que Barbastro era capital do distrito nordeste do reino de Saragoça, e chave da rica várzea do Cinca, além de sede de um importante mercado.

Em 1068 Sancho Ramírez viaja a Roma para consolidar o jovem Reino de Aragão oferecendo em vasalagem ao Papa. Este vínculo está documentado inclusive na quantia do tributo de 600 marcos de ouro ao ano que devia pagar ao Estado Pontifício o Reino de Aragão. Alegou-se uma possível ligação desta relação feudo-vasalática com as armas de linhagem e a cor dos fios das fitas de lemnisco das quais pendiam os selos papales com o emblema de paus de ouro de gules que constituirá, a partir de Afonso II, o sinal real do rei de Aragão.

Sancho Ramírez (c. 1042 - 4 June 1094) was King of Aragon (1063-1094, not formally until 1076) and King of Navarre (from 1076, as Sancho V). He was the son of Ramiro I of Aragon and Ermesinda of Bigorre, and he succeeded his father in 1063.

Between 1067 and 1068, the War of the Three Sanchos involved him in a conflict with his first cousins, both also named Sancho: Sancho IV the king of Navarre and Sancho II the king of Castile, respectively. The Castilian Sancho was trying to retake Bureba and Alta Rioja, which his father had given away to king of Navarre and failed to retake. The Navarrese Sancho begged the aid of the Aragonese Sancho to defend his kingdom. Sancho of Castile defeated the two cousins and retook both Bureba and Alta Rioja, as well as Álava.

Sancho Ramírez followed his father's practice, not using the royal title early in his reign even though his state had become fully independent. This changed in 1076, when Sancho IV of Navarre was murdered by his own siblings, thus prompting a succession crisis in this neighboring kingdom that represented Aragon's nominal overlord. At first, the murdered king's young son, García, who had fled to Castile, was recognized as titular king by Alfonso VI, while Sancho Ramírez recruited to his side noblemen of Navarre who resented their kingdom falling under Alfonso's influence. The crisis was resolved by partition. Sancho Ramírez was elected King of Navarre, while he ceded previously contested western provinces of the kingdom to Alfonso. From this time, Sancho refers to himself as king not only of Navarre but also Aragon.

Sancho conquered Barbastro in 1064, Graus in 1083, and Monzón in 1089. He was defeated by El Cid, who was raiding his lands and those of his Muslim allies, at the Battle of Morella, probably in 1084. He perished in 1094 at the Siege of Huesca, supposedly from an arrow while inspecting the walls of the Muslim stronghold.

Sancho contracted his first marrige in c.1065, to Isabel (died c.1071), daughter of Count Armengol III of Urgel. They were divorced 1071. His second marriage, in 1076, was with Felicia (died 3 May 1123), daughter of Count Hilduin III of Roucy. A third marriage-to Philippa of Toulouse-is sometimes given,[1] but other evidence records him as still married to Felicia at the time of his death.[2] He was father of three sons: by Isabel, he had Peter, his successor; by Felicia he had Alfonso, who succeeded Peter, and Ramiro, who succeeded Alfonso.[3]


References
^ Richard, Alfred, Histoire de Comtes de Poitou, 778-1204
^ Szabolcs de VAJAY, "Ramire II le Moine, roi d'Aragon et Agnes de Poitou dans l'histoire et la légende", in Mélanges offerts à René Crozet, 2 vol, Poitiers, 1966, vol 2, p 727-750; and Ruth E Harvey, "The wives of the first troubadour Duke William IX of Aquitaine", in Journal of Medieval History, vol 19, 1993, p 315. Harvey states that, contrary to prior assumptions, William IX was certainly Philippa of Toulouse's only husband. Vajay states that the marriage to an unnamed king of Aragon reported by a non-contemporary chronicler is imaginary, even though it has appeared broadly in modern histories, and likewise he cites J de Salarrullana de Dios, Documentos correspondientes al reinado de Sancho Ramirez, Saragossa, 1907, vol I, nr 51, p 204-207 to document that Felicie was clearly still married to Sancho months before his death, making the marriage to Philippa several years earlier, as reported in several modern popular biographies of her granddaughter, completely unsupportable.
^ An origin legend of the house of Ayala gives him another son, Vela or Velasgutto de Ayala, by a Barcelonan lady. An alternative version makes the father Ramiro I. This story is without solid foundation, and may represent a confused memory of a feudal relationship with Sancho Ramírez of Viguera and his Vela clan vassals.

[edit] External source

"RAMIREZ""OF ARAGON"; SIEZED NAVARRE 1076 AND REIGNED AS "SANCHO V"KING OF
ARAGON 1063-1094; KING OF NAVARRE 1076-1094

Line 6888 from GEDCOM File not recognizable or too long:
NAME Sancho V, King Of /ARAGON/

He ruled from 1063 to 1094.

He ruled from 1063 to 1094.

SOURCE NOTES:
www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal07689

Source #1: Frederick Lewis Weis, "Ancestral Roots of Certain American Colonists Who Came to America Before 1700" - Seventh Edition, with additions and corrections by Walter Lee Sheppard, Jr., assisted by Davis Faris (Baltimore, MD: Genealogical Publishing Co, 1995), p. 103

Name Prefix:<NPFX> King Name Suffix:<NSFX> Ii, IV Or V Aragon

Event: Ruled 1076 Sancho V [or IV] Ramírez, King of Navarre 3
Event: Ruled BET. 1063 - 1094 Sancho I Ramírez, King of Aragon 3
Note:
Sancho RAMÍREZ (b. before 1045--d. July 6, 1094, Huesca, Aragon), king of Aragon from 1063 to 1094 and of Pamplona (or Navarre; as SanchoV Ramírez) from 1076 to 1094, the son of Ramiro I of Aragon.
After the murder of Sancho IV of Navarre, Sancho Ramírez, with Navarrese consent, became king of Navarre, forestalling the ambition of Alfonso VI of Castile to annex that kingdom. Sancho's main importance was as king of Aragon. After his father's death (1063) fighting the Moors at Graus, the papacy organized three international crusades against Spanish Islam (1063, 1073, and 1087). They all failed, but Sancho reconquered many places from his own resources, notably in the regions of Huesca and Monzón; at the end of his reign Aragon began to edge toward the Mediterranean coast. Sancho placed his kingdoms under the feudal protection of the Holy See in 1089. He died of wounds during the siege of Huesca

Konge av Aragon 1063 - 1094.
Konge av Navarra 1076 - 1094 (som Sancho V).
Sancho var gift 2. gang med Mathilde Philippa av Toulouse.

Event: Ruled 1076 Sancho V [or IV] Ramírez, King of Navarre 3
Event: Ruled BET. 1063 - 1094 Sancho I Ramírez, King of Aragon 3
Note:
Sancho RAMÍREZ (b. before 1045--d. July 6, 1094, Huesca, Aragon), king of Aragon from 1063 to 1094 and of Pamplona (or Navarre; as SanchoV Ramírez) from 1076 to 1094, the son of Ramiro I of Aragon.
After the murder of Sancho IV of Navarre, Sancho Ramírez, with Navarrese consent, became king of Navarre, forestalling the ambition of Alfonso VI of Castile to annex that kingdom. Sancho's main importance was as king of Aragon. After his father's death (1063) fighting the Moors at Graus, the papacy organized three international crusades against Spanish Islam (1063, 1073, and 1087). They all failed, but Sancho reconquered many places from his own resources, notably in the regions of Huesca and Monzón; at the end of his reign Aragon began to edge toward the Mediterranean coast. Sancho placed his kingdoms under the feudal protection of the Holy See in 1089. He died of wounds during the siege of Huesca

Sancho I of Aragon
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.

Sancho of Aragon (Spanish: Sancho Ramírez) (c. 1042 – June 4, 1094, Huesca) was king of Aragon from 1063 until 1094 as Sancho I and king of Navarre from 1076 until 1094) as Sancho V.

He was the son of Ramiro I of Aragon and Ermesinde of Bigorre, and he succeeded his father in 1063. He was elected king of Navarre in 1076 after Sancho IV of Navarre was murdered by his own siblings, thus prompting a succession crisis. Sancho's young son, Garcia, was recognized as titular king in Leon and Castile, where he lived in exile.

Sancho conquered Barbastro in 1065, Graus in 1083, and Monzon in 1089.

He married first in c.1065 (divorced 1071), Isabel of Urgel (d. c.1071), daughter of Count Armengol III of Urgel; and second in 1076, Felicie of Roucy (d May 3, 1123), daughter of Count Hilduin III of Roucy.

His three sons, Pedro, Alfonso and Ramiro, succeeded in turn to the throne of Aragon.


Preceded by:
Ramiro I King of Aragon
1063–1094 Succeeded by:
Peter I
Preceded by:
Sancho IV King of Navarre
1076–1094

Became King of Navarre after murder of cousin Sancho IV in 1074. He died of
wounds suffered during the seige of Huesca in 1094

Became King of Navarre after murder of cousin Sancho IV in 1074. He died of
wounds suffered during the seige of Huesca in 1094

Became King of Navarre after murder of cousin Sancho IV in 1074. He died of
wounds suffered during the seige of Huesca in 1094

Became King of Navarre after murder of cousin Sancho IV in 1074. He died of
wounds suffered during the seige of Huesca in 1094

[Wikipedia, "Sancho Ramírez, King of Aragón and Navarre", retrieved 16 Oct 07]
Sancho Ramírez (c. 1042 ? 4 June 1094, Huesca) was king of Aragon (1063-1094, as Sancho I) and king of Navarre (1076-1094, as Sancho V). He was the son of Ramiro I of Aragon and Ermesinde of Bigorre, and he succeeded his father in 1063.

Between 1067 and 1068, the War of the Three Sanchos involved him in a conflict with his first cousins, both also named Sancho: Sancho IV the king of Navarre and Sancho II the king of Castile, respectively. The Castilian Sancho was trying to retake Bureba and Alta Rioja, which his father had given away to king of Navarre and failed to retake. The Navarrese Sancho begged the aid of the Aragonese Sancho to defend his kingdom. Sancho of Castile defeated the two cousins and retook both Bureba and Alta Rioja, as well as Álava.

Sancho Ramírez was elected king of Navarre in 1076 after Sancho IV of Navarre was murdered by his own siblings, thus prompting a succession crisis. Sancho's young son, García, was recognized as titular king in León and Castile, where he lived in exile.

Sancho conquered Barbastro in 1064, Graus in 1083, and Monzón in 1089.

He married first in c.1065 (divorced 1071), Isabel of Urgel (d. c.1071), daughter of Count Armengol III of Urgel and second in 1076, Felicie of Roucy (d May 3, 1123), daughter of Count Hilduin III of Roucy. A third marriage - to Philippa of Toulouse - is sometimes given [1] but other evidence records him as still married to Felicie at the time of his death.[2]

He perished in 1094 at the Siege of Huesca.

His three sons: by Isabel, he had Peter; by Felicie he had Alfonso and Ramiro. All three succeeded in turn to the throne of Aragon.

Between 1067 and 1068, the War of the Three Sanchos involved him in a conflict with his first cousins, both also named Sancho: Sancho IV the king of Navarre and Sancho II the king of Castile, respectively. The Castilian Sancho was trying to retake Bureba and Alta Rioja, which his father had given away to king of Navarre and failed to retake. The Navarrese Sancho begged the aid of the Aragonese Sancho to defend his kingdom. Sancho of Castile defeated the two cousins and retook both Bureba and Alta Rioja, as well as Álava.
Sancho Ramírez was elected king of Navarre in 1076 after Sancho IV of Navarre was murdered by his own siblings, thus prompting a succession crisis. Sancho's young son, García, was recognized as titular king in León and Castile, where he lived in exile.
Sancho conquered Barbastro in 1065, Graus in 1083, and Monzón in 1089.

Sancho was proclaimed King of Aragon in 1063 and two years later attac ked the Moslems. In this attack, he was aided by French troops and af ter a difficult siege made himself master of Balbastro which united fo r a time the areas of Navarre with Aragon. It is reported that Sanch o married second, after 1086, Phillippe, the daughter of William IV o f Toulouse. He died while laying siege at Huesca.

Event: Ruled 1076 Sancho V [or IV] Ramírez, King of Navarre 3
Event: Ruled BET. 1063 - 1094 Sancho I Ramírez, King of Aragon 3
Note:
Sancho RAMÍREZ (b. before 1045--d. July 6, 1094, Huesca, Aragon), king of Aragon from 1063 to 1094 and of Pamplona (or Navarre; as SanchoV Ramírez) from 1076 to 1094, the son of Ramiro I of Aragon.
After the murder of Sancho IV of Navarre, Sancho Ramírez, with Navarrese consent, became king of Navarre, forestalling the ambition of Alfonso VI of Castile to annex that kingdom. Sancho's main importance was as king of Aragon. After his father's death (1063) fighting the Moors at Graus, the papacy organized three international crusades against Spanish Islam (1063, 1073, and 1087). They all failed, but Sancho reconquered many places from his own resources, notably in the regions of Huesca and Monzón; at the end of his reign Aragon began to edge toward the Mediterranean coast. Sancho placed his kingdoms under the feudal protection of the Holy See in 1089. He died of wounds during the siege of Huesca

-- MERGED NOTE ------------

Wikidata: https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q344802 | Geni: https://www.geni.com/people/5233386757510064451

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]