== Notes for [[Item:Q105597|Q105597]] ==

This is the conclusion of Alan Applebaum in his paper concerning Hillel II titled "'''Hillel II Recovering an Obscure Figure of Late Antiquity'''", ''Jewish Studies Quarterly 20'', 197–223 DOI 10.1628/094457013X13745056601441 ISSN 0944-5706 Mohr Siebeck 2013

Finding Hillel II s place in the Patriarchal dynasty by using Abraham bar Hiyya' s medieval account of “Hillel ben Judah,” and estimating the length of Hillel 's Patriarchate by using the emperor Julian' s fourth-century reference to the Patriarch “Ioulas” together with other research indicating the length of R. Judah Nesiah' s Patriarchate, allow us to add imperial and patristic texts to Abraham 's account and Julian 's reference as sources for Hillel 's life and career. Drawing on all these sources, I have made the following specific proposals.

Hillel II was Judah Nesiah 's younger son and Gamaliel IV' s brother. He was Patriarch for about thirty years. He enjoyed most of the powers and much of the influence that earlier Patriarchs, notably R. Judah Nesiah, strove to attain, although not without significant gaps and uncertainties in his power. His calendar reform – for which, along with his taxes, he is best remembered – was not completely accepted. And a close reading of Julian s letter indicates that the emperor himself knew that Hillel 's authority was shared with other Jews.

While Hillel II was a Patriarch clearly recognized by the imperial government as the representative and leader of the empire 's Jews, and while he raised enormous amounts of money, he was not noticeably willing or able to advance the interests of those Jews, at least when opposed by other more important interests in the empire, although the opportunities he had to influence legislation that have come down to us were not promising to begin with.

His claim to Davidic ancestry was so widely known as to cause theological problems for a prominent bishop; it remains unclear when the claim originated, although it seems likely that Hillel made much of it. A substantial number of the Jews of Sepphoris rejected his political leadership and him, by force of arms, and years later a group of Jews in Antioch was unable or unwilling to deal with him directly and chose to deal through a Gentile rhetor instead.

The Yerushalmi calls Judah Nesiah “a great man” and his son Gamaliel IV an “insignificant man.” Now that the man I have proposed was Judah Nesiah' s other son can be seen somewhat more clearly, he would not be correctly described as either great or as insignificant.

His calendar reform suggests intelligence and intellectual curiosity, but its limited success may also suggest a lack of energy, as does much else. His role regarding the wicked archon in Antioch may indicate that, at least toward the end of his life, he was passive and willing to be a front man. Cyril 's knowledge of Hillel s Davidic claim suggests he was proud, if not vain, although royal ancestry was something anyone in antiquity would have been proud or vain about. His position in the “Gallus revolt,” the way the emperor Julian dealt with him, and perhaps his failure to leave a mark in imperial legislation, suggest a Jewish leader more focused on his relations with Rome than on the welfare of his own people, perhaps even the type of an exceedingly wealthy man more interested in having money than in what the money could do for those who had provided it.
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]