== Notes for [[Item:Q100233|Q100233]] ==

Ezra ben Abraham ben Mazhir

Ezra ha-Kohen ben Abraham ben Mazhir was head of the rump Palestinian Yeshiva in Damascus from 1164 to 1191. He was apparently a son-in-law, but not a direct descendant, of the House of Ha-Kohen that had headed the venerable yeshiva, with interruptions, since 1025. By his time the yeshiva was in a serious decline, having been forced to move from Jerusalem to Tyre in 1071 and to Damascus around 1097. In view of the Seljuq and Crusader conquests, the yeshiva under Maṣliaḥ ha-Kohen ben Solomon was finally compelled to relocate to Egypt, which was still under Fatimid rule. Some members of the yeshiva stayed behind in Damascus under the leadership of Ezra ha-Kohen.

According to Petahiah of Regensburg’s account of his journey to Baghdad and Syria in the twelfth century, Ezra received his ordination from Samuel ben Eli, the head of the Baghdad yeshiva; the fact that the Palestinian yeshiva had to rely on the Baghdad yeshiva demonstrates the extent of its decline. Samuel ben Eli’s letters preserved in the Cairo Geniza also mention Ezra, as well as his brother Sar Shalom, the sons of Abraham, the head of the Yeshivat Ge’on Yaʿaqov (Heb. Yeshiva of the Pride of Jacob). Samuel ben Eli was in close contact with Ezra ben Abraham, and they supported one another against the exilarch Daniel ben Ḥasday, who vehemently opposed granting any authority to the Damascus yeshiva in matters of ordination in Egypt.

There is no doubt that the appointment of Nathaniel ha-Levi ben Moses as gaon in Egypt by the exilarch Daniel ben Ḥasdai, and the appointment of Ezra ben Abraham as gaon in Syria by Samuel ben Eli, head of the Baghdad yeshiva is proof of the difficult relations in Baghdad between the head of the yeshiva and the exilarch. This discord planted the seeds of the conflict between the gaon Samuel ben Eli in Baghdad, and Maimonides in Cairo, who sided with the exilarchs. One of the issues that led to the clash between Samuel ben Eli and Maimonides pertained to the laws of the Sabbath, specifically those surrounding river travel. Both of them wrote about this topic to Abraham ha-Kohen of Baghdad, most probably Ezra’s father, each of them seeking to convince him of the validity of their arguments. In the end, the Damascus yeshiva disintegrated, and what remained of it moved to Egypt, which was already under Ayyubid rule at the end of the twelfth century.

Elinoar Bareket

Bibliography

Gil, Moshe. Jews in Islamic Countries in the Middle Ages (Leiden: Brill, 2004).

Strauss [-Ashtor], Eliyahu. A History of the Jews in Egypt and Syria under the Rule of the Mamlūks, 3 vols. (Jerusalem: Mosad Harav Kook, 1944).

Citation Elinoar Bareket. " Ezra ben Abraham ben Mazhir." Encyclopedia of Jews in the Islamic World. Executive Editor Norman A. Stillman. Brill Online , 2013. Reference. Jim Harlow. 29 January 2013 <http://referenceworks.brillonline.com/entries/encyclopedia-of-jews-in-the-islamic-world/ezra-ben-abraham-ben-mazhir-SIM_0007530>

One letter in the Genizah (T-S 8J8.15) mentions Ezra Gaon. Ezra Gaon is also found signing a document of Shmuel b. Eli Rosh Yeshivat Baghdad in 1172.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD7550731EFBBFA9822EF79916CAD49
geni:6000000019060325096

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]