== Notes for [[Item:Q52280|Q52280]] ==

{geni:about_me} ita (also spelled Seeta or Seetha Hindustani pronunciation: [sītā], listen (help•info) meaning "furrow") is the heroine of the Hindu epic Ramayana.[1][2] She is the consort of the Hindu god Rama (avatar of Vishnu) and is an avatar of Lakshmi, goddess of wealth and wife of Vishnu. She is esteemed as a standard-setter for wifely and womanly virtues for all Hindu women.[3] Sita is known for her dedication, self-sacrifice, courage and purity. Sita is described as the daughter of the earth goddess Bhūmi and the adopted daughter of King Janaka of Mithila and Queen Sunayna. In her youth, she marries Rama, the prince of Ayodhya. Soon after her marriage, she is forced into exile with her husband and brother-in-law Lakshmana. While in exile, the trio settle in the Dandaka forest, from where she is abducted by theRavana, Rakshasa King of Lanka. She is imprisoned in the Ashoka Vatika of Lanka by Ravana. Sita is finally rescued by Rama in the climatic war where Rama slays Ravana. Sita proves her chastity by undergoing a trial by fire. Thereafter, Rama and Sita return to Ayodhya, where they are crowned as king and queen. However, Rama abandons a pregnant Sita, when one of his subjects casts doubt over her chastity. In the refuge of SageValmiki's hermitage Sita gives birth to twins Lava andKusha. After her sons grow up and unite with their father, Sita returns to her mother, the Earth's womb for release from a cruel world.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
6707A5D4DEBB21EFBBFC9A22EF79916B677B

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]