== Notes for [[Item:Q114282|Q114282]] ==

===Family

https://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/SPANISH%20NOBILITY%20LATER%20MEDIEVAL.htm#GarciaGarciadied1160

GARCÍA García de Aza, son of conde GARCÍA Ordóñez, Tenente en Nájera y Grañón & his second wife Eva --- (1106, before 29 Sep-16 Dec 1160). ... [m firstly --- de Lara, daughter of ---.

m [secondly] '''SANCHA Pérez de Traba''', daughter of conde PEDRO Froílaz de Traba & his second wife condesa Mayor Rodríguez (-after Dec 1159). "Garcia Garciez…cum uxore mea Sancia Pedrez et filiis meis" donated property to the abbey of Silos by charter dated 29 Mar 1157, witnessed by "…Maria Andrez, Maria Ylianez de Vila Tella et Gonsalbus Garciez suus filius…Pedro Garciez de Aza…"[150]. "Garcia Garciez filius comite Garcie…cum uxore mea Sancia" donated part of "albergeria de Oterdaios sicut mater mea et fratres mei dederunt" to Burgos Cathedral by charter dated Dec 1159, witnessed by "…Diago Fernandez, Gonzaluo Padiela, comdessa domna Eluira, dona Maria ermana de la condesa…"[151].

García García & his [second] wife had [seven] children:
* 4. PEDRO García de Lerma (-after 22 Aug 1202). ...
*5. GÓMEZ García de Roa (-after 11 Feb 1191). ...
* 6. ORDOÑO García (-after 1188). ...
* 7. GONZALO García . ...
* 8. GARCÍA García (-after 1166). ...
* 9. [RODRIGO García de Aza . ...
* 10. [JUANA de Aza . ....

https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Se%C3%B1or%C3%ADo_de_Albornoz

García married a younger daughter of Pedro Fróilaz de Traba, sometimes called Eva and other times Sancha. 1 October García and his wife had at the least two daughters, Elvira and Mayor, who married Gonzalo de Maranhao.

It is possible that he had two more daughters, Sancha and María, and a natural daughter, Juana, a religious in the Monastery of Santo Domingo de Caleruega.

ES.28079.AHN/1.3.1.2.3.281//CLERO-SECULAR_REGULAR,CAR.793,NUM.12
Tributacion de un palacio con sus heredamientos en Asieso.
Fecha Creacion:
1318-02-04, (Santa Cruz de la Seros) -
Toda Perez de San Vicente, abadesa del monasterio, da a Martin de Ayes, a su mujer Sancha, a Bernardo de Guazer y a su mujer Tomasa un palacio con sus heredamientos situado en Asieso por el pago anual de 5 potos y medio y una libra de aceite.
Lengua/Escritura de la Documentacion:
Castellano
Indices de Descripcion:
Benedictinas
Monasterio de Santa Maria de Santa Cruz de la Seros (Huesca)
Santa Cruz de la Seros (Huesca)
Historical records show that a lot of French Templiers immigrated to Spain to take up the fight against the Moors. Contracts were made between the rulers of Aragon, etc with the Templiers. The contract was simple, for every town conquered by the templiers they would get a huge grant of the land and in some cases, castles and palaces.
I am theorizing that the Ayes heritage began in France, see map of Asieso, France and the Alps are very close making immigration very easy by horseback.
My mother's DNA speaks to me of Haplo Group C, but embedded within her sequences are those of the French which were passed to her by her father, Feliciano Ayes y Ortiz. The sequences in essence, connect me to my French Ayes.
The Surname, Aix doesn't roll off the Spanish tongue too well and one can see how the surname Aix would have been transcribed to become Ayes. Even Puerto Ricans had trouble with my 5th great grandfather's surname, Ales, that eventually transposed to Ayez and then to Ayes. History repeats itself.
Update: 06/23/2008 via Betty Hubbard via yDNA Project Forum.
Betty Hubbard - Jun 20, 2008
"Toda Perez is Gutierre Clan-PEREZ DE TRABA, sister of Trastamara Count Fernando Perez de Traba, their father Count of Trastamara Pedro Froilaz. Go to History file name GUTIERRE CLAN pg 1 -H. Gutierrez- browse -Count of Trastamara Pedro Froilaz. I was excited to find the surname AYES in your search of AYES surname connecting to PEREZ DE TRABA! This AYES has to be related to PEREZ DE TRABA because only close kins they favor give lands to each other during these times. I also remembered my grandfather giving lands to his kins before I was born but during his time lands were cheap; lands had gone up in value in the Phil these days. I was surprised to hear last month that the house of my grandfather was sold to someone, when I asked who sold it, it was sold by my distant aunt. "
Research Copyright 2008, John J. Browne Ayes

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]