== Notes for [[Item:Q111449|Q111449]] ==

image: gold coin minted during the reign [694-710] of Wittiza, King of the Visigothic Kingdom of Spain, of which the Duchy of Cantabria was a part. [commons.wikimedia.org]


----

==[http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/ASTURIAS,%20LEON.htm#PedroDuqueCantabria Project MedLands, ASTURIAS LEON]

2. FRUELA (-[765]). The Historia Silense records that "Petrus ex Recaredi…Gotorum principis progenie" had "duos filios…Adefonsum…et Froylam"[131]. The Chronicle of Alfonso III names "Fruela" as brother of Alfonso, when recording that they "took many cities in battle"[132]. married? '''The name of Fruela's wife is not known.'''

Fruela & his wife had [three] children:

*a) ['''daughter''' ([730/35]-). Her parentage and second marriage are confirmed by Ibn Hayyan who records a campaign in 816 led by “[el] hayib Abd al-Karim ibn Abd al-Wahid ibn Mugit” against “Balask al-Yalasqi señor de Pamplona”, during the course of which [her son by her second marriage] “Garsiya ibn Lubb, hijo de la hermana de Barmud, el tío materno de Idfuns...” was killed[133]. This assumes that the phrase “el tío materno de Idfuns” applies to “Garsiya ibn Lubb” not to “Barmud”. Martínez Díez assumes that “Barmud” was Vermudo I King of Asturias[134]. Her first marriage is confirmed by reading the same text of Ibn Hayyan together with the Sebastiani Chronicon which records the burial of [her daughter by her first marriage and her son-in-law] "Froila…cum uxore sua Munia Oveti" [therefore recording Munia´s patronymic)][135]. This assumes that “Idfuns” in Ibn Hayyan refers to Alfonso II King of Asturias. It does not necessarily follow from this logic that this person was the daughter of Fruela, father of King Vermudo I: she could alternatively have been the daughter of Fruela´s wife by an earlier marriage. If she was the daughter of Fruela, she must have been one of his older children, considerably older than King Vermudo I. The dates associated with her two children strongly suggest that Overo was her first husband and Lope her second. married firstly OVECO ---, son of ---. married secondly LOPE ---, son of ---.]
*b) '''AURELIO''' (-773, bur San Martín). The Chronicle of Alfonso III records that King Fruela was succeeded by "his cousin Aurelio", without giving details of Aurelio's parentage[136]. The Sebastiani Chronicon records that "Aurelius filius Froilani fratris Adefonsi" succeeded King Fruela[137]. According to Ibn-Khaldun, "son fils Aurelio" succeeded King Fruela in [15 Jan 769/4 Jan 770]), reigned six years and died in [11 Nov 774/31 Oct 775][138], but this passage appears to confuse King Fruela with his paternal uncle Fruela. He succeeded his first cousin in 768 as AURELIO King of Asturias. In contrast to his predecessor, he maintained peaceful relations with Abd al-Rahman I Emir of Córdoba. The Chronicle of Alfonso III states that he suppressed a rebellion of slaves, "remained at peace with the Chaldeans", ruled for six years and "in the seventh year" died "of a natural illness, in the era 811 (773)"[139]. The Chronicon Compostellani records that “Aurelius” reigned six years and six months[140]. The Sebastiani Chronicon records that "Aurelius" was buried "in ecclesia sancti Martini episcopi"[141].
*c) '''VERMUDO''' ([750]-797). The Chronicle of Alfonso III records that "Vermudo the son of Fruela" was elected king after the death of Mauregato, and ruled for three years when "he voluntarily gave up his rule because he was a deacon" and installed "his nephew Alfonso as his successor and lived with him most lovingly for many years" before dying "a natural death…in the era 829 (791)"[142], although this date appears to refer to Vermudo's abdication not his death. He was elected in 788 to succeed King Maugerato as VERMUDO I “el Diácono” King of Asturias.



----
===References
* https://thesignsofthetimes.com.au/31/68691.htm

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]