== Notes for [[Item:Q102566|Q102566]] ==

Mar-Zutra II was an Exilarch who led a successful revolt against Persia in the sixth century and achieved seven years of political independence in Mahoza.

Mar-Zutra II became Exilarch of the Jewish community in Babylon at the age of fifteen in the year 512. After King Kavadh I denied Jews the right to organize their own militia, Mar-Zutra took advantage of the confusion and led a successful military revolt that achieved political independence for the Jews of Mahoza in 513.

The Jewish state lasted seven years until 520 when Persian King Kavadh finally defeated Mar-Zutra and punished him with crucifixion on the bridge of Mahuza. A son was born to him on the day of his death, who was also named "Mar Zutra." The latter did not attain to the office of Exilarch, but returned to the Land of Israel, where he became head of the Academy of Tiberias, under the title of "Resh Pirka" ('Aρχιφεκίτησ), several generations of his descendants succeeding him in this office.

After Mar Zutra's death the exilarchate of Babylon remained unoccupied until 550. Mar Ahunai lived in the period succeeding Mar-Zutra II, but for more than thirty years after Mar-Zutra's defeat he did not dare to appear in public, and it is not known whether he really acted as Exilarch even in 550.

http://books.google.com/books?id=8vTTCwG0nKIC&pg=PA53#v=onepage&q&f=false
--------------------

Exilarque Mar Zutra II ben Houna beni David a également été appelé Exilarque Mar Zutra II de Babylone. Il se révolta contre le Kobad fanatique du Zenduk (King Kavadh I de l'Iran), l'établissement d'un Etat juif à Babylone avec sa capitale comme Mahoza, qui a duré entre 501 et 508. Il était Exilarque (Exilarque [en hébreu: ראש גלות Rosh Galout, l'araméen: ריש גלותא Reish Galuta allumé »la tête de l'exil», en grec:. Æchmalotarcha], se référant aux dirigeants de la diaspora communauté juive après la déportation de la population de Juda en exil à Babylone après la destruction du royaume de Juda) à Babylone entre 508 et 520, quand il a été crucifié à mort.

The state lasted for seven years at the end of which the Jews were defeated and Mar Zutra was crucified to death.

--------------------

Exilarch Mar Zutra II ben Huna beni David was also called Exilarch Mar Zutra II of Babylon. He revolted against the fanatic Kobad the Zenduk (King Kavadh I of Iran), establishing a Jewish state in Babylon with its capital as Mahoza, which lasted between 501 and 508. He was Exilarch (Exilarch [Hebrew: ראש גלות Rosh Galut, Aramaic: ריש גלותא Reish Galuta lit. "head of the exile", Greek: Æchmalotarcha], referring to the leaders of the Diaspora Jewish community following the deportation of the population of Judah into Babylonian exile after the destruction of the kingdom of Judah) in Babylon between 508 and 520, when he was crucified to death.

See "My Lines"

( http://homepages.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~cousin/html/p291.htm#i12966 )

from Compiler: R. B. Stewart, Evans, GA

( http://homepages.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~cousin/html/index.htm )
--------------------
Sutra [I] (Mar-Zutra) "Rav" Prince of Judah son of the 30th Exilarch Mar-Zutra II, Sutra I was the son of his father’s second wife and took his father’s name. He was born the day of his father’s execution. He was carried to Palestine. As an adult he was accepted as Nasi or Prince/Patriarch and founded a new dynasty of the Palestinian Nesi’im ca. 550 CE, thus ending the interregnum period following the deposition of Gamaliel VI in 425 CE.

Mar-Zutra II, the 30th Exilarch reigned 512-520 in succession to Ahija(h) I. He reigned first under the regency of Pahida the brother of his first wife, (508-512), who was deposed by his father Haninai, who then became associated with his son in his reign. The execution of Mar-Zutra II was followed by a vacancy in the office of Exilarchate from 520-550 CE. Mar-Zutra II’s first son was Ahunai (Huna Mar II) who was Exilarch from 550-560 being restored after the interregnum. From his line was descended a new dynasty of Exilarchs through Hofnai, Exilarch 560-581 whose sons were Haninai (Exilarch 581-589) and Bostani (I) who founded the new dynasty.

Mar-Zutra II was the son of Hava(h) (d. 493) the heiress. His brother was Hizkiah the father of David, father of Mar Zutra III (Exilarch 589), whose execution was followed by another interregnum in the Exilarchate.

Hava(h) married Haninai, son of Maremar, s. of Zutra, s. of Kahana, s. of Nathan, s. of Kahana. This was the second time a title had passed through a female in accordance with Numbers 27:8 and Numbers 36:8 which regulates it. She was the daughter and only child of:

Huna VI (reigned 484-508, being restored after an interim).

Kahana II (reigned 456-465). His brothers were:

Nosson II Exilarch 470 executed 470 and the office was vacated after his execution until 484 when his nephew Huna VI reigned.

http://www.ccg.org/english/s/P067.html

....................................................

Mar Zutra II, Exilarch at BABYLON

0493 - 0520

* BIRTH: 0493

* DEATH: 0520

Father: Haninai

Family 1 :

1. +Huna* Mar at BABYLON

--------------------

==Mar Zutra of Babylon==
The 30th Exilarch reigned 512-520 in succession to Ahija(h) I. He reigned first under the regency of Pahida the brother of his first wife, (508-512), who was deposed by his father Haninai, who then became associated with his son in his reign. The execution of Mar-Zutra II was followed by a vacancy in the office of Exilarchate from 520-550 CE.
--------------------
According to Sefer Yohassin his name is Mar Zutra.

According to 'Yashir Moshe' Pg 30 Mar Zutra is the 43rd generation since David Hamelech

During the beginning of 6th century Mar-Zutra II formed a politically independent state where he ruled from Mahoza for about seven years. He was eventually defeated by Kavadh I and cricified on a bridge by Kavadh I, son of Sassanid King Peroz I.

Sefer Yuchassin (Book of Genealogies), written by Rabbi Abraham Zacuto (1452-1515), the historian and astronomer whose charts Columbus used in his voyage, is more a chronology than a genealogy. It was written in 1505 and published in Constantinople in 1566. It covers the period from Creation to the expulsions from Spain and Portugal. Zacuto drew much from the preceding chronicles, which he quotes extensively, but the order of generations differs from that in Seder Olam Zuta. The Constantinople edition, published by Samuel Shullam, includes “Dorot Olam” (Generations of the World), a genealogy from Adam to Exilarch David ben Zakkai (died circa 940); its authorship is uncertain and may be Shullam himself.

"Yashir Moshe - A commentary on the Song of Songs" by Moshe ben Abraham Dayan, Edited by Rabbi Ezra Batsri (head of the Jerusalem Rabbinical Court), Published by Haktav Institute (Jerusalem, 5764/2004) first published in 5741/1981.
--------------------
[http://he.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D7%9E%D7%A8_%D7%96%D7%95%D7%98%D7%A8%D7%90_%D7%A8%D7%90%D7%A9_%D7%94%D7%92%D7%95%D7%9C%D7%94 '''מר זוטרא השני, ראש הגולה''' ]

He was Exilarch in Baghdad from 508 to 520.

He was Exilarch in Baghdad from 508 to 520.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000014896478306

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]