== Notes for [[Item:Q114644|Q114644]] ==

BERNARD (-[Aug/Dec] 874). His parentage is confirmed by the charter dated 3 Nov 862 under which "Raymundus…comes et marchio et uxor mea Berteyz" founded the abbey of Vabres, naming "Bernardum filium nostrum…Fulgualdus filius noster…Odo filius noster" (all three of whom also subscribed the document)[196]. He succeeded his father as BERNARD I Comte et Marquis de Toulouse. "Berteiz comitissa et filius meus Bernardus comes et marchio Tolosensis" donated property "in pago Ruthenico…in Tarnesca" to Vabres, constructed by "genitor noster Raymundus marchio quondam Tolosensis…cum genetrice mea Berteiz iam dicta", by charter dated 17 Apr 865, subscribed by "…Begoni vicecomiti…"[197]. The Annales Bertiniani name "rex markiones Bernardum scilicet Tolosæ et iterum Bernardum Gothiæ, itemque Bernardum alium" in 868[198]. Charles II "le Chauve" King of the West Franks confirmed the foundation of "mon. Vabrensi…in pago Ruthenico" by "Bernardus Tolosanus Marchio…pater eius Ragemundus", after the death of "Benedicto filio Ragemundi fratri suo", by charter dated 21 Jun 870[199]. A charter dated Aug 870 records a judgment given by "Bernardum comitem"[200]. He assumed the title Comte de Carcassonne et de Rodez in 871. He was probably murdered on the orders of Bernard “Plantevelue” Comte d’Auvergne. "Bertheiz sagaci" donated property to Vabres, for the souls of "genitoris mei Remigii hac genetricis meæ Arsinda" and for "iugale meo Raimundo et filio meo Bernardo qui fuerunt quondam, seu et filio meo Odone et Benedicto", by charter dated 6 Apr 883[201]. "Frotarius…Biturigensis ecclesiæ archiepiscopus" confirmed privileges to "villa Orbaciaco" for the souls of "Regimundi filiorumque eius Bernardi et Oddonis atque Arberti" by charter dated Aug 887[202].

http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/TOULOUSE.htm

Name Prefix:<NPFX> Count

Bernard II of Toulouse
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Bernard II (died 877), called the Calf, was the Count of Toulouse, Rouergue, Limoges, Nîmes, Carcassonne, Razès, and Albi. He was the son of Raymond I and Bertha. The dates of his reign are disputed: either 865–877 or 864–872.

In 863, his father, loyal to Charles the Bald, was deposed by Humfrid, Count of Barcelona. In 865, when his father died and Humfrid fled, Charles appointed him to the counties of Toulouse and Rouergue, probably including Pallars and Ribagorza, and Limoges. In 872, following the deposition of Oliba II of Carcassonne, he was given the counties of Albi, Nîmes, Carcassonne, and Razès. In 877, he was assassinated by a vassal of Bernard Plantapilosa, who took over Toulouse and Limoges. In Limoges, however, Bernard's brother Fulcoald, with the title of viscount, continued to exercise the power of government and is the founder of that great vicecomital family. Meanwhile, Oliba was reinstated in his old counties. In Pallars and Ribagorza, one Raymond I succeeded in separating those countships from the rest and inaugurating a new and de facto independent dynastic authority in the region.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]