== Notes for [[Item:Q117611|Q117611]] ==

Aldonza Alfonso de León (c. 1215-1266), fue una dama leonesa e hija ilegítima del rey Alfonso IX de León y de su amante Aldonza Martínez de Silva.

Aldonza Alfonso of León (ca. 1212/ca. 1215-1266), daughter of Alfonso IX 'el Baboso' Fernández Rey de León e Aldonza Martínez da Silva, wife, first, of Diego Ramírez Froilaz, nephew of her stepfather, without issue, and, second, of Pedro Ponce de Cabrera, (ca. 1210-), and had issue, ancestors of the notorious Ponce de León family.
--------------------
Daughter of King Alfonso IX of León and his mistress, the Lady Aldonza Martínez de Silva
--------------------
https://familysearch.org/pal:/MM9.2.1/398Z-XWQ

title of nobility: Infanta

Additional Information for Dª Aldonza Alfonso /De León/ Sources (1)

Genealogía del Libertador Ramón Darío Suárez Citing This Record

"Pedigree Resource File," database, FamilySearch (http://familysearch.org/pal:/MM9.2.1/398Z-XWQ : accessed 2014-02-17), entry for Dª Aldonza Alfonso /De León/.

--------------------
Aldonza Alfonso de León. (2015, 14 de mayo). Wikipedia, La enciclopedia libre. Fecha de consulta: 16:13, julio 26, 2015 desde https://es.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aldonza_Alfonso_de_Le%C3%B3n&oldid=82416655.
--------------------
* Reference: [https://www.ancestry.com/family-tree/person/tree/110326636/person/120091511817 Ancestry Genealogy] - [https://www.geni.com/projects/SmartCopy/18783 SmartCopy]: ''Aug 23 2017, 13:03:53 UTC''

Source:
Nobilario das Familias de Portugal, Felgueiras Gayo Carvalhos de Basto 2a Edizao Braga 1989
Vol III pg 584 Ponces.
ES.41168.SNAHN/1.1.2.7.10//OSUNA,C.141,D.29-62
Documento 39: Copia de la tabla de fundación del monasterio de Santa Maria de Nogales [en San Esteban de Nogales (Leon)], por Sancha Ponce de Cabrera, mujer del conde Vela Ponce Gutiérrez; copia de la tabla de la lápida de Aldonza Alfonso de Leon, hija del rey Alfonso IX y mujer de Pedro Ponce de Cabrera; copia de la tabla de la lapida de los condes Vela Ponce y Sancha Ponce de Cabrera;
Research Copyright 2008, John J. Browne Ayes

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]