== Notes for [[Item:Q104110|Q104110]] ==

http://bibliotecadigital.rah.es/dgbrah/i18n/consulta/registro.cmd?id=53930

Attached in the media section are the pages 377-382, 430-432 from the book "Nobiliario de la Ciudad de Burgos" from Valentin Davila Jalon of an expediente for the military order of Montesa where Jeronimo de Salamanca Polanco, the banker based in Antwerp and treasurer of Queen Isabel of Austria, is said to be the son of Alonso de Salamanca Polanco and Ana de Polanco and brother of Miguel de Salamanca and uncle of Juan Alonso de Salamanca.

In another expediente de limpieza de sangre for military orders, the same author Davila Jalon erronously contradicts the above expediente saying that Jeronimo de Salamanca is the son of Bernardino de Salamanca and Maria de Santa Cruz, while still claiming that Miguel de Salamanca Polanco, father of Juan Alonso de Salamanca, is his brother http://riubu.ubu.es/bitstream/10259.4/591/1/1133-9284_n097_p241-254.pdf. However this is clarified in page 244 of this same expediente de limpieza de sangre where it is stated that Jeronimo de Salamanca Santa Cruz and Jeronimo de Salamanca Polanco are two different persons.

In page 244 of the expediente it is clarified that Jeronimo de Salamanca Santa Cruz was mayor of the city of Burgos and procurador mayor de cortes for the city during King Felipe II. His brother, Diego de Salamanca Santa Cruz was a professor of teology in the University of Valladolid as said in the expediente and in the testament of Diego found at https://investigadoresrb.patrimonionacional.es/node/8294.

Jeronimo de Salamanca Polanco on the other hand was a banker and treasurer of Queen Isabella of Austria. His banking partner was Fernando de Bernuy. He resided in Antwerp were he married Barbara de Matanza who was born in Flanders and was a factor of the trading company formed by his brother Miguel de Salamanca Polanco and his cousin Garcia de Salamanca, which was one of the biggest international trading companies in Europe at the time. (Casado Alonso, Hilario. "[https://www.academia.edu/2778482/Comercio_y_hombres_de_negocios_castellanos_y_navarros_en_los_inicios_de_la_Primera_Edad_Global_in_En_los_umbrales_de_Espa%C3%B1a._La_incorporaci%C3%B3n_del_Reino_de_Navarra_a_la_Monarqu%C3%ADa_Hispana._Pamplona_Gobierno_de_Navarra_2012._pp._333-370._._ISBN_978-84-235-3310-7 Comercio y hombres de negocios castellanos y navarros en los inicios de la "Primera Edad Global]"". pp. 348–356)

Jeronimo de Salamanca Polanco features as one of the main bankers and financiers of Felipe II at the end of the 1550s along with the Fugger family. He was also later mayor of Burgos and Prior of the Consulado de Burgos. However after accumulating an enormous amount of wealth his bank went bankrupt and he died in jail in Madrid. http://www.cervantesvirtual.com/descargaPdf/mercaderes-de-burgos-en-canarias-francisco-manrique/ Pages 10-17

In some writings about the merchants of Burgos such as in page 164 of this one http://www.cervantesvirtual.com/descargaPdf/mercaderes-burgaleses-del-siglo-xvi/ Jeronimo de Salamanca Polanco the banker in Flanders is mistakenly referred as Jeronimo de Salamanca Santa Cruz.
--------------------
=== GEDCOM Source ===
2 JAN 2019 10:33:43 GMT -0500 Marcos Fernández de Salamanca Fernández de Salamanca Web Site <p>Árbol genealógico de MyHeritage</p><p>Sitio familiar: Fernández de Salamanca Web Site</p>Árbol genealógico: 491198891-1 Smart Matching 491198891-1 https://www.myheritage.es/person-32001250_336199081_336199081/jeronimo-de-salamanca-polanco 3 Agregado por confirmación del Smart Match Smart Matching 1:336199081-32-1250:0

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000080869878951

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]