== Notes for [[Item:Q87652|Q87652]] ==

ID: I6886

Name: Lucius Julius II of Rome Caesar

Given Name: Lucius Julius II of Rome

Surname: Caesar

Sex: M

_UID: BB0B2AFA5118D811BE490080C8C142CC5A52

Change Date: 26 Nov 2005

Death: Y

Father: Sextus Julius II of Rome Caesar

Marriage 1 Spouse Unknown

Children

Lucius Julius III Caesar of Rome

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I6886

-------------------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Julius_Caesar#Lucius_Julius_Caesar_II

Lucius Julius Caesar II

Son of Sextus Julius Caesar II. Married Poppilia. They had 2 sons Lucius Julius Caesar III and Gaius Julius Caesar Strabo Vopiscus and one daughter Julia Caesaris, who became the first wife of the dictator Lucius Cornelius Sulla.

--------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Julius_Caesar#Lucius_Julius_Caesar_II
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Julius_Caesar#Lucius_Julius_Caesar_II

Lucius Julius Caesar II

Son of Sextus Julius Caesar II. Married Poppilia. They had 2 sons Lucius Julius Caesar III and Gaius Julius Caesar Strabo Vopiscus and one daughter Julia Caesaris, who became the first wife of the dictator Lucius Cornelius Sulla.

--------------------
'''
=Lucius Julius Caesar II=
'''

Lucius Julius Caesar II was the son of a Sextus Julius Caesar. He married a Poppilia. They had two sons, the consul of 90 BC and Gaius Julius Caesar Strabo Vopiscus, and one daughter, Julia Caesaris, who became the first wife of the dictator Sulla.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Julius_Caesar#Lucius_Julius_Caesar_II

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per05317.htm#0

Name Suffix:<NSFX> II

Name Suffix:<NSFX> II

Lucius Julius Caesar II - Son of Sextus Julius Caesar II. Married Poppilia. They had 2 sons Lucius Julius Caesar III and Gaius Julius Caesar Strabo Vopiscus.


wtf 4:565

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]