== Notes for [[Item:Q105330|Q105330]] ==

34. ANA4 GUERRA-CANAMAR-MORALES (LEONOR3 DE MORALES, JUANA2 DE TREVINO-QUINTANILLA-Y-SALAZAR, PEDRO1 DE SALAZAR)
*She married JOSEPH LOBO-GUERRERO-DE-LAS-CASAS, son of JUAN-ALONSO LOBO-GUERRERO-FERNANDEZ-CORDOVA and MARIA DE-LAS-CASAS-NAVARRO.

Children of ANA GUERRA-CANAMAR-MORALES and JOSEPH LOBO-GUERRERO-DE-LAS-CASAS are:
*1. i. CAPTAIN ANTONIO5 LOBO-GUERRERO-DE-LAS-CASAS,
**b. Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico;
**m. ANA DE LIZARRARAS-Y-CUELLAR.
*2. ii. MARGARITA LOBO-GUERRERO,
**b. Saltillo, Coahulia, Mexico;
**m. CAPTAIN JUAN DE ABREGO-GUAJARDO, 09 Sep 1694, Saltillo, Coahulia, Mexico;
***b. Saltillo, Coahulia, Mexico.
****Marriage Notes for MARGARITA LOBO-GUERRERO and JUAN DE ABREGO-GUAJARDO: Marriage source:Index to the Marriage Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara by Raul J. Guerra, Jr., Nadine M. Vasquez, Baldomero Vela, Jr. Page 69.
*3. iii. NICOLASA LOBO-GUERRERO-DE-LAS-CASAS,
**m. JOSEPH-ANTONIO DE-LA-GARZA.
*4. iv. LUIS LOBO-GUERRERO-DE-LAS-CASAS.
*5. v. CAPTAIN JOSEPH LOBO-GUERRERO-DE-LAS-CASAS,
**b. Saltillo, Coahulia, Mexico;
**m. MARIA-ROSA GALINDO-CALIZ.
*6. vi. MARIA-ROSA DE-LAS-CASAS,
**m. BENITO GUTIERREZ-BUSTAMONTE, 04 Jan 1691/92, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico;
***b. Golbardo, Montanes de Burgos, Castilla, Spain.
*7. vii. LEONOR LOBO-GUERRERO-DE-LAS-CASAS,
**b. 08 May 1684, Sagrario Metropolitano, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico;
**m. JUAN-FRANCISCO SANCHEZ-GOMEZ-DE-TAGEL.
***Marriage Notes for LEONOR LOBO-GUERRERO-DE-LAS-CASAS and JUAN-FRANCISCO SANCHEZ-GOMEZ-DE-TAGEL: Marriage source:Mil Familias III by Rodolfo Gonzalez de la Garza. Page 357.
*8. viii. JUAN LOBO-GUERRERO-GUERRA,
**b. 29 Oct 1690, Sagrario Metropolitano, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico;
**m. (1) ANGELA DE SAN-MIGUEL, 19 Sep 1711, Saltillo, Coahulia, Mexico;
***b. Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico;
**m. (2) MELCHORA ELIZONDO-DE-LOS-SANTOS-COY, 03 Nov 1721, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
***Marriage Notes for JUAN LOBO-GUERRERO-GUERRA and ANGELA DE SAN-MIGUEL: Marriage source:From the book, Index to the Marriage Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara by Raul J. Guerra, Jr., Nadine M. Vasquez, Baldomero Vela, Jr. Page 66.
***Marriage Notes for JUAN LOBO-GUERRERO-GUERRA and MELCHORA ELIZONDO-DE-LOS-SANTOS-COY: Source:Index to the Marriage Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara, by Raul J. Guerra., Nadine M. Vasquez, Baldomero Vela, Jr. Page 225.

http://www.somosprimos.com/inclan/salazar.htm

---

Misplaced:

Ana de Lisarraras y CUELLAR [183],[185],[447] was born (date unknown).

Parents: Capt. Miguel de CUELLAR and Teresa de AGUIRRE.

Spouse: Capt. Antonio LOBO GUERRERO. Ana de Lisarraras y CUELLAR and Capt. Antonio LOBO GUERRERO were married. Children were:
*1. Toribio LOBO GUERRERO,
*2. Domingo LOBO GUERRERO.

http://www.raullongoria.net/Genealogy/FamilyTree/b46.html#P10586

--------------------

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000014301802323

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]