== Notes for [[Item:Q87242|Q87242]] ==

Pompeius Strabo From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
(January 2009)

Gnaeus Pompeius Strabo (died 87 BC), whose cognomen means "cross eyed", is often referred to in English as Pompey Strabo to distinguish him from Strabo, the geographer. Strabo lived in the Roman Republic. Strabo was born and raised into a noble family in Picenum (modern Marche & Abruzzo) a rural district in Northern Italy, off the Adriatic coast. Strabo's mother was called Lucilia. Lucilia’s family originated from Suessa Aurunca (modern Sessa Aurunca) and she was a sister of satire poet Gaius Lucilius. Lucilius was a friend of Roman general Scipio Aemilianus Africanus. Strabo’s paternal grandfather was Gnaeus Pompeius, while his father was Sextus Pompeius. His elder brother was Sextus Pompeius and his sister was Pompeia. His brother was the father of another Sextus Pompeius and Quintus Pompeius, the first of whom was the father of another Sextus Pompeius, Consul in 35 BC, in turn the father of still another Sextus Pompeius.

Strabo became the first of his branch of the gens Pompeia to achieve senatorial status in Rome, despite the anti-rural prejudice of the Roman Senate. After proving his military talent, Strabo climbed the cursus honorum and became promagistrate in Sicily 93 BC and consul in the year 89 BC, in the midst of the Social War.

Strabo commanded Roman forces against the Italian Allies in the northern part of Italy. His three Roman legions were instrumental in Rome's victory. After his consulship and the war, Strabo retired to Picenum with all of his veteran soldiers. He remained there until 87 BC, when he responded to dictator Lucius Cornelius Sulla's request for help against general Gaius Marius. Strabo had the habit of playing both ends against the middle in the intense politics of the period. Sulla arranged to remove Strabo from command and replace him with a handpicked confederate. Strabo left camp on "personal business" while his soldiers killed the replacement. Later, when Strabo died of plague, a mob dragged his body through the streets until a tribune interceded. His son took the legions back to Picenum once again.

Strabo married a Roman woman whose name is unknown. He had at least two children: a son, Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus, also known as Pompey the Great or Pompey the triumvir, who took as his fourth wife Julia (the daughter of dictator Gaius Julius Caesar), and a daughter called Pompeia.

Forrás / Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pompeius_Strabo
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pompeius_Strabo

Strabo’s paternal grandfather was Gnaeus Pompeius, while his father was Sextus Pompeius. His elder brother was Sextus Pompeius and his sister was Pompeia. His brother was the father of another Sextus Pompeius and Quintus Pompeius, the first of whom was the father of another Sextus Pompeius, Consul in 35 BC (not to be confused with Sextus Pompeius, enemy of the Triumvirate, who died the same year), in turn the father of still another Sextus Pompeius.

--------------------
G. Pompeius Strabo was a Roman from the rural Italian district of Picenum, that lay between the Apennines and the Adriatic. He became the first of his branch of the gens Pompeia to achieve senatorial status in Rome, despite the anti-rural prejudice of the Roman Senate. After proving his military talent, Strabo climbed the cursus honorum and became propraetor in Sicily 93 BC and consul in the year 89 BC, in the midst of the Social War.”

--------------------
'''
=Pompeius Strabo=
'''

Gnaeus Pompeius Strabo (135–87 BC), whose cognomen means "cross eyed", is often referred to in English as Pompey Strabo to distinguish him from Strabo the geographer, and was the father of Pompey the Great. He lived in the Roman Republic and was born and raised into a noble family in Picenum (modern Marche & Abruzzo) a rural district in Central Italy, off the Adriatic Coast. Strabo’s mother was called Lucilia. Lucilia’s family originated from Suessa Aurunca (modern Sessa Aurunca) and she was a sister of satire poet Gaius Lucilius. Lucilius was a friend of Roman general Scipio Aemilianus Africanus. Strabo’s paternal grandfather was Gnaeus Pompeius, while his father was Sextus Pompeius. His elder brother was Sextus Pompeius and his sister was Pompeia.

Strabo became the first of his branch of the gens Pompeia to achieve senatorial status in Rome, despite the anti-rural prejudice of the Roman Senate. After proving his military talent, Strabo climbed the cursus honorum and became promagistrate in Sicily 93 BC and consul in the year 89 BC, in the midst of the Social War.

Strabo commanded Roman forces against the Italian Allies in the northern part of Italy. His three Roman legions were instrumental in Rome's victory. After his consulship and the war, he retired to Picenum with all of his veteran soldiers. Optimates gave his army to Quintus Pompeius Rufus, the new consul. This caused Pompeius Rufus to be murdered by Strabo’s soldiers. He remained there until 87 BC, when he responded to the Optimates' request for help against the Marian Party. Strabo had the habit of playing both ends against the middle in the intense politics of the period. For this Rutilius Rufus referred to him as "the vilest man alive".

In 87 BC Strabo was killed by a disease outbreak in his army. His avarice and cruelty had made him hated by the soldiers to such a degree that they tore his corpse from the bier and dragged it through the streets. His son took the legions back to Picenum once again.

Strabo married and his wife is an unnamed Roman woman. He had a least two children: a son, Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus, also known as Pompey the Great or Pompey the triumvir who married Julia (the daughter of dictator Gaius Julius Caesar) as his fourth wife and a daughter called Pompeia.

In his honor his name was given to the cities of Alba Pompeia and Laus Pompeia.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pompeius_Strabo

GNAEUS OR GAIUS (L) POMPEIUS

Pompeius Strabo
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Gnaeus Pompeius Strabo (died 87 BC), whose cognomen means "cross eyed", is often referred to in English as Pompey Strabo to distinguish him from Strabo the geographer. Strabo lived in the Roman Republic. Strabo was born and raised into a noble family in Picenum (modern Marche & Abruzzo) a rural district in Northern Italy, off the Adriatic Coast. Strabo's mother was called Lucilia. Lucilia’s family originated from Suessa Aurunca (modern Sessa Aurunca) and she was a sister of satire poet Gaius Lucilius. Lucilius was a friend of Roman general Scipio Aemilianus Africanus. Strabo’s paternal grandfather was Gnaeus Pompeius, while his father was Sextus Pompeius. His elder brother was Sextus Pompeius and his sister was Pompeia. His brother was the father of another Sextus Pompeius and Quintus Pompeius, the first of whom was the father of another Sextus Pompeius, Consul in 35 BC, in turn the father of still another Sextus Pompeius.

Strabo became the first of his branch of the gens Pompeia to achieve senatorial status in Rome, despite the anti-rural prejudice of the Roman Senate. After proving his military talent, Strabo climbed the cursus honorum and became promagistrate in Sicily 93 BC and consul in the year 89 BC, in the midst of the Social War.

Strabo commanded Roman forces against the Italian Allies in the northern part of Italy. His three Roman legions were instrumental in Rome's victory. After his consulship and the war, Strabo retired to Picenum with all of his veteran soldiers. He remained there until 87 BC, when he responded to dictator Lucius Cornelius Sulla's request for help against general Gaius Marius. Strabo had the habit of playing both ends against the middle in the intense politics of the period. Sulla arranged to remove Strabo from command and replace him with a handpicked confederate. Strabo left camp on "personal business" while his soldiers killed the replacement. Later, when Strabo died of plague, a mob dragged his body through the streets until a tribune interceded. His son took the legions back to Picenum once again.

Strabo married and his wife is an unnamed Roman woman. He had a least two children: a son, Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus, also known as Pompey the Great or Pompey the triumvir who married Julia (the daughter of dictator Gaius Julius Caesar) as his fourth wife and a daughter called Pompeia.


[edit] Sources:
Microsoft Encarta Encyclopaedia 2002
http://www.ancientlibrary.com/smith-bio/1930.html
http://www.ancientlibrary.com/smith-bio/2808.html
This article incorporates text from the Encyclopædia Britannica Eleventh Edition, a publication now in the public domain.

Preceded by
Lucius Julius Caesar and Publius Rutilius Lupus Consul of the Roman Republic
with Lucius Porcius Cato
89 BC Succeeded by
Lucius Cornelius Sulla and Quintus Pompeius Rufus

Gnaeus Pompeius
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Gnaeus Pompeius (ca. 75 - April 12, 45 BC), also known as Pompey the Younger, also spelled Cneius, Gneius ...was a Roman politician and general from the late Republic (1st century BC).

Gnaeus Pompeius was the oldest son of Pompey the Great (Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus) by his third wife, Mucia Tertia. Both he and his younger brother Sextus Pompeius grew up in the shadow of their father, one of Rome's best generals and an originally non-conservative politician who drifted to the more traditional faction when Julius Caesar became a threat. When Caesar crossed the Rubicon in 49 BC, thus starting a civil war, Gnaeus followed his father in their escape to the East, as did most of the conservative senators. Pompey's army lost the Battle of Pharsalus in 48 BC, and Pompey himself had to run for his life, only to be murdered in Egypt on September 29 of the same year.

After the murder, Gnaeus and his brother Sextus joined the resistance against Caesar in the Africa Province. Together with Metellus Scipio, Cato the Younger and other senators, they prepared to oppose Caesar and his army to the end. Caesar defeated Metellus Scipio and Cato, who subsequently committed suicide, at the Battle of Thapsus in 46 BC. Gnaeus escaped once again, this time to the Balearic Islands, where he joined Sextus. Together with Titus Labienus, former general in Caesar's army, the Pompey brothers crossed over to the Hispania (the Iberian Peninsula, comprising modern Spain and Portugal), where they raised yet another army.

Caesar soon followed and, on March 17, 45 BC, the armies met in the battle of Munda. Both armies were large and led by able generals. The battle was closely fought, but eventually a cavalry charge by Caesar turned events to his side. In the battle and the panicked escape that followed, Titus Labienus and an estimated 30,000 men of the Pompeian side died. Gnaeus and Sextus managed to escape once again. However, this time, supporters were difficult to find because it was by now clear Caesar had won the civil war. Within a few weeks, Gnaeus Pompeius was caught and executed for treason. Sextus Pompeius was able to keep one step ahead of his enemies, and survived his older brother for a number of years. He married a woman called Claudia Pulchra, who survived him and they had no children.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]