== Notes for [[Item:Q105816|Q105816]] ==

'''4th Shia Ithna'shari Imaam/ 3rd Shia Ismai'li Imaam'''
* Date of Ascension:
* Period of Imamate:
* Wilaadat (Birth): 15th Jamaadil Awwal 38 AH (20th October 658 AD)
* Wafaat (Death): 18th Muharram 94 AH (27th October 712 AD)

In historical sources, the number of Imam al-Sajjad's (a) children have been counted as fifteen, eleven of whom were boys and four of whom were girls.[14] According to al-Shaykh al-Mufid, the names of his wives and children were:

1 - Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a) whose mother was Umm 'Abd Allah (Imam al-Hasan's (a) daughter). 2 - 'Abd Allah 3 - Al-Hasan 4 - Al-Husayn al-Akbar: The mother of 'Abd Allah, al-Hasan and al-Husayn Akbar was a maid. 5 - Zayd 6 - 'Umar: The mother of Zayd and 'Umar was a maid. 7 - Al-Husayn al-Asghar 8 - 'Abd al-Rahman 9 - Sulayman: The mother of 'Umar, al-Husayn al-Asghar and Sulayman was a maid. 10 - 'Ali: who was Imam al-Sajjad's (a) smallest child. 11 - Khadija: whose mother was also the mother of 'Ali. 12 - Al-Muhammad al-Asghar: whose mother was a maid. 13 - Fatima 14 - 'Illiyya 15 - Umm Kulthum: The mother of Fatima, 'Illiyya and Umm Kulthum was a maid.[15] https://en.wikishia.net/view/Imam_Ali_b._al-Husayn_al-Sajjad_(a)#Wives_and_Children

Source 1: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ali_ibn_Husayn

Source 2: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zayn_al-Abidin

Source 3: http://gift2shias.com/2010/05/03/children-of-aimma-by-tripolysunni/

Source 4: http://www.ghadeer.org/english/shia/shia/4thimam.html

Source 5: http://www.al-islam.org/story-of-the-holy-kaaba-and-its-people-shabbar/fourth-imam-ali-ibn-al-husayn-zainul-abedeen

====Bismillah Hir Rahman Nir Raheem

=Allahumma Salle 'ala Syedina Muhammadin wa 'ala Aalihi Syedina Muhammadin Wa Barik Wa Sallim=

His Birth and blessings

The 4th Imam after Imam Hussain(a.s.) was his son Imam Ali Zain-al-Abideen(a.s.). His mother was Bibi Shahar Bano who was a princess from Persia, the daughter of the Kind Yazd Gard II. She was brought as a prisoner of war during the caliphate period of mam Ali(a.s.) during 31 A.H. and Imam Ali(a.s.) got her freed and married her to Imam Hussain(a.s.). Imam Zain-al-Abideen was born from this wedlock. She, however, died within 10 days of the birth of Imam Sajjad(a.s.).

His title Zain-al-Abideen was granted to him by the Holy Prophet(pbuh&hf) himself who mentioned that on the day of judgement a call for Zain-al-Abideen will be made and my son Ali bin al-Hussain(a.s.) will responde to the call saying "Labbaik". His other Title, Syed-us-Sajideen, was given because of his devotion to prayers. He would pray for long durations specially during the nights and would pray a lot of prayers of gratitude - Namaz-e-Shukrana.

Imam Sajjad(a.s.) spent the first 2 years of his life under the care of his grandfater Imam Ali(a.s.) and after his death in 50 A.H., he was brought up under the care of the 2nd Imam Hasan(a.s.). Imam Sajjad(a.s.) was married to the Bibi Fatima(a.s.) - daughter of Imam Hasan(a.s.). Imam Hasan(a.s.) was martyred in 50 A.H. and the Imamate of Imam Hussain(a.s.) started which terminated on 10th Moharram 61 A.H. from where the Imamate of Imam Sajjad(a.s.) began.

Period of Imamate and events of Karbala

Imam Sajjad(a.s.) was about 22 or 23 years old when the sad event of Karbala occured. Since Allah(swt) mentions in his holy Book that this world cannot survive for a moment if there is no Masoom "Imam" present at all times, Allah(swt) arranged it such that Imam Sajjad(a.s.) became severly ill during that battle and could not participate as a warrior. He asked the permission to fight in the battle but Imam Hussain(a.s.) told him that he had been assigned a different type of "Jihad" that was to start after the martyrdom of Imam Hussain(a.s.) - namely leading the women and children of the household of Prophet Mohammad(pbuh&hf) into the bazars and courts of Kufa and Damascus. Imam Sajjad(a.s.) was made a prisoner of war together with the whole family of the Prophet Mohammad(pbuh&hf). It was at this time that he was given the responsibility of Imamate and his was one of the most difficult times when any Imam was given this responsibility. Truly speaking, for him, it would have been very easy to die on the battle field as a martyr than to be taken as prisoner of war and see all the insult and humiliations thrown on him and on the womenfolk of the house of the Prophet. However, he did what Allah wished him to do

After the martyrdom of Imam Hussain(a.s.), the survival of Islam depended on Imam Zainul Abideen(a.s.), and that also at a tender age of 22. He had a very hard job of letting the world know the mission of Imam Hussain(a.s.) and exposing the evil intentions of Yazid and the Bani Umayyah. He had to keep the message of Islam alive and save it from being confused by the evil Bani Umayyah.

The army of Yazid treated him very badly by putting him in heavy chains. As a prisoner of war, he was made to travel on the open back of a camel in burning sunshine from Kerbala to Kufa and then from Kufa to Shaam (Damascus) - a distance of about 750 kilometres. Sometimes, he would be made to walk on the burning sands of the desert. This was not all. Women and children of the family of the Prophet Muhammad(pbuh&hf), too, were hand-cuffed and treated like they were slaves. The daughters of Imam Ali(a.s.) and Bibi Fatima(s.a.) were treated worse than criminals, their Hijabs were taken away from them. A caller accompanied them introducing them to the passersbys as "Those who had disobeyed the Muslim ruler, Yazid". They were then presented as prisoners, first to Ibn-e-Ziyad in Kufa and then to Yazid in Damascus.

In the courts of Ibn-e-Ziyad and Yazid, Imam Sajjad(a.s.) gave lion-hearted lectures and presented the true Islam to the listeners and introduced himself and his accompanying members as the descendents of the Prophet Mohammad(pbuh&hf) and the leaders appointed by Allah(swt). His lectures had such an impact on the listeners that despite several attempts to kill him inside the court of both Yazid and Ibn-e-Ziyad could not materialize. Bibi Zainab(s.a.) and other women of the household of Prophet Mohammad(pbuh&hf) became the frontline protectors and were backed by the people in the court of Yazid who had still left some shame in them.

To quote one incidence, Yazid asked one of his employed preachersto go on the 'Mimber' (pulpit) of the Mosque and abused Imam Ali(a.s.) and his family. When the preacher finished his lecture, Imam Sajjad(a.s.) turned to him and said, "Be ashamed of yourself, you evil speaker. With your words you have displeased Allah so as to please people". Then the Imam(a.s.) asked Yazid to let him talk to the people. Yazid refused to do so. The people of Syria, however, forced Yazid to allow the Imam to go on the Mimber.

Once on the Mimber, Imam Zain al-Abideen(a.s.) first praised Allah(swt) and His Messenger(pbuh&hf). After that the Imam gave along and very powerful speech letting the Syrians know the great position of Imam Husain(a.s.) to Allah(swt), and how evil Yazid and his family were. Part of the speech is summarised below:

"O listeners Allah has given us (Ahle Bart) six things which no one else has. He has given us special Wisdom, Patience, Dignity, Power of speech, Courage and Respect. He gave us special benefit of belonging to the family of his Prophet. To us belong Hamza and Jafar. To us belong Asadullah (The lion of Allah, Imam Ali(a.s.)). To us belong the leader of the youths of paradise (Imam Hassan(a.s.) and Imam Hussain(a.s.)).

"Those who know me, know me. Those who do not, then know that I am the son of Mecca and Mina. I am the son of Zamzam and Safa. I am the son of he who gave Zakat to the poor. I am the son of the best of those who have ever put on Ihram and performed ceremonies of Hajj. I am the son of he who was taken on the night journey from house of Allah to the Mosque of Aqsa and then to Miraj. I am the son of he who was taken around by Gibrael to the Lote-tree of the boundary (Sidratul Muntaha).

"I am the son of Muhammad Mustafa(pbuh&hf). I am the son of Ali Al-Murtaza(a.s.) who fought the polytheists in the battle till they submitted to Islam and fought in the presence of the Prophet until his sword was broken and to whom Zulfikar was given. I am the son of he who had the honour to migrate twice in Islam. I am the son of Fatima the best women of the world...".

The effect of the speech was so powerful that everybody in the Mosque began to weep and to blame Yazid. Yazid was afraid that if the Imam continued his speech, there would be a revolution and revolt. At the same time Yazid could not stop the Imam and get him down from the Mimber. He therefore ordered a "Muazzin" to give Azan, knowing that this would automatically cut the Imam's speech. But he underestimated the Imam's bravery and intelligence. The Imam stopped his speech but did not get down from the Mimber. When the Muazzin said " Allahu Akber" the Imam testified Allah's greatness. When the Muazzin said, "Ash hadu anna Muhammaddan Rasulullah", the Imam stopped the Muazzin from going any further. He then turned to Yezid and asked him. "Tell me o Yazid, was Muhammad(pbuh&hf) your grandfather or mine? If you say he was your grandfather it will be an open lie and if you say he was my grandfather then why have you killed his son and imprisoned his family? Why have you killed my father and brought his women and children to this city as prisoners?"

Yazid had no reply to give.

The effect of this was to turn Syrians against Yazid. Everyone of them now found out about Yazid's crimes that he had committed against the Prophet (pbuh&hf) and his family. They began to blame him and ask for the release of Imam Zain al-Abidin(a.s.) and the womenfolk of the house of the Prophet. Yazid was now afraid that if he did not act fast his rulership would be lost. He therefore freed Imam Zain al-Abidin(a.s.) and let. him return to Medina with full honour and respect.

His Life in Madina

Yazid had to free the Imam(a.s.) out of fear of his own rulership, therefore, Imam(a.s.) was still not completely safe from his evil designs even upon reaching back to Madina. Once in Madina, Imam(a.s.) gathered the people and told them the horrifying stories of Karbala and informed them that his father Imam Hussain(a.s.) and his companions were martyred and his family members were made prisoners and were taken from one city to another and branded as traitors.

Imam Sajjad(a.s.) started regular mourning session right from the day he arrived in Madina and apprised the people of the hard times that the family of the Prophet(pbuh&hf) had to to through. Day in and day out, people used to go to Imam(a.s.) and present condolence and hear the events of Karbala. Once a visitor named Noman came to Imam(a.s.) and asked him which was the most difficult time he had to face and the Imam(a.s.) cried for a long time and three times said "AS-SHAAM AS-SHAAM AS-SHAAM". Another visitor asked him as to how long would he continue mourning and crying and he replied that Prophet Ayub(a.s.) had 12 sons and only one of them got lost and he know that he was still alive but he continued crying until his eyes became white and his back got bent - I had seen 17 members of my family being slaughtered around me like sheep and you ask me as to how long I would continue mourning.

Another task that Imam Sajjad(a.s.) did after coming back from Syria was that he started praying and saying supplications with full devotion. His devotion was so strong and felt by his companions and visitors that they started collection his supplications which still exist by the name of SAHIFA-E-KAMILA. It is also know as SAHIFA-E-SAJJADIA. It consists of 54 Duas, 14 additional duas and 15 Munajaat. In addition to the SAHIFA there are several other supplications of the Imam(a.s.) which appear under different cover names.

His martyrdom

Imam(a.s.) kept his life very personal and preferred to stay in a town close to Madina from where he would preach the true religion of Allah(swt) quietly and with character. His character and preaching inspired a large number of people specially in the vicinity of Madina and Makkah. Slowly the tyrrant rulers of his time began to realize the dangers that they faced from the Imam(a.s.)'s preaching and character. His period of Imamte was full of tyrant rulers such as Yazid untill 64 A.H., Moawiya bin Yazid and Marwan bin-al-Hakam until 65 A.H, then from 68 A.H. until 86 A.H. was the rulership of Abdul Malik bin Marwan and finally from 86 A.H. until 96 A.H. was the period of Walid bin Abdul Malik. Amid this growing threat, Walid decided to poison and kill the Imam and finally he succeeded in his ulterior motives and Imam Sajjad(a.s.) was poisoned by the governor of Madina and martyred on 25th Moharram 95 A.H. (713 A.D.)

ZIARAAT

Permission for entering Jannat-ul-Baqi
Ziarat of Aimmah (as) in Baqi Salwat on Imam Sajjad (as)

BOOKS

Sahifa Sajjadia - Duas from Imam Sajjad (as)

English The Life of Imam Zaynul 'Abidin Al Sahifa Al Sajjadiyya (PDF)

Urdu Sawaneh Imam Sajjad

Articles Karbala and the Imamat of the Fourth Imam The Virtues of Imam Zayn al-Abidin (A.S.) The Sermon of Imam Sajjad (A.S.) in Kufa Maxims of Imam Zainul Abedin(A.S.) Hadrat Shahrbano: The Reverend Mother of Imam Zayn al-Abidin(A.S.) Sciences Disseminated by Imam Zayn al-Abidin(A.S.) Students and Companions of Imam Zayn al-Abidin(A.S.)

'''4th Imam from the silsila-e-Imamaat|The Remained Son| Imam Sajjad ( Ali ibn Husayn entitled Zayn al-abidin and Sajjad ) was the son of the third Imam , and his wife , the queen among women , the daughter of Yazdigird the king of Iran . He was the only son of Imam Husayn to survive, for his other three brothers Ali Akbar , aged twenty-five , five year old Ja'far and Ali Asghar ( or Abdullah ) who was a suckling baby , were martyred during the event of Karbala . The Imam had also accompanied his father on the journey that terminated fatally in Karbala, but because of severe illness and the inability to carry arms or participate in fighting he was prevented from taking part in the holy war and being martyred . So he was sent with the womenfolk to Damascus . After spending a period in imprisonment he was sent with honor to Medina because Yazid wanted to conciliate public opinion . But for a second time , by the order of the Umayyad caliph , Abd al-Malik , he was chained and sent from Medina to Damascus and then again returned to Medina'''
--------------------
* Wilaadat (Birth): 11th Shaabaan 42 AH (1st December 662 AD)
* Wafaat (Death): 10th Muharram 61 AH (12th October 680 AD)

Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ali_al-Akbar_ibn_Husayn
--------------------
'''3rd Fatimid Imaam'''

* ''Imaamate Period/ Reign: 34 years; 61-95 AH (680-714 AD)''
* Wilaadat (Birth):
* Wafaat (Death): 95 AH (714 AD)
--------------------
http://en.rodovid.org/wk/Person:70251

38eme generation directe jusqu'a [ Mirza Abolhassan Abol Kheir Mir Mohr Dar de Shah Safi (*)]

5 generations a partir de Soltan Seid Ahmed dont la tombe est a Ghom. https://www.geni.com/people/623-Soltan-Seid-Ahmad-Hezaveh-Premier-Seid-Djalil-ol-Ghadir-fils-de-Abu-Jafar/6000000037447709704

Ali ibn Husayn علي بن حسين (Arabic) 4th Imam of Twelver and 3rd Imam of Ismaili Shia

Emam Sejed Emam Zein ol Abedini ol Yaleslam امام سجاد امام زين العابدين عليهالسلام, L'Emam Sejjed est le petit fils de Ali, le compagnon constant du prophete Mohammad et de Fatimah, la fille du prophete Mohamad.

Caliph Ali ibn Abi Talib - علي بن أبي طالب Muhammad

Ali

Fatimah

Hasan

Husayn '''al-Sajjad'''

The author of the prayers in Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiyya,[34] ("The Scripture of Al-Sajjad", "The Psalm of the Household of the Prophet"

"al-Sjjad" est le plus jeune fils de Hossein Ben Ali - né en l'an 38 après l'Egire à Médine, en Arabie Saoudite (egalement connu sous les noms متفاوت غزاله، سُلافه، سَلامَه، شاهزَنان، شاهبانویه. Hossein Ben Ali Ben Abitaleb titre Sejed Zein Ol Abedin), petit-fils du prophète Muhammad, fils d'Ali et de Fâtima et le troisième des douze Imams du chiisme duodécimain, à la mort de son aîné Hasan en 670. [Hossein Ben Ali est aussi connu sous le nom de Abû `Abd Allah al-Husayn ben `Alî Sayyd ach-Chuhâdâ'1 ou Husayn, Hussein surnommé Sayyd ach-Chuhâdâ2 (né le 8 janvier 626 - mort le 10 octobre 680 lors de la bataille de Kerbala) [http://bit.ly/1LvsZD9] D’après les chroniqueurs de l’histoire l'Emam Sejjed est prince Sassanide, sa mère est la fille de Yazsdeguerd III, le dernier roi Sassanide [http://bit.ly/1LvsZD9]

[Thus, from Imam Zayn al-ʿĀbedin onwards, the Shiʿite Imams will be the bearers of a two-fold light: that of walāya from ʿAli and Fāṭema (thus of Moḥammad) and the glorious light from the ancient kings of Persia, as transmitted by Šahrbānu.]

http://bit.ly/1HtzSqf

Epoux de Fatemeh, la fille de Hassan Ben Ali – le second Imam

Ali ibn Husayn (Arabic: علي بن الحسين‎) known as Zayn al-Abidin (the adornment of the worshippers) and Imam al-Sajjad (The Prostrating Imam), was the fourth Shia imam, after his father Husayn, his uncle Hasan, and his grandfather Ali—Muḥammad’s son-in-law. Ali ibn Husayn survived the Battle of Karbala and was taken, along with enslaved women, to the caliph in Damascus. Eventually, he was allowed to return to Medina, where he led a secluded life with a few intimate companions. Imam Sajjad's life and statements were entirely devoted to asceticism and religious teachings, mostly in the form of invocations and supplications. His famous supplications are known as Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiyya.

Author of prayers in Sahifa al-Sajjadiyya, which is known as "The Psalm of the Household of the Prophet."[22]

Recit de la bataille de Kerbala Récit de la bataille[modifier | modifier le code] Le premier tué fut Qâsim âgé de dix ans fils de Hasan. Il fut coupé en deux d'un coup de sabre. Le cheval de Husayn tomba touché par une flèche. Husayn s'assit par terre mais les soldats ennemis n'osèrent pas le tuer, ne voulant pas être responsable de la mort du petit-fils du Prophète. Abdallah, un des fils de Husayn âgé d'un an, pleurait. Husayn le prit dans ses bras, mais une flèche atteignit l'enfant à l'oreille et celui-ci fut tué sur le coup. Affaibli par la soif, Husayn voulut boire dans l'Euphrate, une flèche l'atteignit à la bouche. Sept ou huit hommes se jetèrent sur lui. L'un d'entre eux le transperça de sa lance dans le dos. Un autre le décapita lorsqu'il fut à terre. D'autres lui enlevèrent ses vêtements et ses armes. On pilla la tente d'Husayn, on déchira les vêtements des femmes, mais on fit grâce à `Alî Zayn al-Abidin le fils de Husayn qui était resté dans la tente parce qu'il était malade.

http://www.al-islam.org/story-of-the-holy-kaaba-and-its-people-shabbar/fourth-imam-ali-ibn-al-husayn-zainul-abedeen

http://bit.ly/1WHFL4M http://www.iranicaonline.org/articles/hosayn-b-ali-ii

List of Ismaili Emams:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Ismaili_imams#Nizari

Sayyid (also spelled "Seyd", "Syed", "Sayed", "Sayyed", "Saiyid", "Seyed", "Said" and "Seyyed") (pronounced [səj.jɪd], Arabic: سيد‎; meaning Mister) (plural Sadah Arabic: سادة‎, Sāda(h)) is an honorific title denoting males accepted as descendants of the Islamic Prophet Muhammad through his grandsons, Hasan ibn Ali and Husayn ibn Ali, sons of Muhammad's daughter Fatimah and his son-in-law Ali (Ali ibn Abi Talib).[1] Conventionally, descent is patrilineal.

The Sayyid whose ancestry is Husayn ibn Ali were called Husayni in Persian and Husayni in Urdu. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sayyid]

L'Emam Sejjed est le fils de Hossein Ben Ali Ben Abitaleb titre Sejed Zein Ol Abedin,متفاوت غزاله، سُلافه، سَلامَه، شاهزَنان، شاهبانویه، né en l'an 38 après l'égir à Médine. Il est le 3eme Imam du chiisme duodecimain [http://bit.ly/1LvsZD9] D’après les chroniqueurs de l’histoire l'Emam Sejjed est prince Sassanide, sa mère est la fille de Yazsdeguerd III, le dernier roi Sassanide [http://bit.ly/1LvsZD9]

https://fa.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D8%B3%D8%AC%D8%A7%D8%AF#.D9.81.D8.B1.D8.B2.D9.86.D8.AF.D8.A7.D9.86

L’ Emam Sejed (Abou Mohamad Ali Ben Hossein -Ol Abedini Eslami ) est le quatrième des 12 Imams du chiisme duodecimain. Son titre par lequel il est connu est « Sejjed" et "Seid ol Abedin ».

L’Emam Sejjed était de ceux qui accompagnèrent Hossein, le fils du prophete Mohammad, lors de son massacre à Kerbala (10 octobre 680) .

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Le père et les ancêtres de Mirza Mohamad Hossein Vafa Farahani ont tous été chargés du sceau du Sejjed. jusqu'au regne du dernier Shah Safavi, Soltan Hossain. در زمان حکومت شاه عباس اول عده‌ای از سادات تفرش به دربار صفوی راه یافتند. این شاخه از سادات که به سبب در دست داشتن مهر حضرت سجاد معروف به میر مُهردار بودند، تا اواخر دورهٔ صفوی و تا زمان شاه سلطان حسین منصب مُهرداری شاهان صفوی را حفظ کردند.

http://bit.ly/1jvVUxT http://www.beytoote.com/religious/bozorgan-din/biography1-sajjad.html http://bit.ly/1jvVUxT

Avant l'invasion arabe, Aragh etait le siege des Zoroastriens, en Iran. Elle devient "Tafresh" après l'invasion arabe.

--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ali_ibn_Husayn

autre profil similaire sur geni https://www.geni.com/people/Imam-Ali-as-Sajjad/6000000078420274840?through=6000000084219625162
--------------------
Imam Ali bin Hussain was named after his paternal grandfather. His wife, Fatima, was the daughter of Imam Hasan. Imam Hasan was Ali's paternal uncle.

----

In Herman Tree: Zenal Abidin
5. ALI.ZAINALABIDIN-4.
was born in 656 in 36h, died in 713 in 93h, Madinah, Saudi Arabia, at age 57, and was buried in Baqyi, Madinah.
Reference Link: http://freepages.family.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~naqobatulasyrof/main/des/d4.htm
Reference Link: http://familytreemaker.genealogy.com/users/a/s/y/Naqobatul-Asyrof-Jakarta/WEBSITE-0001/UHP-0022.html

-- MERGED NOTE ------------

Wikidata: https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q314978 | Geni: https://www.geni.com/people/5102404071680114676

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:5102404071680114676

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]