== Notes for [[Item:Q135796|Q135796]] ==

* [http://mechon-mamre.org/p/pt/pt25a03.htm#19 1 Chronicles 3:19-20.]


* Wikipedia: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zerubbabel Zerubbabel] & [https://he.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D7%96%D7%A8%D7%95%D7%91%D7%91%D7%9C_%D7%91%D7%9F_%D7%A9%D7%90%D7%9C%D7%AA%D7%99%D7%90%D7%9C זרובבל בן שאלתיאל.]

* Jewish Encyclopedia (1906): [https://www.jewishencyclopedia.com/articles/15251-zerubbabel Zerubbabel.]

This is Zerubbabel, Governor of Judah. Do not confuse him with the https://www.geni.com/people/Zerubbabel-ancestor-of-Jesus/6000000008640591110 who was named in the ''Gospel of Luke''.

20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)~

Luke 3:23–38 lists the genealogy of Jesus, and has Zerubbabel as the 20th generation ancestor of Jesus. That source has a VERY different lineage for the ancestry of Zerubbabel, as the descendant of Nathan, son of King David. Traditionally these are the same person, BUT there is NO way to reconcile the two very different genealogies. As such we preferred having BOTH versions represented in the tree. As noted the "other" Zerubbabel is here ( https://www.geni.com/people/Zerubbabel-ancestor-of-Jesus/6000000008640591110 ). Luke's version, through Nathan, son of King David, would make Jesus completely irrelevant to Throne of King David. In this version, on the other hand, as the great-grandson of Jehoiachin, next-to-last King of Judah, Zerubbabel has a direct and immediate claim to this throne. So this version makes a lot more historical sense. As such, the rest of Luke's lineage to Jesus, is continued HERE, through Zerubbabel's son, Rhesa.

20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)~

Ibn Ezra (Shemot 2:10, Haggai 1:1) says that Zerubavel was the son of Pediyah, based on a verse in Divrei haYamim. Zerubavel is generally identified as a son of Shealtiel, because Shealtiel was Pediyah's brother, and Shealtiel raised Zerubavel. Biologically, Zerubavel is the son of Pediyah, Pediyah turn the child to Sheltiel to be raised as an heir to a sterile father.

The position of ibn Ezra is strengthened by the text "Yashir Moshe"; the Dayan of Aleppo Family Tree which provides the same explanation as presented by ibn Ezra.

Further, Rabbi David Kimhi (the Radak) (Melachim II 8:26, Yechezkel 21:32) says that this was the family line: Yechanyah-Shelatiel-Pediyah-Zerubavel. Shealtiel may have been listed as the father because he was more well-known and respected than Pediyah.

Ibn Ezra (Chaggai 2:22, Daniel 6:29, Ezra 1:8) also mentions that Zerubavel was also known as Sheshbatzar. He takes "Sheshbatzar" to be a Babylonian variant to "Zerubavel."

Avot deRabbi Nathan says Zerubavel was born circumcised. This seems to be learned from Gd's reference to Zerubavel as "Avdi," "my slave," in Chaggai 2:23.

Also mentioned in Abarbanel family scroll as son of Pedaya – undated handwritten manuscript from the collection of the late Rabbi Shmuel Gorr, held by Chaim Freedman. Reference was made to “Elef Margaliot” 1993, Meir Wunder.

20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)20:29, 13 August 2025 (UTC)~~

Ezra 3:2

Zorobabel was the 23rd generation in male line descent from King David (No. 1). He was the accepted heir. The details of his ancestry and the solution of the two fathers listed for him being Shealtiel and Pediah (1Chron. 3:19) are explained under the Levirate laws and the explanation is in the paper The Genealogy of the Messiah (No. 119).

Zorobabel was the royal Jewish heir and 3rd Exilarch at Babylon ca 545 BCE. He was 8th Governor of Judea ca 537-536 BCE. He was Prince of Judah ca. 515 BCE and was recalled and imprisoned 513 BCE and executed 510 BCE.

He married three wives. The first wife was Amytis a Babylonian Princess, who was called a foreign wife. She bore him Shazrezzar, which is a Babylonian name. He was the ancestor of a major Davidic line.

Zorobabel’s second wife was Rhodah who was a Persian princess who later remarried a Persian prince and was also called a foreign wife. She bore him Reza (a Persian Name). He was allegedly the half brother through his mother of Darius, king of Persia. It is this line that is referred to in the ancestry of Mariam if we accept that the line of Zorobabel was in fact through Nathan and the adopted son of Jeconiah, namely Shealtiel who was the actual son of Neri(ah). The Crown Princess Tamar was the means of the change in lineage. This is another incident of a Princess Tamar being used to transfer the kingship. We will examine this further below.

Thirdly, Zorobabel married Esthra, who was a Jewish princess and from whom the line of the current royal family is descended.

The prophecy concerning the throne and the place of Zorobabel in the process is seen to be part of the process of the birthright promises of the last days.

Remember that the father of Zorobabel was Shealtiel/Pediah and the father of Shealtiel was not actually Jeconiah. He was the adopted son of Jeconiah and was his acknowledged heir (Mat. 1:12). He was the son of the wife of King Jehoiakin or Jeconiah by a former husband of Princess Tamar, namely Prince Neri(ah). See also Luke 3:27. Now this fact gives another rise to the issue of from whom the lineage of Zorobabel was actually descended.

--------------------

Zerubbabel (Hebrew: זְרֻבָּבֶל‎, Zərubbāvel; Greek: ζοροβαβελ, Zŏrobabel) was a governor of Judah (Haggai 1:1) and the great-grandson of Jehoiachin, next-to-last King of Judah. Led the first band of Jews, numbering 42,360, who returned from the Babylonian Captivity in the first year of Cyrus, King of Persia. He also laid the foundation of the Second Temple in Jerusalem the next year. The Seder Olam Zutta lists him as the Exilarch in Babylon to succeed Shealtiel. The texts are conflicting as to whether Zerubbabel was the son of Shealtiel or his nephew. His son Meshullam succeeded him as Exilarch, and was followed by another son Hananiah. Muslim historian Ya'qubi attributed the recovery of the Torah and the Books of the Prophets to him instead of Ezra.


Zerubbabel
Meaning: the seed of Babylon

the son of Salathiel or Shealtiel (Hag. 1:1; Zorobabel, Matt. 1:12);called also the son of Pedaiah (1 Chr. 3:17-19), i.e., according to afrequent usage of the word "son;" the grandson or the nephew of Salathiel

He is also known by the Persian name of Sheshbazzar (Ezra 1:8, 11). Inthe first year of Cyrus, king of Persia, he led the first band of Jews,numbering 42,360 (Ezra 2:64), exclusive of a large number of servants,who returned from captivity at the close of the seventy years. In thesecond year after the Return, he erected an altar and laid the foundationof the temple on the ruins of that which had been destroyed byNebuchadnezzar (3:8-13; ch. 4-6). All through the work he occupied aprominent place, inasmuch as he was a descendant of the royal line ofDavid


More on who was Zerubbabel's father?

His father was Shealtiel.
Ezra.3:2, Neh.12:1
"And Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel."

His father was Pedaiah.
1 Chr.3:19
"And the sons of Pedaiah were, Zerubbabel, and Shimei."

Mat 1:12, 13

Luke 3:27

1 Chr 3:19; Ezr 2:2; 3:2, 8; 4:2; 5:2; Neh 7:7; 12:47; Haggai 1:1, 12, 14

or bible dictionary Sheshbazzar RIN 7569

Same person as RIN 6007 shown with different parent. (See children of Assir, Pedaiah's brother.)

Footnotes for 1 Chr 3:19 list Zerubbaabel as son of Shealtiel Ezr 3:2; 5:2; Hag 1:1; Matt 1:12

Zerubbabel
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Zerubbabel ("Seed of Babylon", an Assyrian-Babylonian name), was the grandson of Jehoiachin, the second to last King of Judah. Zerubbabel led the first band of Jews, numbering 42,360, who returned from the Babylonian Captivity in the first year of Cyrus, King of Persia (Ezra). Zerubbabel was also noted for laying the foundation of the Second Temple in Jerusalem the next year. He disappears from history shortly thereafter.

Whether the identity of Zerubbabel with Sheshbazzar, "the prince of Judah" and leader of the first great band of exiles returning to Jerusalem is correct is discussed in the Jewish Encyclopedia.

Zerubbabel is also mentioned in the Books of Haggai (1:10) and 1 Chronicles (3.17-19, where he is said to be the son of Pedaiah—a scribal error, according to the compilers of the Jewish Encyclopedia 1908). He achieved legendary status in Post-Exilic times, mentioned in Ecclesiasticus of Sirach (xlix. 11) among the famous men of Israel. In the New Testament, Zerubbabel is mentioned in the Gospel of Matthew's version of the Genealogy of Jesus, as "Zorobabel"); he is alternately said to be the son of Shealtiel (or Salathiel, according to Matthew).
[edit]

External links

* Easton's Bible Dictionary: Zerubbabel
* Jewish Encyclopedia: Zerubbabel
* Loeb Family Tree: Zerubbabel



Preceded by:
Shealtiel Matthew's Ancestry of Jesus - 9th Great Grandfather of Jesus Succeeded by:
Abiud
Preceded by:
Shealtiel Luke's Ancestry of Jesus - 18th Great Grandfather of Jesus Succeeded by:
Rhesa

Governor of Judah in "second year of Darius the king"0520 B.C, under whom the rebuilding of the Jewish Temple at Jerusalem took place

·son of Shealtiel

·of Davidic origin, and rekindled Jewish messianic hopes

·thought to have originally been a Babylonian Jew who returned to Jerusalem at the head of a band of Jewish exiles and became governor of Judaea under the Persians

0538 B.C. ·He was a Jewish Tribal leader who returned to Judah after Cyrus, King of Persia, captured Babylon. Ezra 2:1 "Now these are the children of the province that went up out of the captivity, of those which had been carried away, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away unto Babylon, and came again unto Jerusalem and Judah, every one unto his city;" 2:2 "Which came with Zerubbabel: Jeshua, Nehemiah, Seraiah, Reelaiah, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mizpar, Bigvai, Rehum, Baanah."

0520 B.C. ·governor of Judaea charged with the rebuilding of the Temple in Jerusalem -

·the father of Meshullam, and Hananiah, and Shelomith their sister; and Hashubah, and Ohel, and Berechiah, and Hasadiah, Jushabhesed

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]