== Notes for [[Item:Q105603|Q105603]] ==

Muhammad was the founder of the religion of Islam and is regarded by Muslims as a messenger and prophet of God, '''the final law-bearer in a series of Islamic prophets''' as taught by the Qur'an (33:40–40).

Muslims thus consider him the restorer of an uncorrupted original monotheistic faith preached before him by Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus and other prophets.

He was also active as a '''diplomat, merchant, philosopher, orator, legislator, reformer, military general''', and, according to Muslim belief, an '''agent of divine action.'''

Born in 570 in the Arabian city of Mecca, he was ''orphaned'' at an early age and brought up under the care of his uncle Abu Talib. He later worked mostly as a merchant, as well as a shepherd, and was first married by age 25. Discontented with life in Mecca, he retreated to a cave in the surrounding mountains for meditation and reflection.

According to Islamic beliefs it was here, at age 40, in the month of Ramadan, where he received his first revelation from God. Three years after this event Muhammad started preaching these revelations publicly, proclaiming that "God is One", that complete "surrender" to Him (lit. islām) is the only way of life (dīn) acceptable to God, and that he himself was a prophet and messenger of God, in the same vein as other prophets before him.

Muhammad gained few followers early on, and was met with hostility from some Meccan tribes; he and his followers were treated harshly. To escape persecution, Muhammad sent some of his followers to Abyssinia before he and his remaining followers in Mecca eventually migrated to Medina (then known as Yathrib) in the year 622. This event, the Hijra, marks the beginning of the Islamic calendar. In Medina, Muhammad united the conflicting tribes, and after eight years of fighting with the Meccans, his followers — who by then had grown to 10,000 — conquered Mecca. In 632, a few months after returning to Medina from his Farewell pilgrimage, Muhammad fell ill and died. By the time of his death, most of the Arabian Peninsula had converted to Islam; and he had united the tribes of Arabia into a single Muslim religious polity.

The revelations (or Ayat, lit. "Signs") — which Muhammad reported receiving until his death — form the verses of the Qur'an, regarded by Muslims as the “Word of God” and around which the religion of Islam is based. Besides the Qur'an, Muhammad’s life (sira) and traditions (sunnah) are also upheld by Muslims. They discuss Muhammad and other prophets of Islam with reverence, adding the phrase "peace be upon him" whenever their names are mentioned.

In Michael H. Hart's 'The 100: A Ranking of the Most Influential Persons in History', Muhammad is described as the most influential person in history. Hart asserted that Muhammad was "supremely successful" in both the religious and secular realms.

--------------------

His our Prophet...All Muslim love him...Salawat to him

--------------------

Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet1

b. 9 May 570, d. 8 June 632

Father 'Abd Allâh ibn 'Abd al-Muttalib Banu Hâshim1,2 b. 545, d. before 9 May 570

Mother Aminah bint Wahab al-Qurayshi (as)1 b. circa 545, d. circa 576

Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet was related to Fâtimah al-Zahra bint Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh Banu Hâshim (as); the daughter of Muhammad and Khadijah (and possibly the only child together).3,4 Messenger of Allah. Seal of all Prophets. Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet was from the offspring of An-Nadr bin Kinana (Sahih Bukhari 4.698). He was a descendant of Mudar, of which Muhammad was informed by the angel Gabriel, and was not common knowledge.5 Also called Abu al-Qasim Muhammad.6 He was the father of al-Qassim ibn Muhammad Banu Hâshim; the son of Muhammad and Khadijah.7 Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet was the father of Ibraheem ibn Muhammad Banu Hâshim; the son of Muhammad by Maria, the Egyptian Coptic Christian.8,7 Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet was the father of Zainab bint Muhammad Banu Hâshim; the eldest daughter of Muhammad and Khadijah.4,9 Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet was the father of Umm Kalthum bint Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh Banu Hâshim; the daughter of Muhammad and Khadijah.4 Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet was the father of Ruqaiyah bint Muhammad Banu Hâshim; the daughter of Muhammad and Khadijah.4 Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet was the father of Ta'hir ibn Muhammad Banu Hâshim; the son of Muhammad and Khadijah.7 Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet was born on 9 May 570 at 17th Rabi' al-Awwal 54 B.H., Mecca, Saudi Arabia. He was born after his father's death.1,10,6 He was the son of 'Abd Allâh ibn 'Abd al-Muttalib Banu Hâshim and Aminah bint Wahab al-Qurayshi (as).1,2 Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet was born on 20 August 570.11 He was born at Friday, 17th Rabiul-Awwal, 52 B.H.. Muslims claimed that he was born on this date, but according to scholars, the date is uncertain.8 He was a witness where 'Abd al-Muttalib ibn Hâshim, Clan Chief took in his grandson, Muhammad, who later became the Prophet, on the death of Muhammad's mother in 576. Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet was taken into the home of Grandfather, 'Abd al-Muttalib, at age six when his mother died in 576.6 He witnessed the death of 'Abd al-Muttalib ibn Hâshim, Clan Chief in 578; He died at age 82. On his deathbed he appointed his son Abu Talib as the guardian of Muhammad.12 Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet was a witness where Âbu Tâlib ibn 'Abd al-Muttalib, Clan Chief made the guardian of his nephew, Muhammad, on the death of his father in 580. Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet was taken into the care of his uncle, Abu Talib, on the death of his grandfather, 'Abd al-Muttali, in 580. He was so described: a gentle, soft spoken, tall and handsome boy. An approximate outline may be traced of his appearance in the prime of manhood: Slightly above the middle size, his figure, though spare, was handsome and commanding, the chest broad and open, the bones and framework large, the joints well knit together. His neck was long and finely moulded. The head, unusually large, gave space for a broad and noble brow. The hair, thick, jet black, and slightly curling, fell down over his ears. The eye- brows were arched and joined. The countenance thin, but ruddy. His large eyes, intensely black and piercing, received additional lustre from their long dark eye-lashes. The nose was high and slightly aquiline, but fine, and at the end attenuated. The teeth were far apart. A long black bushy beard, reaching to the breast, added manliness and presence. His expression was pensive and contemplative. The face beamed with intelligence, though something of the sensuous also might be there discerned. The skin of his body was clear and soft; the only hair that met the eye was a fine thin line which ran down from the neck toward the navel. His broad back leaned slightly forward as he walked; and his step was hasty, yet sharp and decided, like that of one rapidly descending a declivity.13 He accompanied the trading caravans of his uncle and guardian, Abu Talib, across the deserts, giving him deep insight into nature and man between 585 and 595. He was a witness where Khadîjah bint Khuwaylid banu As'sad al-Qurayshiyya hired Muhammad as the manager for her rich merchantile caravans, and soon married him. Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet married Khadîjah bint Khuwaylid banu As'sad al-Qurayshiyya, daughter of Khuwaylid banu As'sad al-Qurayshi, in 595; His 1st. 4th cousins.14,2,6 Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet was a witness where Zaid ibn Muhammad carried away while young and sold into slavery, and as a slave was presented by Khadija to Muhammad after 595.15 Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet received the Divine Message, where the angel Gabriel appeared to a fearful Muhammad and informed him that he was God's chosen messenger, and became the Prophet of God in 610.16 He experienced his first vision of the angel, and is deeply disturbed, but reassured by his wife, whose Christian cousin, Waraqah, helped him to understand his experience in the Judeo-Christian Biblical tradition of prophets in 610.6 He was a witness where Clan Chief Abu Lahab ibn 'Abd al-Muttalib Banu Hâshim an enemy of the Prophet from the very beginning of his public mission after 610. Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet was a witness where Umm Jamil (?) an enemy of the Prophet from the very beginning of his public mission after 610. Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet began preaching publicly circa 613.6 A contract for the marriage of Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet and 'Â'isha umm Mu'minin bint Abu Bakr al-Makkiyya was signed in 620.17 Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet married Saudah bint Zam'ah (?), daughter of Zam'ah (?), in 621; His 2nd. Her 2nd (widow).6,18,19 Twelve men from Yathrib on a pilgrimage to the pagan Ka'bah shrine of Mecca (of the god Hubal and about 300 lesser idols) secretly professed allegiance to Muhammad's message of monotheism at Mecca, Arabia, in June 621.6 Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet commanded his followers in Mecca to emigrate to Yathrib, later called Medina (Medinat-en-nabi=City of the prophet) in April 622 at Mecca, Arabia.6 He fled from a planned assassination, by the Meccans, towards Medina (the Muslim era of Hijrah (Emigration) is named after this incident), southward to the cave of Thaur on 16 July 622 at 17th Rabi' al-Awwwal.6 Prophet of Islâm between 16 July 622 and 8 June 632.2 He arrived safely on 24 September 622 at Yathrib (now Medina), Arabia.6 He led three raids on trade caravans but all fail in 623.6 He married Ayishah as a political marriage to cement ties with 'A`ishah's father, Abu Bakr, who was one of Muhammad's most important supporters, but last endly, she remained his favourite in January 624.6 Followers of his, disguised as pilgrims during the annual period of sacred truce among all Arab tribes, attack an unarmed trade caravan from Yemen, at Nakhlah south of Mecca, killing one person and taking two for ransom, at Arabia in January 624.6 He married 'Â'isha umm Mu'minin bint Abu Bakr al-Makkiyya, daughter of 'Abû Bakr al-Siddiq, 1st Rightly Guided Caliph of Islam and Umm Ruman (?), in January 624; His 3rd.20,2,6,17,19 Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet regarded the Jewish tribes as at par with his own followers, but his experiences of their betrayals of the pacts they entered into with him for the joint defense of Medina (Yathrib) against his Meccan enemies, led him to expel them and execute all Jewish males in Medina; he also levied a special tax (jizyah) on the Jews of Khybar (creating a precedent that later led orthodox Islam to conclude must be paid by Christians and Jews to the Muslim state), and consequently also changed the prayer direction (qiblah) of his followers from Jerusalem to Mecca's Ka'bah, even though it was a shrine of tribal idols, and justified this by announcing that Abraham with Ishmael had built it as a shrine to God (Qur'an 2:125,127) circa February 624.6 He received a revelation justifying the crimes because of Mecca's banning of his access to the Ka'bah (Qur'an, 2:217) in January 624.6 He led a raiding party of about 315 men to attack a Meccan trade caravan which eluded him, but the leader of the Makhuzum clan of Mecca confronted him with a force of 800 near Badr; his troops triumph and in the aftermath many of his critics in Medina are assassinated and the Muslim movement grows on 15 March 624.6 He married Hafsa bint 'Umar ibn al-Khattab Bani Adiy, daughter of 'Umar ibn al-Khattab, 2nd Rightly Guided Caliph of Islam, after 15 March 624; His 4th. Her 2nd (widow).2,6,21,19 Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet married Hind umm Salamah bint Ummayyah after 15 March 624; His 5th.6 Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet married Zainab ummu al-Masakin bint Khuazimah, daughter of Khuazimah (?), circa 625 at 3 A.H; His 6th. Her 3rd (widow).6,22 Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet married Zainab bint Jahsh Banu Hâshim, daughter of Jahsh Banu Hâshim and Hind umm Salamah bint Ummayyah, in 625 at 4 A.H; His 8th. Her 2nd (allowed by al-Ahzab 33:37).6,23 Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet present when a Meccan force of 3000 attacked Medina at Uhud; and returned them to Mecca having killed as many Meccans as the Muslims had lost, on 23 March 625.6 He withstood a siege by a Meccan confederacy of 10,000 troops; his troops at Medina were well prepared and the siege failed in April 627 at Medina, Arabia.6 He attacked the Jewish clan of Qurayzah who surrendered, and had their men savagely executed and their women and children sold as slaves after April 627.6 He married Zaynab bint Jahsh, the former wife of his adopted son, and received a revelation to justify it (Qur'an 33:37)

after April 627.6 He had his forces attack and defeat the Banu Khuza'ah tribe, from whom he took the beautiful Juwayriya as a wife from the tribe instead of a ransom after April 627.6 He married Juwayriya bint al-Harith Banu Khuza'ah, daughter of al-Harith bin Abi Dirar Banu Khuza'ah, after April 627; His 7th.6,19 Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet married Mariah al-Qibtiyah circa 628; His 9th.6 Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet set out on pilgrimage to the Ka'bah at Mecca driving sacrificial animals ahead of him, but was dissappointed that only 1,600 of his men were willing to accompany him, and after long negotiations at al-Hudaybiyah, the Meccans and Muslims agreed to stop hostilities and that Muslims would be allowed to make the pilgrimage the following year in March 628.6 He married Ramlah umm Habibah bint Abu Sufyan (?), daughter of Abu Sufyan (?), after March 628; His 10th. Her 2nd (widow).6,24 Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet married Safiyah bat Huyay Banu Akhtab, daughter of Huyay Banu Akhtab, after March 628; His 11th. Her 2nd (widow).6 Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet conquered Mecca in 629 at Arabia.20 He entered Mecca by the Hudaybiyah agreements with unarmed followers as an act of worship in March 629 at Mecca, Arabia.6 He married Maimunah bint Al-Harith (?) in March 629 at Mecca, Arabia; His 11th. Her 2nd (widow).6,19 Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet repudiated the Hudaybiyah agreements after his allies were attacked by allies of Mecca circa November 629.6 He associated with Rayhanah the Jewess after November 629; Concubine. She a widow.6 Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet entered Mecca with 10,000 men in triumph, and killed 28 opponents, removed the statue of the god Hubal from the Ka'bah, destroyed all the tribal idols, and announced the Law of Islam in January 630 at Mecca, Arabia.6 He led a force of 30,000 men to the Syrian border in a month long campaign, concluded treaties of submission to Islam with various tribes (but Christian support for Byzantium provoked his hostility) after January 630.6 He performed the old pagan Arab rites of the 'hajj' pilgrimage to Mecca, giving them a new, monotheistic meaning in March 632 at Mecca, Arabia.6 He died on 8 June 632 at 28th Safar 11 A.H., Medina, Arabia, at age 62 years and 30 days. Said to have been poisoned by an old Jewish woman. He forbade, by revelation, Muslim's from marrying his widows. He was survived by nine wives. (Qur'an 33:53).1,2,25,26,27,28 Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh al-Mustafa (pbuh&hf), The Prophet was buried in his house adjoining the Great Mosque, Medina, Arabia.

Family 1

Child

Zaid ibn Muhammad b. c 58515

Family 2

Khadîjah bint Khuwaylid banu As'sad al-Qurayshiyya b. circa 555, d. between 619 and 620

Children

al-Qassim ibn Muhammad Banu Hâshim b. c 596, d. c 598

Zainab bint Muhammad Banu Hâshim+ b. c 597, d. 629

Ruqaiyah bint Muhammad Banu Hâshim+ b. c 598, d. 6232

Umm Kalthum bint Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh Banu Hâshim b. c 603, d. 630

Fâtimah al-Zahra bint Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allâh Banu Hâshim (as)+ b. c 605, d. c 63329,2

Ta'hir ibn Muhammad Banu Hâshim b. c 605, d. c 606

Family 3

'Â'isha umm Mu'minin bint Abu Bakr al-Makkiyya b. after February 614, d. July 678

Family 4

Saudah bint Zam'ah (?) b. circa 601, d. 643

Family 5

Hind umm Salamah bint Ummayyah b. circa 608, d. 676

Family 6

Hafsa bint 'Umar ibn al-Khattab Bani Adiy b. circa 590, d. circa 665

Family 7

Zainab ummu al-Masakin bint Khuazimah b. circa 595

Family 8

Zainab bint Jahsh Banu Hâshim b. circa 607, d. 641

Family 9

Juwayriya bint al-Harith Banu Khuza'ah b. circa 614, d. circa 676

Family 10

Mariah al-Qibtiyah b. circa 607, d. 637

Child

Ibraheem ibn Muhammad Banu Hâshim b. c 628

Family 11

Safiyah bat Huyay Banu Akhtab b. circa 608, d. circa 670

Family 12

Ramlah umm Habibah bint Abu Sufyan (?) b. circa 595, d. 664

Family 13

Maimunah bint Al-Harith (?) b. circa 600, d. 670

Family 14

Rayhanah the Jewess b. circa 613

Citations

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 435-45.

[S653] PoH, online http://www.friesian.com/

[S894] Muslim History, online http://members.nbci.com/muslimhistry/index.htm, Chapter 1.

[S469] Al-Islam.com, online http://www.al-islam.com/, The Prophet's daughters.

[S956] Comparitive Index to Islam, online http://answering-islam.org/Index/index.html, per Ibn Sa`d, "Kitab al-Tabaqat al-Kabir", Vol. I, p. 4, "The people of Banu Fuhayrah came to the Prophet and said to him : You belong to us. He replied : Verily, (the archangel) Gabriel has informed me that I belong to Mudar.".

[S911] Hadrian to Islam, online http://users.iafrica.com/l/ll/lloyd/1-TimeLine/…..

[S469] Al-Islam.com, online http://www.al-islam.com/, The Prophet's sons.

[S956] Comparitive Index to Islam, online http://answering-islam.org/Index/index.html

[S469] Al-Islam.com, online http://www.al-islam.com/, The Prophet's grandchildren.

[S894] Muslim History, online http://members.nbci.com/muslimhistry/index.htm, Chapter 1, pg. 1.

[S954] Esq., Bengal Civil Service William Muir Muir on Mahomet, Vol. 2, Chap. 1, "...it suffices to state that the widowed Amina gave birth to a son in the autumn of the year 570 A.D. It is a vain attempt to fix with certainty the precise date of the birth, for the materials are too vague and discrepant to be subjected to so close a calculation." but consider too M. Caussin de Perceval (whose calculations have already been recommended for general acceptance) accepts the 20th of August, 570 A.D..

[S956] Comparitive Index to Islam, online http://answering-islam.org/Index/index.html, ABDUL MUTTALIB.

[S954] Esq., Bengal Civil Service William Muir Muir on Mahomet, Vol. 2, Chap. 2.

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 436-45.

[S956] Comparitive Index to Islam, online http://answering-islam.org/Index/index.html, ZAID B. MUHAMMAD.

[S711] Encyclopedia, MS Encarta 2001, under "Islam.".

[S956] Comparitive Index to Islam, online http://answering-islam.org/Index/index.html, AISHA BINT ABU BAKR.

[S956] Comparitive Index to Islam, online http://answering-islam.org/Index/index.html, WIVES.

[S469] Al-Islam.com, online http://www.al-islam.com/, The Prophet's wives.

[S172] Various Encyclopaedea Britannica.

[S956] Comparitive Index to Islam, online http://answering-islam.org/Index/index.html, HAFSAH.

[S956] Comparitive Index to Islam, online http://answering-islam.org/Index/index.html, ZAINAB BINT KHUAZIMAH.

[S956] Comparitive Index to Islam, online http://answering-islam.org/Index/index.html, ZAINAB BINT JAHSH.

[S956] Comparitive Index to Islam, online http://answering-islam.org/Index/index.html, UBAIDULLAH B. JASH.

[S862] Various EB CD 2001, Muhammad, says 8 June, 632.

[S890] Ali Abbas, Shiíite Encyclopedia, Ch 1.b, pg. 41.

[S911] Hadrian to Islam, online http://users.iafrica.com/l/ll/lloyd/1-TimeLine/…., but has it as 8 June 632..

[S956] Comparitive Index to Islam, online http://answering-islam.org/Index/index.html, 8 Jun 632.

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 436-44.

--------------------

Mahoma (La Meca, c. el 26 de abril de 570/571 — Medina, 8 de junio de 632) fue el profeta (nabi نبي) fundador del islam. Su nombre completo en lengua árabe es Abu l-Qasim Muhammad ibn ‘Abd Allāh al-Hashimi al-Qurashi del que, castellanizando su nombre coloquial Muhammad (مُحَمِّد), se obtiene Mahoma.

De acuerdo a la religión musulmana, Mahoma es considerado el "sello de los profetas" (jātim al-anbiyā' خاتم الأنبياء), por ser el último de una larga cadena de mensajeros, enviados por Dios para actualizar su mensaje, que según el islam, sería en esencia el mismo que habrían transmitido sus predecesores, entre los que se contarían Ibrahim (Abraham), Isa (Jesús) y Musa (Moisés).

Vida anterior a la predicación

Su nacimiento e infancia

Árabe de la tribu de Coraix (Quraysh), nació en La Meca (مكة) alrededor del 570/571.[1] Meca se encuentra en la región de Hiyaz en la actual Arabia Saudí. Fue hijo póstumo de Abd Allah ibn Abd al-Muttalib, miembro del clan de los hashimí.

La costumbre de los más honorables de la tribu de Quraysh era enviar a sus hijos con niñeras beduinas con el propósito de que crecieran libres y saludables en el desierto, para poder también robustecerse y aprender de los beduinos, que eran reconocidos por su honradez y la carencia de numerosos vicios, y Mahoma fue confiado a Bani S’ad.[2]

Apertura del pecho

El primer milagro que se narra sobre Mahoma en la compilación de los hadices es que el Arcángel Gabriel descendió y abrió su pecho para sacar su corazón. Extrajo un coágulo negro de éste y dijo «Esta era la parte por donde Satán podría seducirte». Después lo lavó con agua Zam Zam en un recipiente de oro y devolvió el corazón a su sitio. Los niños y compañeros de juego con los que se encontraba corrieron hacia su nodriza y dijeron: «Mahoma ha sido asesinado»; todos se dirigieron a él y lo hallaron en buen estado, a excepción del rostro pálido.[3] Los musulmanes ven este acontecimiento como una protección para que él se apartara desde su infancia de la adoración de los ídolos y probablemente la razón por la que fue devuelto a su madre. Se quedó huérfano a temprana edad y, debido a una costumbre árabe que dice que los hijos menores no pueden recibir la herencia de sus progenitores, no recibió ni la de su padre ni la de su madre.[cita requerida] Se dice que ella murió cuando él tenía seis años, por lo que fue acogido y educado primero por su abuelo Abd al-Muttalib y luego por su tío paterno Abu Talib, un líder de la tribu Quraysh, la más poderosa de La Meca, y padre de su primo y futuro califa Ali.[4]

Encuentro con el monje Bahira

En aquella época La Meca era un centro comercial próspero, principalmente porque existían varios templos que contenían diferentes ídolos, lo cual atraía a un gran número de peregrinos. Mercaderes de diferentes tribus visitaban La Meca en la época del peregrinaje, cuando las guerras tribales estaban prohibidas y podían contar con un viaje seguro. En su adolescencia, Mahoma acompañó a su tío por sus viajes a Siria y otros lugares. Por tanto, pronto llegó a ser una persona con amplia experiencia en las costumbres de otras regiones.

A los doce años se dirigió a Basora con su tío Abu Tâlib y tuvieron un encuentro con un monje llamado Bahira, algunos orientalistas dicen que esto demuestra que Mahoma aprendió de él los libros sagrados, pero los escolares musulmanes refutan esta opinión alegando que no pudo haber aprendido en la hora de la comida ese conocimiento y que además no se registra un segundo encuentro con este monje, en los hadices se narra que Bahira reconoció algunas señales de la profecía de Mahoma y le advirtió a su tío sobre llevarlo a Siria por temor de los judíos y romanos.[5]

Matrimonio con Jadiya

Mahoma no tuvo un trabajo específico en su juventud, pero se ha reportado que trabajó como pastor para Bani Sad y en la Meca como asalariado.[4] A la edad de los 25 años Mahoma trabajó como mercader en la ruta caravanera entre Damasco y La Meca a las órdenes de Jadiya, hija de Juwaylid (خديجة بنت خويلد ), una rica comerciante viuda, había impresionado a Jadiya y ésta le propuso matrimonio en el año 595. Ibn Ishaq presenta que la edad de Jadiya era 28 años, y Al Waqidi presenta cuarenta. Algunos dicen que al engendrar Jadiya dos varones y cuatro mujeres de Mahoma, hace que la opinión más fuerte sea la de Ibn Ishaq, pues es sabido que la mujer llega a la edad de la menopausia antes de los cincuenta años. A pesar de que estas informaciones no están establecidas en un hadiz sino que es algo que se hizo famoso entre los historiadores.[5] Jadiya tuvo seis hijos con Mahoma, dos varones y cuatro mujeres. Todos nacieron antes de que Mahoma recibiera la primera revelación. Sus hijos Al-Qasim y Abdullah murieron en la infancia en La Meca. Sus cuatro hijas se llamaban Zainab, Ruqayyah, Umm Kulzum y Fátima. Jadiya sería posteriormente la primera persona en aceptar el islam después de la revelación.

Las primeras revelaciones

Mahoma era de carácter reflexivo y rutinariamente pasaba noches meditando en una cueva (Hira) cerca de La Meca. Los musulmanes creen que en 610 a los cuarenta años de edad, mientras meditaba, Mahoma tuvo una visión del ángel Gabriel. Describió esta visita como un mandato para memorizar y recitar los versos enviados por Dios. Durante su vida, Mahoma confió la conservación de la palabra de Dios (Allah الله), trasmitida por Gabriel (Yibril, جبريل), a la retentiva de los memoriones, quienes la memorizaban recitándola incansablemente que después de su muerte serían recopilados por escrito en el Corán debido a la primordial importancia de conservar el mensaje original en toda su pureza, sin el menor cambio ni de fondo ni de forma. Para ello emplearon materiales como las escápulas de camello, sobre las que grababan los versículos del Corán. El arcángel Gabriel le indicó que había sido elegido como el último de los profetas y como tal predicó la palabra de Dios sobre la base de un estricto monoteísmo, prediciendo el Día del Juicio Final.

De acuerdo con el Corán y las narraciones, Mahoma era analfabeto (ummi), hecho que la tradición musulmana considera una prueba que autentifica al Corán (Al-Qur'ān, القران), libro sagrado de los musulmanes, como portador de la verdad revelada.

Esta visión perturbó a Mahoma, pero su esposa Jadiya le aseguró que se trataba de una visión real y se convirtió en su primera discípula. Transformado en un rico y respetado mercader, recibió la revelación del ángel Gabriel, que le invitó a predicar una nueva religión.

Rechazo

A medida que los seguidores de Mahoma comenzaban a aumentar en número, se convirtió en una amenaza para los jefes de las tribus locales. La riqueza de estas tribus se basaba en la Kaaba, el recinto sagrado de los ídolos de los árabes y el punto principal religioso de La Meca. Si rechazaban a dichos ídolos, tal como Mahoma predicaba, no habría peregrinos hacia La Meca, ni comercio, ni riqueza. El repudio al politeísmo que denunciaba Mahoma era particularmente ofensivo a su propia tribu, la qurayshí, por cuanto ellos eran los guardianes de la Kaaba. Es por esto que Mahoma y sus seguidores se vieron perseguidos.

En el año 619 fallecieron Jadiya, la esposa de Mahoma, y su tío Abu Talib. Este año se conoce como el "año de la tristeza". El clan al que pertenecía Mahoma lo repudió y sus seguidores sufrieron hambre y persecución.

Isra y Miraj

En 620, Mahoma hizo un viaje en una noche que es conocido como Isra y Miraj. Isra es la palabra en árabe que se refiere a un viaje milagroso desde La Meca a Jerusalén, específicamente al lugar conocido como Masjid al-Aqsa. Isra fue seguida por el Mi'rāŷ, su ascensión al cielo, donde recorrió los siete cielos y se comunicó con profetas que le precedieron, como Abraham, Moisés o Jesús.

La Hégira

La vida de la pequeña comunidad musulmana en La Meca no sólo era difícil, sino también peligrosa. Las tradiciones árabes afirman que hubo varios atentados contra la vida de Mahoma, quien finalmente decidió trasladarse a Medina, un gran oasis agrícola donde había seguidores suyos. Rompiendo sus vínculos con las lealtades tribales y familiares, Mahoma demostraba que estos vínculos eran insignificantes comparados con su compromiso con el islam, una idea revolucionaria en la sociedad tribal de la Arabia. Esta migración a Medina marca el principio del año en el calendario islámico. El calendario islámico cuenta las fechas a partir de la Hégira (هجرة), razón por la cual las fechas musulmanas llevan el prefijo AH (año de la Hégira).

Mahoma llegó a Medina como un mediador, invitado a resolver querellas entre los bandos árabes de Aws y Khazraj. Logró este fin absorbiendo a ambas facciones en la comunidad musulmana y prohibiendo el derramamiento de sangre entre los musulmanes. Sin embargo, Medina era también el lugar donde vivían varias tribus judías. Mahoma esperaba que estas tribus lo reconocieran como profeta, lo cual no ocurrió. Algunos académicos afirman que Mahoma abandonó la esperanza de ser reconocido como profeta por los judíos, y que, por tanto, la alquibla, es decir, la dirección en la que rezan los musulmanes, fue cambiada del antiguo templo de Jerusalén a la Kaaba en La Meca.

Mahoma emitió un documento que se conoce como La Constitución de Medina (en 622-623), en la cual se especifican los términos en que otras facciones, particularmente los judíos, podían vivir dentro del nuevo estado islámico. De acuerdo con este sistema, a los judíos y cristianos les era permitido mantener su religión mediante el pago de un tributo (no así a los practicantes de religiones paganas). Este sistema vendría a tipificar la relación entre los musulmanes y los dhimmis, y esta tradición es la razón de la relativa estabilidad que normalmente existía en los califatos árabes.

La guerra

Las relaciones entre La Meca y Medina se deterioraron rápidamente. Todas las propiedades de los musulmanes en La Meca fueron confiscadas, mientras que en Medina Mahoma lograba alianzas con las tribus vecinas.

Los seguidores de Mahoma comenzaron a asaltar las caravanas que se dirigían a La Meca. En marzo de 624, Mahoma condujo a trescientos guerreros en un asalto a una caravana de mercaderes que se dirigía a La Meca. Los integrantes de la caravana lograron rechazar el ataque y posteriormente decidieron dirigir una represalia contra los musulmanes, enviando un pequeño ejército a invadir a Medina. El 15 de marzo de 624, en un lugar llamado Badr, ambos bandos chocaron. Si bien los seguidores de Mahoma eran numéricamente tres veces inferiores a sus enemigos (trescientos contra mil), los musulmanes ganaron la batalla. Éste fue el primero de una serie de logros militares por parte de los musulmanes.

El dominio de Mahoma se consolida

Para los musulmanes, la victoria de Badr resultaba una ratificación divina de que Mahoma era un legítimo profeta. Después de la victoria, y una vez que el clan judío de Banu Qainuqa fue expulsado de Medina, los ciudadanos de este lugar adoptaron todos la fe musulmana y Mahoma se estableció como el regente de facto de la ciudad.

Después de la muerte de su esposa, Mahoma contrajo matrimonio con Aisha, la hija de su amigo Abu Bakr (quien posteriormente se convertiría en el líder de los musulmanes tras la muerte de Mahoma). En Medina también se casó con Hafsah, hija de Umar (quien luego sería el sucesor de Abu Bakr). Estos casamientos sellarían las relaciones entre Mahoma y sus principales seguidores.

La hija de Mahoma, Fátima, se casó con Ali, primo de Mahoma. Otra hija, Ruqayyah, contrajo matrimonio con Uzman pero ella falleció y después Uzman se casó con su hermana Umm Kulzum. Estos hombres surgirían en los años subsiguientes como los sucesores de Mahoma (califas) y líderes políticos de los musulmanes. Por tanto, los cuatro primeros califas estaban vinculados a Mahoma por los diferentes matrimonios. Los musulmanes consideran a estos califas como los rashidún (الخلفاء الراشدون), que significa "guiados".

Continúa la guerra

En 625 un jefe de La Meca, Abu Sufyan, marchó contra Medina con 3.000 hombres. En la batalla que se libró el 23 de marzo, no salió victorioso ninguno de los dos bandos. El ejército de La Meca afirmó haber ganado la batalla, pero quedó muy diezmado como para perseguir a los musulmanes de Medina y ocupar la ciudad.

En abril de 627, Abu Sufyan emprendió otro ataque contra Medina, pero Mahoma había cavado trincheras alrededor de la ciudad y pudo defenderla exitosamente en lo que se conoce como la Guerra de las Trincheras.

Después de esta batalla, los musulmanes, se vieron traicionados por la tribu judía de Banu Qurayza o Banu Koreidha la cual se había aliado con las tribus de la Meca en la batalla de las trincheras, emprendieron guerra contra éstos, derrotándolos. Los hombres de la tribu fueron decapitados y las mujeres y niños fueron vendidos como esclavos.

Tras la victoria de la Guerra de las Trincheras, los musulmanes expandieron su influencia a través de conversiones o conquistas de varias ciudades y tribus.

La conquista de La Meca

Antes de su muerte en 632, Mahoma había consolidado su dominio sobre la península de Arabia.En el año 628, la posición de Mahoma era lo suficientemente fuerte para decidir su retorno a La Meca, esta vez como un peregrino. En marzo de ese año, se dirigió a La Meca seguido de 1.600 hombres. Después de diversas negociaciones, se firmó un tratado en un pueblo cercano a La Meca llamado al-Hudaybiyah. Si bien a Mahoma no se le permitió ese año entrar en La Meca, las hostilidades cesaron y a los musulmanes se les autorizó el acceso a la ciudad en el año siguiente.

El tratado duró solo dos años, ya que en 630 los regentes de La Meca rompieron dicho tratado. Como consecuencia de esto, Mahoma marchó hacia La Meca con un ejército de más de 10.000 hombres, la cual conquistó sin que encontrara resistencia. Mahoma declaró amnistía a los pobladores de la ciudad, muchos de los cuales se convirtieron al islam. Mahoma destruyó los ídolos de la Kaaba y, por tanto, el peregrinaje en adelante sería al lugar sagrado del islam. A pesar de Mahoma no estar presente en el asalto a la ciudad, como en todas las batallas por prescripción coránica, Muhammad administraba la quinta parte del botín para repartirlo entre los más necesitados. Los cuatro quintos restantes pertenecían siempre a los combatientes. Cobró un rescate 45 onzas de plata por cada prisionero, rescate que fue repartido entre los necesitados. Muhammad, no llegó nunca a saciarse de comida alguna, en su casa no había sino lo necesario para pasar el día y para los invitados que a ella acudían.

La capitulación de La Meca y la derrota de las tribus enemigas Hunayn permitió a Mahoma tomar el control de Arabia. Sin embargo, Mahoma no constituyó ningún gobierno, sino que prefirió gobernar a través de las relaciones personales y los tratados con diferentes tribus.

La vida familiar de Mahoma

Desde 595 hasta 619, Mahoma sólo tuvo una esposa, Jadiya, una rica mujer de La Meca que contaba 27 años (40 según otras fuentes) cuando se casó. Después de su muerte contrajo matrimonio con Sawdah, y al poco tiempo con Aisha, hija de Abu Bakr —quien posteriormente sucedería a Mahoma—. Según algunos hadices, Aisha tenía 6 años de edad cuando fue prometida al profeta, que tenía 54, aunque el matrimonio se consumó cuando ella tuvo 9. Hay, sin embargo, estudiosos musulmanes que creen que dichos datos son erróneos y que Aisha era considerablemente mayor.[6]

Pese a estas reinterpretaciones modernas de los hadices que adjudicarían a Aisha una edad más madura, una gran mayoría de los fieles musulmanes siguen aceptando actualmente las interpretaciones tradicionales. Esto último ha sido utilizado por críticos del islam, como Ibn Warraq, para sostener que los matrimonios infantiles que se siguen practicando en la actualidad en los países islámicos encuentran un argumento favorable en este posible precedente histórico[7]

Más tarde se casó con Hafsa, con Zaynab (quien era mujer de su hijo adoptivo Zaid), Ramlah, hija de un líder que combatió a Mahoma, y con Umm Salama, viuda de un combatiente musulmán.

También se casó con una cristiana de nombre Mariyah Al-Qibtía (Mariyah, la copta) tuvo otro hijo con ella después de mudarse a Medina. Ese séptimo y último hijo se llamaba Ibrahim. Al igual que sus hermanos varones, Ibrahim falleció en su niñez; se dice que murió a los 17 o 18 meses de edad, y con una judía de nombre Safiah. Posteriormente tuvo varias otras esposas, de número impreciso entre éstas 9 reseñadas, que afirman casi todos los expertos como seguras, y las más de 20 que algunos le estiman. Algunas de estas mujeres eran esposas de seguidores de Mahoma muertos en batalla, mientras que otras eran hijas de sus aliados.

La muerte de Mahoma

Muerte de Mahoma en un manuscrito otomano de 1596.Después de una corta enfermedad, Mahoma falleció el 8 de junio de 632 en la ciudad de Medina a la edad de 63 años.

Abu Bakr, el padre de Aisha, la tercera mujer de Mahoma, fue elegido por los líderes de la comunidad musulmana como el sucesor de Mahoma, pues éste era el favorito de Mahoma. Cualquiera que hayan sido los hechos, lo cierto es que Abu Bakr se convirtió en el nuevo líder del islam. La mayor parte de su corto reinado la pasó combatiendo tribus rebeldes en lo que se conoce como las Guerras Ridda.

A la fecha de la muerte de Mahoma, había unificado toda la Península Arábica y expandido la religión islámica en esta región, así como en parte de Siria y Palestina.

Posteriormente los sucesores de Mahoma extendieron el dominio del imperio árabe a Palestina, Siria, Mesopotamia, Persia, Egipto, el Norte de África y Al-Andalus.

Descendientes de Mahoma

A Mahoma le sobrevivieron su hija Fátima y los hijos de ésta. Los chiíes afirman que el esposo de Fátima, Alí y sus descendientes, son los verdaderos líderes del islam. Los sunníes no aceptan esta afirmación, si bien respetan a los descendientes de Mahoma.

Los descendientes de Mahoma son conocidos por diferentes nombres, tales como sayyid y sharif. Muchos líderes y nobles de los países musulmanes, actuales y pasados, afirman ser descendientes de Mahoma con variables grados de credibilidad, tales como la dinastía fatimí del Norte de África, los idrisíes, la actual familia real de Marruecos y Jordania y los imanes ismaelitas que usan el título de Agha Khan.

--------------------

Nabi Muhammad SAW berasal dari kabilah Quraisy, tepatnya keturunan Hasyim. Ayah beliau adalah Abdullah bin Abdul Muthalib, cucu Hasyim. Ibunda beliau adalah Aminah binti Wahab yang berasal dari keturunan Bani Zuhrah, salah satu kabilah Quraisy. Dimana Setelah menikah, Abdullah melakukan pepergian ke Syam. Ketika pulang dari pepergian itu, Rasulullah wafat di Madinah dan dikuburkan di kota itu juga.

Setelah beberapa bulan dari wafatnya sang ayah berlalu, Rasulullah adalah nabi pamungkas dari para nabi, yang lahir di bulan Rabi’ul Awal, tahun 571 Masehi di Makkah, dan dengan kelahirannya itu, dunia menjadi terang-benderang. Sesuai dengan kebiasaan para bangsawan Makkah, ibundanya menyerahkan Muhammad kecil kepada Halimah Sa’diyah dari kabilah Bani Sa’d untuk disusui. Beliau tinggal di rumah Halimah selama empat tahun. Setelah itu, sang ibu mengambilnya kembali.

Dengan tujuan untuk berkunjung ke kerabat ayahnya di Madinah, sang ibunda membawanya pergi ke Madinah. Dalam perjalanan pulang ke Makkah, ibundanya wafat dan dikebumikan di Abwa`, sebuah daerah yang terletak antara Makkah dan Madinah. Setelah ibunda beliau wafat, secara bergantian, kakek dan paman beliau, Abdul Muthalib dan Abu Thalib memelihara beliau. Pada usia dua puluh lima tahun, beliau menikah dengan Khadijah yang waktu itu sudah berusia empat puluh tahun. Beliau menjalani hidup bersamanya selama dua puluh lima tahun hingga ia wafat pada usia enam puluh lima tahun.

Pada usia empat puluh tahun, beliau diutus menjadi nabi oleh Allah. Ia mewahyukan kepada beliau al-Quran yang seluruh manusia dan jin tidak mampu untuk menandinginya. Ia menamakan beliau sebagai pamungkas para nabi dan memujinya karena kemuliaan akhlaknya.

Beliau hidup di dunia ini selama enam puluh tiga tahun. Menurut pendapat masyhur, beliau wafat pada hari Senin bulan Shafar 11 Hijriah di Madinah.

--------------------
"Muhammed Prophet Of Islam PBUH An-Hazrat Abul-Qasim Muhammed -ie- Mustafa Ahmed-ie -Mujtaba (S.A.W.S) Sahib-It Taj-Ie-Wal Merajie Huzoor Sarwar-Ie Konain Khatim-Un Nabaieen Wa-Katmul- Mursaleen Wo Rahmat-Ul- Lil Alaaimeen Alaihis Sallat Was Sallam ( Prophet of Islam)".............Syed's are the direct descendants of The Prophet Muhammed (PBUH) Of Islam. The Prophet's daughter Syeda Bibi Fatima-tuz- Zahra (R.A) was married to Ali ibne Abu-Talib (R.A), (Fourth Caliph of Caliphate of Rashideen) and who was also the youngest cousin of the Prophet of Islam. The other descendants of Ali ibne Abu-Talib from his other wifes are named as Alawi's ( Although syed's are Hashmi Sadaat's ( for info: Descendents when started using the surname "Syed" then they stopped using the word Hashimi in past after the era of Prophet Of Islam ) and Alavi's are Hashmi Alavi's ). The Prophet Of Islam's tree goes far back to the prophet Ismail (Ishmael) son of Prophet Ibrahim (Abraham) (Whose father was Taric but not Azar->Who was Ibrahim' uncle) It Is a respectful and honorable that as Muslims in good faith we all uses numerous honorable names for (Muhammed Prophet Of Islam PBUH An-Hazrat Aboul-Qasim Muhammed -ie- Mustafa Ahmed-ie -Mujtaba (S.A.W.S) Sahib-It Taj-Ie-Wal Merajie Huzoor Sarwar-Ie Konain Khatim-Un Nabaieen Wa-Katmul- Mursaleen Wo Rahmat-Ul- Lil Alaaimeen Alaihis Sallat Was Sallam ( Prophet of Islam) and many more that are assigned attributes by Allah (God the Almighty) in our Holy Book (Qur'an) to our Prophet. Qur'an is also wrongly miss-spelled as Koran.

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 [[Category:Wikipedia overwrite]]
Jump to: navigation, search

Not to be confused with Sa‘id or saeed ( means happy / farrah ) or Zayd.

Sayyed's (Arabic: سيد‎) (plural sādah / sadaat where 't' is a silent letter in Arabic: سادة‎) literally means Mister. As an honorific title given to males accepted as who are the descendants of the Islamic Prophet Muhammad through his grandsons, Hasan ibn Ali and Husain ibn Ali, who were also the sons of the prophet's daughter Fatima tuz Zahra (also named as Hussany and Hosseiny Syed's " Alai-Rasool" )and his son-in-law Ali ibn Abi Talib ( Ali's descendent's are also called as "Aulad-ie-Ali"). Daughters of sayyids are given the titles Sayyeda, Syarifah, or Sharifah. Children of a Sayyida mother but a non-Sayyid father cannot be attributed the title of Sayyed; however, Syed's may also claim the title ' Mir' but never Mirza (out of question) In the Arab world or any where else in the world as matter itself.

The Alevi use seyyid (the Turkish form) as an honorific before the names of their saints ( only if they are direct descendants of the prophet of Islam). El Cid, the name given to a famous Spanish knight of the 11th century C.E., is derived from Al-Sayyid (as-sayyid/Mister/Ustaaz / moallim). As-Sayyid / Mister / his highness is also used as title or a different form of address to denote a prince or superior in the Sultanate of Oman and rest of the muslim world or else matters in this current era only ( nothing as such related to the word " Syed" who are the descendents of Prophet Of Islam ).

Arabic Sayyid, Sayyidi, Sayyed, Sayid, Saiyyid, Saiyid, Sidi Arab world Azerbaijani Seyid, Seyyid Azerbaijan, Iran Baluchi Sayyid, Syed, Sayeed, Sayyed, Sayid Baluchistan region Indonesia Sayyid, Syed, Sayid Indonesia Kurdish Seyid, Syed, Seyyid, Seyit Kurdish region Malay Syed, Sheikh Malaysia, Brunei and Singapore Pashto Sayed, Syed, Said Afghanistan & Northwest Pakistan Persian Said, Sayyed, Sayed, Saeyd, Seyyed, Seyed, Saiyed, Saeid, Siyyid Iran & Afghanistan Punjabi Sayed, Syed Pakistan, India Seraiki, Sindhi Sayed, Syed Pakistan Turkish Seyed, Seyit, Seyyid, Seyyed Turkey, Azerbaijan and Central Asia Bosnian Seid, Sait, Sead Bosnia and Herzegovina Urdu, Marathi, Hindi, Assamese, Konkani, Kannada, Bhojpuri, Telugu, Tamil, Bengali, Malayalam, Gujarati Syed, Saiyad, Saiyed, Sayyid, Saiyed, Saiyid, Sayyed, Sayid South Asia Spanish Cid Al-Andalus Other Siyyid

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sayyid

--------------------
The prophet of the Muslim faith
--------------------
Muhammad From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 [[Category:Wikipedia overwrite]]
For other persons named Muhammad, see Muhammad (name). For other uses, see Muhammad (disambiguation). Page semi-protected Muhammad ibn ‘Abdullāh

The name Muhammad in traditional Thuluth calligraphy by the hand of Hattat Aziz Efendi Born ca. 570/571 Mecca, Arabia (present day Saudi Arabia) Died June 8, 632 (age 63) Medina, Arabia Cause of death Illness Religion Muslim Spouse see below Parents

Father: Abd Allah Mother: Aminah bint Wahb

A series of articles on

Muhammad callig.gif Prophet of Islam Muhammad

Life Companions · Family tree · In Mecca · In Medina · Conquest of Mecca · The Farewell Sermon · Succession

Career Diplomacy · Family · Wives · Military career

Succession Farewell Pilgrimage · Pen and paper · Saqifah · General bay'ah

Views by subject Slavery · Jews · Christians

Perspectives Muslim (Poetic and Mawlid) · Medieval Christian · Historicity · Criticism · Depictions v · d · e This article is part of the series: Islam Allah-eser-green.png Beliefs[show] Practices[show] Texts and laws[show] History and leadership[show] Culture and society[show] Islam and other religions[show] Other[show] v · d · e

Muhammad ibn ‘Abdullāh (Arabic: محمد; Transliteration: Muḥammad;[n 1] pronounced [mʊˈħæmmæd] ( listen); also spelled Muhammed or Mohammed)[n 2][n 3] (ca. 570/571 – June 8, 632),[1] (Monday, 12th Rabi' al-Awwal, Year 11 A.H.) is the founder[n 4] of the religion of Islam,[2] and is considered by Muslims to be a messenger and prophet of God (Arabic: Allah|الله Allāh), the last law-bearer in a series of Islamic prophets, and, by most Muslims,[n 5] the last prophet of Islam as taught by the Qur'an.[3] Muslims thus consider him the restorer of an uncorrupted original monotheistic faith (islām) of Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus and other prophets.[4][5][6] He was also active as a diplomat, merchant, philosopher, orator, legislator, reformer, military general, and, according to Muslim belief, an agent of divine action.[7]

Born in 570 in the Arabian city of Mecca,[8] he was orphaned at an early age and brought up under the care of his uncle Abu Talib. He later worked mostly as a merchant, as well as a shepherd, and was first married by age 25. Discontented with life in Mecca, he retreated to a cave in the surrounding mountains for meditation and reflection. According to Islamic beliefs it was here, at age 40, in the month of Ramadan, where he received his first revelation from God. Three years after this event Muhammad started preaching these revelations publicly, proclaiming that "God is One", that complete "surrender" to Him (lit. islām) is the only way (dīn)[n 6] acceptable to God, and that he himself was a prophet and messenger of God, in the same vein as other Islamic prophets.[6][9][10] Muhammad gained few followers early on, and was met with hostility from some Meccan tribes; he and his followers were treated harshly. To escape persecution, Muhammad sent some of his followers to Abyssinia before he and his remaining followers in Mecca migrated to Medina (then known as Yathrib) in the year 622. This event, the Hijra, marks the beginning of the Islamic calendar, which is also known as the Hijri Calendar. In Medina, Muhammad united the conflicting tribes, and after eight years of fighting with the Meccan tribes, his followers, who by then had grown to 10,000, conquered Mecca. In 632, a few months after returning to Medina from his Farewell pilgrimage, Muhammad fell ill and died. By the time of his death, most of the Arabian Peninsula had converted to Islam; and he had united the tribes of Arabia into a single Muslim religious polity.[11][12]

The revelations (or Ayat, lit. "Signs of God")–which Muhammad reported receiving until his death–form the verses of the Qur'an, regarded by Muslims as the “Word of God” and around which the religion is based. Besides the Qur'an, Muhammad’s life (sira) and traditions (sunnah) are also upheld by Muslims. They discuss Muhammad and other prophets of Islam with reverence, adding the phrase peace be upon him whenever their names are mentioned.[13] While conceptions of Muhammad in medieval Christendom and premodern times were largely negative, appraisals in modern history have been far less so.[10][14] His life and deeds have been debated and criticized by followers and opponents over the centuries.[15] He is revered as a true prophet and Manifestation of God in the Baha'i Faith.[16] Contents [hide]

1 Names and appellations in the Qur'an
2 Sources for Muhammad's life
2.1 Qur'an
2.2 Early biographies
2.3 Hadith
2.4 Non-Arabic sources
3 Pre-Islamic Arabia
4 Life
4.1 Life in Mecca
4.1.1 Childhood and early life
4.2 Wives and children
4.3 Beginnings of the Qur'an
4.4 Opposition
4.5 Isra and Mi'raj
4.6 Last years in Mecca before Hijra
4.7 Hijra
4.7.1 Migration to Medina
4.7.2 Establishment of a new polity
4.7.3 Beginning of armed conflict
4.7.4 Conflict with Mecca
4.7.5 Siege of Medina
4.7.6 Truce of Hudaybiyyah
4.8 Final years
4.8.1 Conquest of Mecca
4.8.2 Conquest of Arabia
4.8.3 Farewell pilgrimage and death
4.9 Aftermath
5 Early reforms under Islam
6 Slaves
7 Legacy
7.1 Muslim views
7.2 Other views
7.2.1 Non-western views
7.2.2 European and Western views
7.2.3 Other religious traditions
8 Criticism
9 See also
10 Notes
11 References
12 Bibliography
12.1 Encyclopedias
13 Further reading
14 External links
14.1 Non-Muslim biographies
14.2 Muslim biographies

Names and appellations in the Qur'an

The name Muhammad means "Praiseworthy" and occurs four times in the Qur'an.[17] The Qur'an addresses Muhammad in the second person not by his name but by the appellations prophet, messenger, servant of God ('abd), announcer (bashir), warner (nathir), reminder (mudhakkir), witness (shahid), bearer of good tidings (mubashshir), one who calls [unto God] (dā‘ī) and the light-giving lamp (siraj munir). Muhammad is sometimes addressed by designations deriving from his state at the time of the address: thus he is referred to as the enwrapped (al-muzzammil) in Qur'an 73:1 and the shrouded (al-muddaththir) in Qur'an 74:1.[18] In the Qur'an, believers are not to distinguish between the messengers of God and are to believe in all of them (Sura Al-Baqara 2:285). God has caused some messengers to excel above others 2:253 and in Sura Al-Ahzab 33:40 He singles out Muhammad as the "Seal of the Prophets".[19] The Qur'an also refers to Muhammad as Aḥmad "more praiseworthy" (Arabic: أحمد‎, Sura As-Saff 61:6). Sources for Muhammad's life The Qur'an is the primary source for details about Muhammed's life. Main articles: Historiography of early Islam and Historicity of Muhammad

Being a highly influential historical figure, Muhammad's life, deeds, and thoughts have been debated by followers and opponents over the centuries, which makes a biography of him difficult to write.[10] Qur'an Wiki letter w cropped.svg This section requires expansion.

Muslims regard the Qur'an as a holy book and the primary source of knowledge about Muhammed as a historical figure.[10] The Qur'an has a few allusions to Muhammad's life.[20] The Encyclopaedia of Islam says that the Qur'an responds "constantly and often candidly to Muhammad's changing historical circumstances and contains a wealth of hidden data."[10] Early biographies Main article: Prophetic biography

Next in importance are historical works by writers of the 3rd and 4th centuries of the Muslim era.[21] These include the traditional Muslim biographies of Muhammad (the sira literature), which provide further information on Muhammad's life.[22]

The earliest surviving written sira (biographies of Muhammad and quotes attributed to him) is Ibn Ishaq's Life of God's Messenger written ca. 767 (150 AH). The work is lost, but was used verbatim at great length by Ibn Hisham and Al-Tabari.[20][23] Another early source is the history of Muhammad's campaigns by al-Waqidi (death 207 of Muslim era), and the work of his secretary Ibn Sa'd al-Baghdadi (death 230 of Muslim era).[21]

Many scholars accept the accuracy of the earliest biographies, though their accuracy is unascertainable.[20] Recent studies have led scholars to distinguish between the traditions touching legal matters and the purely historical ones. In the former sphere, traditions could have been subject to invention while in the latter sphere, aside from exceptional cases, the material may have been only subject to "tendential shaping".[24] Hadith Hadith collections Mosque02.svg

[show]Sunni [show]Shi'a [show]Ibadi [show]Mu'tazili This box: view · talk · edit Main article: Hadith

In addition, the hadith collections are accounts of the verbal and physical traditions of Muhammad that date from several generations after his death.[25] Hadith compilations are records of the traditions or sayings of Muhammad. They might be defined as the biography of Muhammad perpetuated by the long memory of his community for their exemplification and obedience.[26]

Western academics view the hadith collections with caution as accurate historical sources.[25] Scholars such as Madelung do not reject the narrations which have been compiled in later periods, but judge them in the context of history and on the basis of their compatibility with the events and figures.[27] Although usually discounted by historians, oral tradition plays a major role in the Islamic understanding of Muhammad.[15] Non-Arabic sources Wiki letter w cropped.svg This section requires expansion.

The earliest documented Christian knowledge of Muhammad stems from Byzantine sources. They indicate that both Jews and Christians saw Muhammad as a deceiving prophet, or at least certain circles did. In the Doctrina Jacobi nuper baptizati of 634, Muhammad is portrayed as being "deceiving[,] for do prophets come with sword and chariot?, [...] you will discover nothing true from the said prophet except human bloodshed."[28] Another Greek source for Muhammad is the 9th-century writer Theophanes. The earliest Syriac source is the 7th-century writer John bar Penkaye.[29] Pre-Islamic Arabia Main articles: Pre-Islamic Arabia and Jahiliyyah Approximate locations of some of the important tribes and Empire of the Arabian Peninsula at the dawn of Islam (approximately 600 CE / 50 BH).

The Arabian Peninsula was largely arid and volcanic, making agriculture difficult except near oases or springs. The landscape was thus dotted with towns and cities, two prominent ones being Mecca and Medina. Medina was a large flourishing agricultural settlement, while Mecca was an important financial center for many surrounding tribes.[30] Communal life was essential for survival in the desert conditions, as people needed support against the harsh environment and lifestyle. Tribal grouping was encouraged by the need to act as a unit, this unity being based on the bond of kinship by blood.[31] Indigenous Arabs were either nomadic or sedentary (or bedouins), the former constantly travelling from one place to another seeking water and pasture for their flocks, while the latter settled and focused on trade and agriculture. Nomadic survival was also dependent on raiding caravans or oases, the nomads not viewing this as a crime.[32][33]

In pre-Islamic Arabia, gods or goddesses were viewed as protectors of individual tribes, their spirits being associated with sacred trees, stones, springs and wells. As well as being the site of an annual pilgrimage, the Kaaba shrine in Mecca housed 360 idol statues of tribal patron deities. Aside from these gods, the Arabs shared a common belief in a supreme deity called Allah (literally "the god"), who was remote from their everyday concerns and thus not the object of cult or ritual. Three goddesses were associated with Allah as his daughters: Allāt, Manāt and al-‘Uzzá. Monotheistic communities existed in Arabia, including Christians and Jews.[34] Hanifs – native pre-Islamic Arab monotheists – are also sometimes listed alongside Jews and Christians in pre-Islamic Arabia, although their historicity is disputed amongst scholars.[35][36] According to Muslim tradition, Muhammad himself was a Hanif and one of the descendants of Ishmael, son of Abraham.[37] Life Al-Masjid al-Nabawi (the Mosque of the Prophet) in Medina, Saudi Arabia, is the site of Muhammad's tomb. Life in Mecca

Timeline of Muhammad in Mecca Important dates and locations in the life of Muhammad in Mecca c. 569 Death of his father, Abdullah c. 570 Possible date of birth, April 26: Mecca 576 Death of his mother, Amina 578Death of his grandfather c. 583 Takes trading journeys to Syria c. 595Meets and marries Khadijah 610 First reports of Qur'anic revelation c. 613 Begins spreading message of Islam publicly c. 614 Begins to gather following in Mecca c. 615 Emigration of Muslims to Ethiopia 616 Banu Hashim clan boycott begins c. 618 Medinan War 619 Banu Hashim clan boycott ends 619 The year of sorrows: khadija and Abu Talib die c. 620 Isra and Mi'raj 622 Emigrates to Medina (Hijra)

This box: view · talk · edit Main article: Muhammad in Mecca

Muhammad was born and lived in Mecca for the first 52 years of his life (570–622) which was divided into two phases, that is before and after declaring the prophecy. Childhood and early life See also: Year of the Elephant, Mawlid, and Family tree of Muhammad

Muhammad was born in the month of Rabi' al-awwal in 570. He belonged to the Banu Hashim, one of the prominent families of Mecca, although it seems not to have been prosperous during Muhammad's early lifetime.[10][38] Tradition places the year of Muhammad's birth as corresponding with the Year of the Elephant, which is named after the failed destruction of Mecca that year by the Aksumite king Abraha who had in his army a number of elephants. Recent scholarship has suggested alternative dates for this event, such as 568 or 569.[39]

Muhammad's father, Abdullah, died almost six months before he was born.[40] According to the tradition, soon after Muhammad's birth he was sent to live with a Bedouin family in the desert, as the desert-life was considered healthier for infants. Muhammad stayed with his foster-mother, Halimah bint Abi Dhuayb, and her husband until he was two years old. Some western scholars of Islam have rejected the historicity of this tradition.[41] At the age of six Muhammad lost his mother Amina to illness and he became fully orphaned.[42] He was subsequently brought up for two years under the guardianship of his paternal grandfather Abd al-Muttalib, of the Banu Hashim clan of the Quraysh tribe. When Muhammad was eight, his grandfather also died. He now came under the care of his uncle Abu Talib, the new leader of Banu Hashim.[39] According to Watt, because of the general disregard of the guardians in taking care of weak members of the tribes in Mecca in the 6th century, "Muhammad's guardians saw that he did not starve to death, but it was hard for them to do more for him, especially as the fortunes of the clan of Hashim seem to have been declining at that time."[43]

While still in his teens, Muhammad accompanied his uncle on trading journeys to Syria gaining experience in the commercial trade, the only career open to Muhammad as an orphan.[43] According to tradition, when Muhammad was either nine or twelve while accompanying the Meccans' caravan to Syria, he met a Christian monk or hermit named Bahira who is said to have foreseen Muhammed's career as a prophet of God.[44]

Little is known of Muhammad during his later youth, and from the fragmentary information that is available, it is hard to separate history from legend.[43] It is known that he became a merchant and "was involved in trade between the Indian ocean and the Mediterranean Sea."[45] Due to his upright character he acquired the nickname "al-Amin" (Arabic: الامين), meaning "faithful, trustworthy" and was sought out as an impartial arbitrator.[8][10][46] His reputation attracted a proposal from Khadijah, a forty-year-old widow in 595. Muhammad consented to the marriage, which by all accounts was a happy one.[45] Wives and children Main articles: Muhammad's wives and Ahl al-Bayt

Muhammad's life is traditionally defined into two periods: pre-hijra (emigration) in Mecca (from 570 to 622), and post-hijra in Medina (from 622 until 632). Muhammad is said to have had thirteen wives or concubines. (There are differing accounts on the status of some of them as wife or concubine.[47])[48] All but two of his marriages were contracted after the migration to Medina. Part of a series on Islam Muhammadwives.png Umm-al-Momineen Wives of Muhammad

Khadijah bint Khuwaylid

Sawda bint Zamʿa

Aisha bint Abi Bakr

Hafsa bint Umar

Zaynab bint Khuzayma

Hind bint Abi Umayya

Zaynab bint Jahsh

Juwayriya bint al-Harith

Ramlah bint Abi Sufyan

Rayhana bint Zayd

Safiyya bint Huyayy

Maymuna bint al-Harith

Maria al-Qibtiyya

At the age of 25, Muhammad married the wealthy Khadijah bint Khuwaylid who was 40 years old at that time.[49] The marriage lasted for 25 years and was a happy one.[50] Muhammad relied upon Khadija in many ways and did not enter into marriage with another woman during this marriage.[51][52] After the death of Khadija, it was suggested to Muhammad by Khawla bint Hakim that he should marry Sawda bint Zama, a Muslim widow, or Aisha, daughter of Um Ruman and Abu Bakr of Mecca. Muhammad is said to have asked her to arrange for him to marry both.[53]

Traditional sources dictate that Aisha was six or seven years old when betrothed to Muhammad[53][54][55] but the marriage was not consummated until she was nine or ten years old.[53][54][56][57][58] While majority of traditional sources indicate Aisha was 9 (and therefore a virgin) at the time of marriage, a small number of more recent writers have variously estimated her age at 15 to 24.[59][60][61][62]

Nine of Muhammad's wives survived him.[48] Aisha, who became known as Muhammad's favourite wife in Sunni tradition, survived him by many decades and was instrumental in helping bring together the scattered sayings of Muhammad that would form the Hadith literature for the Sunni branch of Islam.[53]

After migration to Medina, Muhammad (who was now in his fifties) married several women. These marriages were contracted mostly for political or humanitarian reasons. The women were either widows of Muslims who had been killed in battle and had been left without a protector, or belonging to important families or clans whom it was necessary to honor and strengthen alliances with.[63]

Muhammad did his own household chores and helped with housework, such as preparing food, sewing clothes and repairing shoes. He is also said to have had accustomed his wives to dialogue; he listened to their advice, and the wives debated and even argued with him.[64][65][66]

Khadijah is said to have borne Muhammad four daughters-(Ruqayyah bint Muhammad, Umm Kulthum bint Muhammad, Zainab bint Muhammad, Fatimah Zahra)-and two sons-(Abd-Allah ibn Muhammad and Qasim ibn Muhammad) who both died in childhood. All except two of his daughters, Fatimah and Zainab, died before him.[67] Shi'a scholars contend that Fatimah was Muhammad's only daughter.[68] Maria al-Qibtiyya bore him a son named Ibrahim ibn Muhammad, but the child died when he was two years old.[67]

Muhammad's descendants through Fatimah are known as sharifs, syeds or sayyids. These are honorific titles in Arabic, sharif meaning 'noble' and sayed or sayyid meaning 'lord' or 'sir'. As Muhammad's only descendants, they are respected by both Sunni and Shi'a, though the Shi'as place much more emphasis and value on their distinction.[69] Beginnings of the Qur'an Part of a series on the Quran Decorative Qur'an cover Mus'haf Sura · Ayah Quran reading Tajwid · Hizb · Tarteel Quranic guardian · Manzil Qari' · Juz' · Rasm Ruku' · Sujud Translations List of translations English translations History Meccan suras Medinan suras Tafsir Persons related to verses Justice · Asbab al-nuzul Naskh · Biblical narratives Tahrif · Bakkah · Muqatta'at Esoteric interpretation Quran and Sunnah Literalism · Miracles Science · Female figures Perspectives Shia · Criticism · Desecration Surah of Wilaya and Nurayn Tanazzulat · Qisas Al-Anbiya House of the Quran v · d · e See also: History of the Qur'an and Wahy

At some point Muhammad adopted the practice of meditating alone for several weeks every year in a cave on Mount Hira near Mecca.[70][71] Islamic tradition holds that during one of his visits to Mount Hira, the angel Gabriel appeared to him in the year 610 and commanded Muhammad to recite the following verses:[72] The cave Hira in the mountain Jabal al-Nour where, according to Muslim belief, Muhammad received his first revelation.

Proclaim! (or read!) in the name of thy Lord and Cherisher, Who created-
Created man, out of a (mere) clot of congealed blood:
Proclaim! And thy Lord is Most Bountiful,-
He Who taught (the use of) the pen,-
Taught man that which he knew not.
—Qur'an, sura 96 (Al-Alaq), ayat 1-5[73]

According to some traditions, upon receiving his first revelations Muhammad was deeply distressed.[74] After returning home, Muhammad was consoled and reassured by Khadijah and her Christian cousin, Waraqah ibn Nawfal. Shi'a tradition maintains that Muhammad was neither surprised nor frightened at the appearance of Gabriel but rather welcomed him as if he had been expecting him.[75] The initial revelation was followed by a pause of three years during which Muhammad further gave himself to prayers and spiritual practices. When the revelations resumed he was reassured and commanded to begin preaching: "Thy Guardian-Lord hath not forsaken thee, nor is He displeased.".[76][77][78] A depiction of Muhammad receiving his first revelation from the angel Gabriel. From the book Jami' al-tawarikh by Rashid-al-Din Hamadani, published in 1307 AD, Ilkhanate period.

According to Welch these revelations were accompanied by mysterious seizures, and the reports are unlikely to have been forged by later Muslims.[10] Muhammad was confident that he could distinguish his own thoughts from these messages.[79] According to the Qur'an, one of the main roles of Muhammad is to warn the unbelievers of their eschatological punishment (Qur'an 38:70, Qur'an 6:19). Sometimes the Qur'an does not explicitly refer to the Judgment day but provides examples from the history of some extinct communities and warns Muhammad's contemporaries of similar calamities (Qur'an 41:13–16).[18] Muhammad is not only a warner to those who reject God's revelation, but also a bearer of good news for those who abandon evil, listen to the divine word and serve God.[80] Muhammad's mission also involves preaching monotheism: The Qur'an demands Muhammad to proclaim and praise the name of his Lord and instructs him not to worship idols apart from God or associate other deities with God.[18]

The key themes of the early Qur'anic verses included the responsibility of man towards his creator; the resurrection of dead, God's final judgment followed by vivid descriptions of the tortures in hell and pleasures in Paradise; and the signs of God in all aspects of life. Religious duties required of the believers at this time were few: belief in God, asking for forgiveness of sins, offering frequent prayers, assisting others particularly those in need, rejecting cheating and the love of wealth (considered to be significant in the commercial life of Mecca), being chaste and not to kill newborn girls.[10] Opposition See also: Persecution of Muslims by the Meccans and Migration to Abyssinia

According to Muslim tradition, Muhammad's wife Khadija was the first to believe he was a prophet.[81] She was soon followed by Muhammad's ten-year-old cousin Ali ibn Abi Talib, close friend Abu Bakr, and adopted son Zaid.[81] Around 613, Muhammad began his public preaching (Qur'an 26:214).[82] Most Meccans ignored him and mocked him, while a few others became his followers. There were three main groups of early converts to Islam: younger brothers and sons of great merchants; people who had fallen out of the first rank in their tribe or failed to attain it; and the weak, mostly unprotected foreigners.[83]

According to Ibn Sad, the opposition in Mecca started when Muhammad delivered verses that condemned idol worship and the Meccan forefathers who engaged in polytheism.[84] However, the Qur'anic exegesis maintains that it began as soon as Muhammad started public preaching.[85] As the number of followers increased, he became a threat to the local tribes and the rulers of the city, whose wealth rested upon the Kaaba, the focal point of Meccan religious life, which Muhammad threatened to overthrow. Muhammad’s denunciation of the Meccan traditional religion was especially offensive to his own tribe, the Quraysh, as they were the guardians of the Ka'aba.[83] The powerful merchants tried to convince Muhammad to abandon his preaching by offering him admission into the inner circle of merchants, and establishing his position therein by an advantageous marriage. However, he refused.[83]

Tradition records at great length the persecution and ill-treatment of Muhammad and his followers.[10] Sumayyah bint Khabbab, a slave of a prominent Meccan leader Abu Jahl, is famous as the first martyr of Islam, having been killed with a spear by her master when she refused to give up her faith. Bilal, another Muslim slave, was tortured by Umayyah ibn Khalaf who placed a heavy rock on his chest to force his conversion.[86][87] Apart from insults, Muhammad was protected from physical harm as he belonged to the Banu Hashim clan.[88][89] After being persecuted by the Meccans, some of the early converts to Islam sought refuge in the Aksumite Empire (shown above).

In 615, some of Muhammad's followers emigrated to the Ethiopian Aksumite Empire and founded a small colony there under the protection of the Christian Ethiopian emperor Aṣḥama ibn Abjar.[10]

An early hadith known as "The Story of the Cranes" (translation: قصة الغرانيق, transliteration: Qissat al Gharaneeq) was propagated by two Islamic scholars, Ibn Kathir al Dimashqi and Ibn Hijir al Masri, where the former has strengthened it and the latter called it fabricated[90] (see Science of hadith). The hadith describes Muhammad's involvement at the time of migration in an episode which historian William Muir called the "Satanic Verses". The account holds that Muhammad pronounced a verse acknowledging the existence of three Meccan goddesses considered to be the daughters of Allah, praising them, and appealing for their intercession. According to this account, Muhammad later retracted the verses at the behest of Gabriel.[n 7] Islamic scholars have weakened the hadith[91] and have denied the historicity of the incident as early as the tenth century.[92] In any event, relations between the Muslims and their pagan fellow-tribesmen were already deteriorated and worsening.

In 617 the leaders of Makhzum and Banu Abd-Shams, two important Quraysh clans, declared a public boycott against Banu Hashim, their commercial rival, to pressurize it into withdrawing its protection of Muhammad. The boycott lasted three years but eventually collapsed as it failed in its objective.[93][94] Isra and Mi'raj Main article: Isra and Mi'raj The Al-Aqsa Mosque, adjacent to the Dome of the Rock (along the southern wall of al-Haram ash-Sharif), is the site from which Muhammad is believed to have travelled to heaven and returned.

Islamic tradition relates that in 620, Muhammad experienced the Isra and Mi'raj, a miraculous journey said to have occurred with the angel Gabriel in one night. In the first part of the journey, the Isra, he is said to have travelled from Mecca on a winged horse to "the farthest mosque" (in Arabic: masjid al-aqsa), which Muslims usually identify with the Al-Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem. In the second part, the Mi'raj, Muhammad is said to have toured heaven and hell, and spoken with earlier prophets, such as Abraham, Moses, and Jesus.[95] Ibn Ishaq, author of the first biography of Muhammad, presents this event as a spiritual experience whereas later historians like Al-Tabari and Ibn Kathir present it as a physical journey.[95]

When he was transported to Heaven, he reported seeing an angel with "70,000 heads, each head having 70,000 mouths, each mouth having 70,000 tongues, each tongue speaking 70,000 languages; and every one involved in singing God's (Allah's) praises." After calculation this would mean the angel spoke 24 quintillion (2.401 × 1019) languages for the praise of Allah. This description is similar word for word to the description of an angel seen by Moses in "The Revelation of Moses" [96]

Some western scholars of Islam hold that the oldest Muslim tradition identified the journey as one traveled through the heavens from the sacred enclosure at Mecca to the celestial al-Baytu l-Maʿmur (heavenly prototype of the Kaaba); but later tradition identified Muhammad's journey from Mecca to Jerusalem.[97] Last years in Mecca before Hijra Muhammad's visit to Ta'if was his first attempt to spread Islam beyond Mecca.

Muhammad's wife Khadijah and his uncle Abu Talib both died in 619, the year thus being known as the "year of sorrow". With the death of Abu Talib, the leadership of the Banu Hashim clan was passed to Abu Lahab, an inveterate enemy of Muhammad. Soon afterwards, Abu Lahab withdrew the clan's protection from Muhammad. This placed Muhammad in danger of death since the withdrawal of clan protection implied that the blood revenge for his killing would not be exacted. Muhammad then visited Ta'if, another important city in Arabia, and tried to find a protector for himself there, but his effort failed and further brought him into physical danger.[10][94] Muhammad was forced to return to Mecca. A Meccan man named Mut'im b. Adi (and the protection of the tribe of Banu Nawfal) made it possible for him safely to re-enter his native city.[10][94] Persian manuscript miniature depicting Muhammad, from Rashid-al-Din Hamadani's Jami al-Tawarikh, approximately 1315, illustrating the episode of the Black Stone.[98]

Many people were visiting Mecca on business or as pilgrims to the Kaaba. Muhammad took this opportunity to look for a new home for himself and his followers. After several unsuccessful negotiations, he found hope with some men from Yathrib (later called Medina).[10] The Arab population of Yathrib were familiar with monotheism because a Jewish community existed there.[10] Converts to Islam came from nearly all Arab tribes in Medina, such that by June of the subsequent year there were seventy-five Muslims coming to Mecca for pilgrimage and to meet Muhammad. Meeting him secretly by night, the group made what was known as the "Second Pledge of al-`Aqaba", or the "Pledge of War"[99] Following the pledges at Aqabah, Muhammad encouraged his followers to emigrate to Yathrib. As with the migration to Abyssinia, the Quraysh attempted to stop the emigration. However, almost all Muslims managed to leave.[100]

Hijra Timeline of Muhammad in Medina c. 622 Emigrates to Medina (hijrah) 623 Caravan Raids begin 623 Al Kudr Invasion 624 Battle of Badr: Muslims defeat Meccans 624 Battle of Sawiq, Abu Sufyan escapes capture 624 Expulsion of Banu Qaynuqa 624 Invasion of Thi Amr, Muhammed raids Ghatafan tribes 624 Assassination of Khaled b. Sufyan & Abu Rafi 625 Battle of Uhud: Meccans defeat Muslims 625 Tragedy of Bir Maona and Al Raji 625 Invasion of Hamra al-Asad, successfully terrifies enemy to cause retreat 625 Banu Nadir expelled after Invasion 625 Invasion of Nejd, Badr and Dumatul Jandal 627 Battle of the Trench 627 Invasion of Banu Qurayza, successful siege 628 Treaty of Hudaybiyyah, gains access to Kaaba 628 Conquest of the Khaybar oasis 629 First hajj pilgrimage 629 Attack on Byzantine Empire fails: Battle of Mu'tah 630 Bloodless conquest of Mecca 630 Battle of Hunayn 630 Siege of Ta'if 631 Rules most of the Arabian peninsula 632 Attacks the Ghassanids: Tabuk 632 Farewell hajj pilgrimage 632 Wasal (June 8): Medina This box: view · talk · edit Main article: Hijra (Islam) Migration to Medina Main article: Muhammad in Medina

A delegation consisting of the representatives of the twelve important clans of Medina, invited Muhammad as a neutral outsider to Medina to serve as chief arbitrator for the entire community.[101][102] There was fighting in Yathrib mainly involving its Arab and Jewish inhabitants for around a hundred years before 620.[101] The recurring slaughters and disagreements over the resulting claims, especially after the Battle of Bu'ath in which all clans were involved, made it obvious to them that the tribal conceptions of blood-feud and an eye for an eye were no longer workable unless there was one man with authority to adjudicate in disputed cases.[101] The delegation from Medina pledged themselves and their fellow-citizens to accept Muhammad into their community and physically protect him as one of themselves.[10]

Muhammad instructed his followers to emigrate to Medina until virtually all his followers left Mecca. Being alarmed at the departure of Muslims, according to the tradition, the Meccans plotted to assassinate Muhammad. With the help of Ali, Muhammad fooled the Meccans who were watching him, and secretly slipped away from the town with Abu Bakr.[103] By 622, Muhammad emigrated to Medina, a large agricultural oasis. Those who migrated from Mecca along with Muhammad became known as muhajirun (emigrants).[10] Establishment of a new polity Wikisource has original text related to this article: Medina Charter Main article: Constitution of Medina

Among the first things Muhammad did in order to settle down the longstanding grievances among the tribes of Medina was drafting a document known as the Constitution of Medina, "establishing a kind of alliance or federation" among the eight Medinan tribes and Muslim emigrants from Mecca, which specified the rights and duties of all citizens and the relationship of the different communities in Medina (including that of the Muslim community to other communities, specifically the Jews and other "Peoples of the Book").[101][102] The community defined in the Constitution of Medina, Ummah, had a religious outlook but was also shaped by practical considerations and substantially preserved the legal forms of the old Arab tribes.[10] It effectively established the first Islamic state.

The first group of pagan converts to Islam in Medina were the clans who had not produced great leaders for themselves but had suffered from warlike leaders from other clans. This was followed by the general acceptance of Islam by the pagan population of Medina, apart from some exceptions. According to Ibn Ishaq, this was influenced by the conversion of Sa'd ibn Mu'adh (a prominent Medinan leader) to Islam.[104] Those Medinans who converted to Islam and helped the Muslim emigrants find shelter became known as the ansar (supporters).[10] Then Muhammad instituted brotherhood between the emigrants and the supporters and he chose Ali as his own brother.[105] Beginning of armed conflict Main article: Battle of Badr

Following the emigration, the Meccans seized the properties of the Muslim emigrants in Mecca.[106] Economically uprooted and with no available profession, the Muslim migrants turned to raiding Meccan caravans as an act of war, deliberately initiating armed conflict between the Muslims and Mecca.[107][108] Muhammad delivered Qur'anic verses permitting the Muslims to fight the Meccans (see sura Al-Hajj, Qur'an 22:39–40).[109] These attacks pressured Mecca by interfering with trade, and allowed the Muslims to acquire wealth, power and prestige while working towards their ultimate goal of inducing Mecca's submission to the new faith.[110][111] Alt text

Expeditions of Muhammad Ghazwah (expeditions where he took part)

Caravan Raids – Waddan – Buwat – Safwan – Dul Ashir – Badr – Kudr – Sawiq – Banu Qaynuqa – Ghatafan – Bahran – Uhud – Al-Asad – Banu Nadir – Invasion of Nejd – Invasion of Badr – 1st Jandal – Trench – Banu Qurayza – 2nd Banu Lahyan – Banu Mustaliq – Thi Qerd – Hudaybiyyah – Khaybar – Conquest of Fidak – 3rd Qura – Dhat al-Riqa – Mu'tah – Banu Baqra – Mecca – Hunayn – Autas – Ta'if – Hawazan – Tabouk

Sariyyah (expeditions which he ordered) Nakhla – Nejd – 1st Banu Asad – 1st Banu Lahyan – Al Raji – Bir Maona – Assassination of Abu Rafi – Maslamah – 2nd Banu Asad – 1st Banu Thalabah – 2nd Banu Thalabah – Dhu Qarad – Jumum – Al-Is – 3rd Banu Thalabah – 1st Qura – 2nd Jandal – Fidak – 2nd Qura – Uraynah – Hisma – Umar – Abu Bakr – Banu Murrah – Banu Uwal – Yemen – 3rd Fadak – Banu Sulaym – Kadid – v · d · e

In March of 624, Muhammad led some three hundred warriors in a raid on a Meccan merchant caravan. The Muslims set an ambush for them at Badr.[112] Aware of the plan, the Meccan caravan eluded the Muslims. Meanwhile, a force from Mecca was sent to protect the caravan, continuing forward to confront the Muslims upon hearing that the caravan was safe. The Battle of Badr began in March of 624.[113] Though outnumbered more than three to one, the Muslims won the battle, killing at least forty-five Meccans with only fourteen Muslims dead. They also succeeded in killing many Meccan leaders, including Abu Jahl.[114] Seventy prisoners had been acquired, many of whom were soon ransomed in return for wealth or freed.[107][115][116] Muhammad and his followers saw in the victory a confirmation of their faith.[10] The Qur'anic verses of this period, unlike the Meccan ones, dealt with practical problems of government and issues like the distribution of spoils.[117]

The victory strengthened Muhammad's position in Medina and dispelled earlier doubts among his followers. As a result the opposition to him became less vocal. Pagans who had not yet converted were very bitter about the advance of Islam. Two persons, Asma bint Marwan and Abu 'Afak had composed verses taunting and insulting the Muslims. They were killed by persons belonging to their own or related clans , but nothing was said and no blood-feud followed.[118]

Muhammad expelled from Medina the Banu Qaynuqa, one of three main Jewish tribes.[10] Following the Battle of Badr, Muhammad also made mutual-aid alliances with a number of Bedouin tribes to protect his community from attacks from the northern part of Hijaz.[10] Conflict with Mecca Main article: Battle of Uhud

The attack at Badr committed Muhammad to total war with Meccans, who were now anxious to avenge their defeat. To maintain their economic prosperity, the Meccans needed to restore their prestige, which had been lost at Badr.[119] In the ensuing months, Muhammad led expeditions on tribes allied with Mecca and sent out a raid on a Meccan caravan.[120] Abu Sufyan subsequently gathered an army of three thousand men and set out for an attack on Medina.[121] Mount Uhud, in north of Medina, was the site of the second battle between Muslim and Meccan forces.

A scout alerted Muhammad of the Meccan army's presence and numbers a day later. The next morning, at the Muslim conference of war, there was dispute over how best to repel the Meccans. Muhammad and many senior figures suggested that it would be safer to fight within Medina and take advantage of its heavily fortified strongholds. Younger Muslims argued that the Meccans were destroying their crops, and that huddling in the strongholds would destroy Muslim prestige. Muhammad eventually conceded to the wishes of the latter, and readied the Muslim force for battle. Thus, Muhammad led his force outside to the mountain of Uhud (where the Meccans had camped) and fought the Battle of Uhud on March 23.[122][123] Although the Muslim army had the best of the early encounters, indiscipline on the part of strategically placed archers led to a Muslim defeat, with 75 Muslims killed including Hamza, Muhammad's uncle and one of the best known martyrs in the Muslim tradition. The Meccans did not pursue the Muslims further, but marched back to Mecca declaring victory. They were not entirely successful, however, as they had failed to achieve their aim of completely destroying the Muslims.[124][125] The Muslims buried the dead, and returned to Medina that evening. Questions accumulated as to the reasons for the loss, and Muhammad subsequently delivered Qur'anic verses 3:152 which indicated that their defeat was partly a punishment for disobedience and partly a test for steadfastness.[126]

Abu Sufyan now directed his efforts towards another attack on Medina. He attracted the support of nomadic tribes to the north and east of Medina, using propaganda about Muhammad's weakness, promises of booty, memories of the prestige of the Quraysh and use of bribes.[127] Muhammad's policy was now to prevent alliances against him as much as he could. Whenever alliances of tribesmen against Medina were formed, he sent out an expedition to break them up.[127] When Muhammad heard of men massing with hostile intentions against Medina, he reacted with severity.[128] One example is the assassination of Ka'b ibn al-Ashraf, a chieftain of the Jewish tribe of Banu Nadir who had gone to Mecca and written poems that helped rouse the Meccans' grief, anger and desire for revenge after the Battle of Badr.[129] Around a year later, Muhammad expelled the Banu Nadir from Medina.[130] Muhammad's attempts to prevent formation of a confederation against him were unsuccessful, though he was able to increase his own forces and stop many potential tribes from joining his enemies.[131] Siege of Medina Main article: Battle of the Trench

With the help of the exiled Banu Nadir, the Quraysh military leader Abu Sufyan had mustered a force of 10,000 men. Muhammad prepared a force of about 3000 men and adopted a new form of defense unknown in Arabia at that time: the Muslims dug a trench wherever Medina lay open to cavalry attack. The idea is credited to a Persian convert to Islam, Salman the Persian. The siege of Medina began on March 31 627 and lasted for two weeks.[132] Abu Sufyan's troops were unprepared for the fortifications they were confronted with, and after an ineffectual siege lasting several weeks, the coalition decided to go home.[133] The Qur'an discusses this battle in sura Al-Ahzab, ayat (verses) 9-27, 33:9–27.[85] During the battle, the Jewish tribe of Banu Qurayza, located at the south of Medina, had entered into negotiations with Meccan forces to revolt against Muhammad. Although they were swayed by suggestions that Muhammad was sure to be overwhelmed, they desired reassurance in case the confederacy was unable to destroy him. No agreement was reached after the prolonged negotiations, in part due to sabotage attempts by Muhammad's scouts.[134] After the coalition's retreat, the Muslims accused the Banu Qurayza of treachery and besieged them in their forts for 25 days. The Banu Qurayza eventually surrendered and all the men, apart from a few who converted to Islam, were beheaded, while the women and children were enslaved.[135][136] Walid N. Arafat and Barakat Ahmad have disputed that the Banu Qurayza were killed on quite such a large scale.[137] Arafat disputes large-scale killings and argued that Ibn Ishaq gathered information from descendants of the Qurayza Jews, who embellished or manufactured the details of the incident. Arafat relates the testimony of Ibn Hajar, who denounced this and other accounts as "odd tales" and quoted Malik ibn Anas, a contemporary of Ibn Ishaq, whom he rejected as a "liar", an "impostor" and for seeking out the Jewish descendants for gathering information about Muhammad's campaign with their forefathers.[n 8] Ahmad argues that only some of the tribe were killed, while some of the fighters were merely enslaved.[138][139] Watt finds Arafat's arguments "not entirely convincing",[140] while Meir J. Kister has contradicted[clarification needed] the arguments of Arafat and Ahmad.[141]

In the siege of Medina, the Meccans exerted their utmost strength towards the destruction of the Muslim community. Their failure resulted in a significant loss of prestige; their trade with Syria was gone.[142] Following the Battle of the Trench, Muhammad made two expeditions to the north which ended without any fighting.[10] While returning from one of these (or some years earlier according to other early accounts), an accusation of adultery was made against Aisha, Muhammad's wife. Aisha was exonerated from the accusations when Muhammad announced that he had received a revelation confirming Aisha's innocence and directing that charges of adultery be supported by four eyewitnesses.[53] Truce of Hudaybiyyah Main article: Treaty of Hudaybiyyah

Although Muhammad had already delivered Qur'anic verses commanding the Hajj,[143] the Muslims had not performed it due to the enmity of the Quraysh. In the month of Shawwal 628, Muhammad ordered his followers to obtain sacrificial animals and to make preparations for a pilgrimage (umrah) to Mecca, saying that God had promised him the fulfillment of this goal in a vision where he was shaving his head after the completion of the Hajj.[144] Upon hearing of the approaching 1,400 Muslims, the Quraysh sent out a force of 200 cavalry to halt them. Muhammad evaded them by taking a more difficult route, thereby reaching al-Hudaybiyya, just outside of Mecca.[145] According to Watt, although Muhammad's decision to make the pilgrimage was based on his dream, he was at the same time demonstrating to the pagan Meccans that Islam does not threaten the prestige of their sanctuary, and that Islam was an Arabian religion.[145] Imprint of Muhammad's seal, used in letters sent to other heads of state. (Graphically enhanced.)

Negotiations commenced with emissaries going to and from Mecca. While these continued, rumors spread that one of the Muslim negotiators, Uthman bin al-Affan, had been killed by the Quraysh. Muhammad responded by calling upon the pilgrims to make a pledge not to flee (or to stick with Muhammad, whatever decision he made) if the situation descended into war with Mecca. This pledge became known as the "Pledge of Acceptance" (Arabic: بيعة الرضوان , bay'at al-ridhwān‎) or the "Pledge under the Tree". News of Uthman's safety, however, allowed for negotiations to continue, and a treaty scheduled to last ten years was eventually signed between the Muslims and Quraysh.[145][146] The main points of the treaty included the cessation of hostilities; the deferral of Muhammad's pilgrimage to the following year; and an agreement to send back any Meccan who had gone to Medina without the permission of their protector.[145]

Many Muslims were not satisfied with the terms of the treaty. However, the Qur'anic sura "Al-Fath" (The Victory) (Qur'an 48:1–29) assured the Muslims that the expedition from which they were now returning must be considered a victorious one.[147] It was only later that Muhammad's followers would realise the benefit behind this treaty. According to Welch, these benefits included the inducing of the Meccans to recognise Muhammad as an equal; a cessation of military activity posing well for the future; and gaining the admiration of Meccans who were impressed by the incorporation of the pilgrimage rituals.[10]

After signing the truce, Muhammad made an expedition against the Jewish oasis of Khaybar, known as the Battle of Khaybar. This was possibly due to it housing the Banu Nadir, who were inciting hostilities against Muhammad, or to regain some prestige to deflect from what appeared to some Muslims as the inconclusive result of the truce of Hudaybiyya.[121][148] According to Muslim tradition, Muhammad also sent letters to many rulers of the world, asking them to convert to Islam (the exact date is given variously in the sources).[10][149][150] Hence he sent messengers (with letters) to Heraclius of the Byzantine Empire (the eastern Roman Empire), Khosrau of Persia, the chief of Yemen and to some others.[149][150] In the years following the truce of Hudaybiyya, Muhammad sent his forces against the Arabs on Transjordanian Byzantine soil in the Battle of Mu'tah, in which the Muslims were defeated.[151] Final years Conquest of Mecca Main articles: Conquest of Mecca and Muhammad after the conquest of Mecca A depiction of Muhammad advancing on Mecca from Siyer-i Nebi, a 16th-century Ottoman manuscript. The angels Gabriel, Michael, Israfil and Azrail, are also shown. The destruction of idols at the Kaaba by Muhammad, in L'Histoire Merveilleuse en Vers de Mahomet, anonymous 16th or 17th-century illustration. An anonymous artist's illustration of al-Bīrūnī's The Remaining Signs of Past Centuries, depicting Muhammad prohibits intercalary months during the Farewell Pilgrimage, found in a 17th-century Ottoman copy of a 14th-century (Ilkhanate) manuscript (Edinburgh codex).

The truce of Hudaybiyyah had been enforced for two years.[152][153] The tribe of Banu Khuza'a had good relations with Muhammad, whereas their enemies, the Banu Bakr, had an alliance with the Meccans.[152][153] A clan of the Bakr made a night raid against the Khuza'a, killing a few of them.[152][153] The Meccans helped the Banu Bakr with weapons and, according to some sources, a few Meccans also took part in the fighting.[152] After this event, Muhammad sent a message to Mecca with three conditions, asking them to accept one of them. These were that either the Meccans paid blood money for those slain among the Khuza'ah tribe; or, that they should disavow themselves of the Banu Bakr; or, that they should declare the truce of Hudaybiyyah null.[154]

The Meccans replied that they would accept only the last condition.[154] However, soon they realized their mistake and sent Abu Sufyan to renew the Hudaybiyyah treaty, but now his request was declined by Muhammad.

Muhammad began to prepare for a campaign.[155] In 630, Muhammad marched on Mecca with an enormous force, said to number more than ten thousand men. With minimal casualties, Muhammad took control of Mecca.[156] He declared an amnesty for past offences, except for ten men and women who had mocked and ridiculed him in songs and verses. Some of these were later pardoned.[157] Most Meccans converted to Islam and Muhammad subsequently destroyed all the statues of Arabian gods in and around the Kaaba.[158][159] The Qur'an discusses the conquest of Mecca.[85][160] Conquest of Arabia Main articles: Battle of Hunayn and Battle of Tabouk

Soon after the conquest of Mecca, Muhammad was alarmed by a military threat from the confederate tribes of Hawazin who were collecting an army twice the size of Muhammad's. The Banu Hawazin were old enemies of the Meccans. They were joined by the Banu Thaqif (inhabiting the city of Ta'if) who adopted an anti-Meccan policy due to the decline of the prestige of Meccans.[161] Muhammad defeated the Hawazin and Thaqif tribes in the Battle of Hunayn.[10]

In the same year, Muhammad made the expedition of Tabuk against northern Arabia because of their previous defeat at the Battle of Mu'tah as well as reports of the hostile attitude adopted against Muslims. Although Muhammad did not make contact with hostile forces at Tabuk, he received the submission of some local chiefs of the region.[10][162]

A year after the Battle of Tabuk, the Banu Thaqif sent emissaries to Medina to surrender to Muhammad and adopt Islam. Many bedouins submitted to Muhammad in order to be safe against his attacks and to benefit from the booties of the wars.[10] However, the bedouins were alien to the system of Islam and wanted to maintain their independence, their established code of virtue and their ancestral traditions. Muhammad thus required of them a military and political agreement according to which they "acknowledge the suzerainty of Medina, to refrain from attack on the Muslims and their allies, and to pay the Zakat, the Muslim religious levy."[163] Farewell pilgrimage and death Main article: The Farewell Pilgrimage

At the end of the tenth year after the migration to Medina, Muhammad carried through his first truly Islamic pilgrimage, thereby teaching his followers the rites of the annual Great Pilgrimage (Hajj).[10] The tombstone of Muhammad in the quarters of his third wife, Aisha. (Al-Masjid al-Nabawi, Medina)

After completing the pilgrimage, Muhammad delivered a famous speech known as The Farewell Sermon. In this sermon, Muhammad advised his followers not to follow certain pre-Islamic customs such as adding intercalary months to align the lunar calendar with the solar calendar. Muhammad abolished all old blood feuds and disputes based on the former tribal system and asked for all old pledges to be returned as implications of the creation of the new Islamic community. Commenting on the vulnerability of women in his society, Muhammed asked his male followers to “Be good to women; for they are powerless captives (awan) in your households. You took them in God’s trust, and legitimated your sexual relations with the Word of God, so come to your senses people, and hear my words ...”. He also told them that they were entitled to discipline their wives but should do so with kindness. Muhammad also addressed the issue of inheritance by forbidding false claims of paternity or of a client relationship to the deceased and also forbidding his followers to leave their wealth to a testamentary heir. He also upheld the sacredness of four lunar months in each year.[164][165] According to Sunni tafsir, the following Qur'anic verse was delivered in this incident: “Today I have perfected your religion, and completed my favours for you and chosen Islam as a religion for you.”(Qur'an 5:3)[10] According to Shia tafsir, it refers to appointment of Ali ibn Abi Talib at the pond of Khumm as Muhammad's successor, this occurring a few days later when Muslims were returning from Mecca to Medina.[166]

A few months after the farewell pilgrimage, Muhammad fell ill and suffered for several days with head pain and weakness. He died on Monday, June 8, 632, in Medina, at the age of 63.[167] With his head resting on Aisha's lap he murmured his final words soon after asking her to dispose of his last worldly goods, which were seven coins:

Rather, God on High and paradise.[167]
—Muhammad

He is buried where he died, which was in Aisha's house and is now housed within the Mosque of the Prophet in the city of Medina.[10][168][169] Next to Muhammad's tomb, there is another empty tomb that Muslims believe awaits Jesus.[169][170] Aftermath See also: Rashidun, Muslim conquest, and Succession to Muhammad Conquests of Muhammad and the Rashidun.

Muhammad united the tribes of Arabia into a single Arab Muslim religious polity in the last years of his life. With Muhammad's death, disagreement broke out over who would succeed him as leader of the Muslim community.[12] Umar ibn al-Khattab, a prominent companion of Muhammad, nominated Abu Bakr, Muhammad's friend and collaborator. Others added their support and Abu Bakr was made the first caliph. This choice was disputed by some of Muhammad's companions, who held that Ali ibn Abi Talib, his cousin and son-in-law, had been designated the successor by Muhammad at Ghadir Khumm. Abu Bakr's immediate task was to make an expedition against the Byzantine (or Eastern Roman Empire) forces because of the previous defeat, although he first had to put down a rebellion by Arab tribes in an episode referred to by later Muslim historians as the Ridda wars, or "Wars of Apostasy".[171]

The pre-Islamic Middle East was

Muhammad, the Messenger of God

Muslims believe that Islam completes the revelation of God’s finalmessage to man through the Prophet Muhammad Praise Be Unto Him (PBUH) andthe Holy Qur’an. For Muslims, God began His message with Judaism andChristianity, and Islam is the capstone of the monotheistic tradition.The Prophet’s name means "the praised one" or "he who is glorified" andtraditionally every mention of the Prophet by name is followed by one ofseveral invocations. Usually it is sufficient to say ‘alayhis-salam’ or‘Peace be upon him’ (PBUH). The Prophet is a descendant of the ProphetsIbrahim (Abraham) and Ismail (Ishmael). His father was Abdullah, the sonof Abdel Mutalib and the grandson of Hashem who was the founder of theHashemite clan.
As the Prophet was born after his father’s death, and in keeping withpre-Islamic tribal law, he was unable to inherit from his father and wassent to be raised with a Bedouin foster mother, Halima al-Sa’diya, in thedesert. The Prophet returned to Mecca under the care of his uncle AbuTalib, and as a young man, he earned a reputation for resolvinginter-tribal differences. In fact, he was known within his Quraysh tribeas al-Sadeq al-Ameen, or ‘the honest, the trustworthy’. When he wastwenty-five he married Khadija who bore the Prophet two sons that died ininfancy, and four daughters.

When the Prophet was forty years old, having already experienced visions,he received the first revelation of the Qur’an and the Divine message bythe Angel Gabriel in a cave. His wife was the first to convert, followedby his young cousin ‘Ali, the son of Abu Talib, and Zeid his servant. TheProphet Muhammad (PBUH) first began to publicly preach to his own clanthe Hashemites, and the first to convert from outside his family was AbuBakr, his friend and influential merchant dealer. As the message spreadand the followers of the new religion grew, so did the opposition in thecity of Mecca. The city was at the time the center of trade andpilgrimage because of the Ka’aba, which held for the Meccans many sacredobjects and idols of worship.

With time, resistance to Islam became hostile and despite the ban placedon the Hashemite clan the Prophet remained uncompromising in his messageof monotheism. To escape persecution many Muslims left Mecca, andeventually so too did the Prophet when it was realized that his life wasin danger. With many of his followers already established in al-Medinaal-Munawwara, the Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) emigrated under the cover ofdarkness in order to evade the search parties. This celebrated journey(622 CE) became known as the Hijra (emigration) and was later designatedto mark the first year of the Muslim calendar, as the Prophet’s arrivalin Medina marked the first Islamic state. Al-Medina al-Munawwarathereafter became known as the ‘city of the Prophet’.

Over the next six years the Prophet lived in Medina, spreading the wordof Islam and practicing its teachings. Soon, it became apparent that theMuslims would have to face the Meccans in the field of battle in order tofurther spread God’s message. In March 624 CE, against a superior force,the Muslims defeated the idol worshipping Meccans at the Battle of Badr,however only a year later the Muslims were defeated in the disastrousBattle of Uhud. In 628 CE the Prophet with 1000 men entered the walls ofMecca and soon afterwards the Prophet was acknowledged as the leader.Fully established in Mecca, the Messenger of God sent great expeditionsto the north of Arabia, inviting others to enter into Islam. This marksthe beginning of Islam’s expansion towards Syria and Persia.

The ninth year of the Hijra (632 CE) is known as the "Year ofDeputations" when delegates came from all over Arabia to enter intoIslam. On June 8 of that year, the Prophet died and was buried inaccordance to his wishes, in his house. The expansion of Islam continuedextending from as far West as Spain to as far East as India within onehundred years. Today there are around a billion Muslims in the world.

BIOGRAPHY: Muhammad was born in about 570 in the city of Mecca, an important trading center in western Arabia. He was a member of the Hashim clan of the powerful Quraysh tribe. Because Muhammad's father, Abd Allah, died before he was born and his mother, Amina, when he was 6 years old, he was placed in the care of his grandfather Abd al-Muttalib and, after 578, of his uncle Abu Talib, who succeeded as head of the Hashim clan. At the age of about 25, Muhammad entered the employ of a rich widow, Khadijah, in her commercial enterprise. They were married soon after. Two sons, both of whom died young, and four daughters were born. One of the daughters, Fatima, acquired special prominence in later Islamic history because of her marriage to Muhammad's cousin Ali.

In about 610, Muhammad, while in a cave on Mount Hira outside Mecca, had a vision in which he was called on to preach the message entrusted to him by God. Further revelations came to him intermittently over the remaining years of his life, and these revelations constitute the text of the Koran. The opening verses of chapters 96 and 74 are generally recognized as the oldest of these revelations; Muhammad's vision is mentioned in 53:118 and 81:1925, and the night of the first revelation in 97:15 and 44:3. At first in private and then publicly, Muhammad began to proclaim his message: that there is but one God and that Muhammad is his messenger sent to warn people of the Judgment Day and to remind them of God's goodness.

The Meccans responded with hostility to Muhammad's monotheism and iconoclasm. As long as Abu Talib was alive, Muhammad was protected by the Hashim, even though that clan was the object of a boycott by other Quraysh after 616. In about 619, however, Abu Talib died, and the new clan leader was unwilling to continue the protective arrangement. At about the same time, Muhammad lost another staunch supporter, his wife Khadijah. In the face of persecution and curtailed freedom to preach, Muhammad and some 70 followers reached the decision to sever their ties of blood kinship in Mecca and to move to Medina, a city approximately 400 km (250 mi) to the north. This move, called the hegira, or hijra (an Arabic word meaning "emigration"), took place in 622, the first year of the Muslim calendar. (Muslim dates are usually preceded by AH, anno hegirae, the year of the hegira.)

In Medina an organized Muslim community gradually came into existence under Muhammad's leadership. Attacks on caravans from Mecca led to war with the Meccans. Muhammad's followers obtained (624) victory at Badr but were defeated at Uhud a year later. In 627, however, they successfully defended Medina against a siege by 10,000 Meccans. Clashes with three Jewish clans in Medina occurred in this same period. One of these clans, the Banu Qurayza, was accused of plotting against Muhammad during the siege of Medina; in retaliation all of the clan's men were killed and the women and children sold into slavery. Two years later, in the oasis of Khaybar, a different fate befell another Jewish group: after defeat they were allowed to remain there for the price of half their annual harvest of dates.

Since 624 (AH 2) the Muslims of Medina had been facing Mecca during worship (earlier, they had apparently turned toward Jerusalem). Mecca was considered of primary importance to the Muslim community because of the presence there of the Kaaba. This sanctuary was then a pagan shrine, but according to the Koran (2:12429), it had been built by Abraham and his son Ishmael and therefore had to be reintegrated in Muslim society. An attempt to go on pilgrimage to Mecca in 628 was unsuccessful, but at that time an arrangement was made allowing the Muslims to make the pilgrimage the next year, on condition that all parties cease armed hostilities. Incidents in 629 ended the armistice, and in January 630, Muhammad and his men marched on Mecca. The Quraysh offer to surrender was accepted with a promise of general amnesty, and hardly any fighting occurred. Muhammad's generosity to a city that had earlier forced him out is often cited as an example of remarkable magnanimity.

In his final years Muhammad continued his political and military involvements, making arrangements with nomadic tribes ready to accept Islam and sending expeditions against hostile groups. A few months after a farewell pilgrimage to Mecca in March 632 he fell ill. Muhammad died on June 8, 632 (12 Rabi I AH 11) in the presence of his favorite wife, Aisha, whose father, Abu Bakr, became the first caliph.

--Willem A. Bijlefeld, Grolier Online

Muhammad married his first wife when he was 26 years of age.
His family were of the Banu Hashim
Prophet of Allah

Ibn Abd Allah Ibn Abd al-Muttalib Ibn Hashim

Pertencente àquela família dos Banû Hâshim nasceu, naquele ano de 570, um menino, já órfão de pai quando do seu nascimento, e a quem o seu avô paterno e prestigiado governante de Meca, ‘Abd al-Muttalib, deu o nome, então desconhecido entre os árabes, de MUHAMMAD, significando em árabe, ‘o digno de louvor’.
Foi criado entre os nómadas do deserto, quando criança pequena, pela sua mãe de leite, também ela uma nómada. Continuou ainda a viver com os nómadas mais algum tempo depois da morte da sua verdadeira mãe.
Quando regressou a Meca, foi criado e protegido, como se de um filho se tratasse, por seu avô ‘Abd al-Muttalib e, após a morte deste, pelo seu tio Abû Tâlib.
Será com este último que ele, já na sua juventude, fará as suas primeiras participações nas caravanas anuais que o seu clã organizava.

1 NAME Mohammed the /Prophet/
2 GIVN Mohammed the
2 SURN Prophet


Mohammed had ten wives altogether. Only by his first wife did he have children. Muhammed's only grandchildren were by his daughters Zaynab and Fatima.

Muhammad
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 [[Category:Wikipedia overwrite]]
Muhammad (Arabic: ????? mu?ammad; also Mohammed, Mohamet, and other variants[1][2]) (570-632 AD)[3][4] was an Arab religious, political and military leader who founded Islam and the Muslim community (Arabic: ??? Ummah). He united the tribes of the Arabian Peninsula into a federation of allied tribes with its capital at Medina.

According to Islamic traditions, Muhammad began receiving revelations from God (Arabic: ???? Allah) from the age of 40, delivered through the angel Gabriel over the last 23 years of his life. The content of these revelations, known as the Qur'an,[5] was memorized and recorded by his followers and compiled into a single Book shortly after his death. The Qur'an, along with the details of Muhammad’s life as recounted by his biographers and his contemporaries, forms the basis of Islamic theology. Within Islam, he is considered the last and most important prophet of God.[6] Muslims do not regard him as the founder of a new religion but as the restorer of the original monotheistic faith of Adam, Abraham and other prophets, [7][8][9][10][11] whose messages, according to some, had become misinterpreted or corrupted over time. [12]

After Muhammad, a rapid creation of an empire under the Umayyads established a new polity from the Atlantic to the Indus River. Within a few decades of his death, his successors united all of Arabia in an Islamic empire which conquered the Sassanid and Byzantine empires. With historically unprecedented swiftness, they conquered present-day Iran, Iraq, Egypt, Palestine, Syria, Armenia, and most of Byzantine-held North Africa. The Caliphate soon pressed on to the Iberian Peninsula in the west, and much of Central Asia and Sindh (present day Pakistan) in the east. By 750, Islam was as fully established as the other two Abrahamic belief systems, Judaism and Christianity, and at which time, it was the world's greatest military power.[citation needed]
Contents
[hide]

* 1 Etymology
* 2 Overview
* 3 Sources for Muhammad's life
* 4 Modern Western Academic view of Muhammad
* 5 Life based on Islamic traditions
o 5.1 Before Medina
+ 5.1.1 Genealogy
+ 5.1.2 Childhood
+ 5.1.3 Middle years
+ 5.1.4 The Beginnings of the Qur'an
+ 5.1.5 Rejection
+ 5.1.6 Isra and Miraj
+ 5.1.7 Hijra to Ethiopia
o 5.2 Muhammad in Medina
+ 5.2.1 Hijra to Medina
+ 5.2.2 Beginnings of conflict
+ 5.2.3 The conflict with Mecca
+ 5.2.4 Muhammad and the Jewish tribes of Medina
+ 5.2.5 The truce of Hudaybiyya
+ 5.2.6 Muhammad's letters to the Heads of State
o 5.3 Conquest of Mecca
+ 5.3.1 Unification of Arabia
+ 5.3.2 Death
o 5.4 Muhammad as a military leader
o 5.5 Family life
o 5.6 Companions
* 6 Muhammad the reformer
* 7 Miracles in the Muslim biographies
* 8 Traditional views of Muhammad
o 8.1 Seal of the Prophets
o 8.2 More traditions
o 8.3 Depictions of Muhammad
o 8.4 Muslim veneration of Muhammad
o 8.5 Other religious traditions in regard to Muhammad
* 9 See also
* 10 Notes
* 11 References
o 11.1 Encyclopedias
* 12 Further reading
* 13 External links

Etymology
"Muhammad" in Arabic calligraphy.
"Muhammad" in Arabic calligraphy.

The name Muhammad etymologically means "the praised one" in Arabic.[13] Within Islam, Muhammad is known as Nabi (Prophet) and Rasul (Messenger). Although the Qur'an sometimes declines to make a distinction among prophets, in verse 33:40 it singles out Muhammad as the "Seal of the Prophets" (33:40).[14] The Qur'an also refers to Muhammad as "Ahmad" (61:6) (Arabic :????), Arabic for "more praiseworthy".

Overview

Born to ‘Abdu’llah ibn ‘Abdu’l-Muttalib, Muhammad initially adopted the occupation of a shepherd, and later became a merchant. In his youth, he was called by the nickname "Al-Amin" (Arabic: ?????? ), a common Arab name meaning "faithful, trustworthy" and was sought out as an impartial arbitrator.[9][4] During the month of Ramadan, Muhammad would retreat to a cave located at the summit of Mount Hira, just outside Mecca in the Arabian Hijaz, where he fasted and prayed. According to Islamic belief, when Muhammad was about forty (610 CE), Archangel Gabriel visited him in the cave and commanded him to recite verses sent by God. These revelations continued until his death twenty-three years later. The collection of these verses is known as the Qur'an.

He expanded his mission as a prophet, publicly preaching strict monotheism, preaching against the social evils of his day, and warning of a Day of Judgment when all humans shall be held responsible for their deeds.[4]

After ignoring Muhammad's preaching, the elites in Mecca, commercially threatened by the growing popularity of his message, persecuted Muhammad and his followers. This continued, and intensified, over more than a decade. The hardships reached a new level for Muhammad after the deaths of his wife Khadija and his uncle Abu Talib, an important political protector of Muhammad. Eventually, in 622, he left Mecca in a journey known to Muslims as the Hijra (the Migration).[4] He settled in the area of Yathrib (now known as Medina) with his followers, where he was the leader of the first Muslim community.

Eight years of war between Muhammad and Meccan forces followed, ending with the Muslim victory and conquest of Mecca. The Muslims subsequently removed everything they considered idolatrous from the Kaaba. Most of the townspeople accepted Islam. In March 632, Muhammad led the pilgrimage known as the Hajj. On returning to Medina he fell ill and died after a few days, on June 8.

Under the caliphs who assumed authority after his death, the Islamic empire expanded into Palestine, Syria, Mesopotamia, Persia, Egypt, North Africa, southern Spain, and Anatolia. Later conquests, commercial contact between Muslims and non-Muslims, and missionary activity spread Islam over much of the Eastern Hemisphere, including China and Southeast Asia.

Sources for Muhammad's life

Main article: Historiography of early Islam

The dates often given for Muhammad's life are 570-632 AD/CE. The earliest surviving biography of Muhammad is a collection of hadith called the Sirah Rasul Allah or, the Life of the Apostle of God, by Ibn Ishaq, a member of the Tabi‘in generation who was born 85 years after Hijra — approximately 717 — and who died in 767.

Other sources for biographies of Muhammad are:

* the Ibn Hisham's Prophetic Sirah (Arabic: ?????? ???????), which is a detailed trace of the Prophet's lineage and life
* the military chronicles of Waqidi (745-822)
* the biographies of Ibn Sa'd (783-845), a student of Waqidi
* later histories
* Qur'anic commentaries
* collections of Prophetic hadith

These texts were recorded more than a century, and often several centuries, after the death of Muhammad. The Qur'an is generally considered by academic scholars to record the words spoken by Muhammad.[15] The Qur'an (a word that literally translates as "Recitation") was also maintained by the "Hafiz", people who memorized the entire document and recited it.

Modern Western Academic view of Muhammad
The neutrality of this section is disputed.
Please see the discussion on the talk page.

Main article: Non-Islamic view of Muhammad's historicity

11th century Persian Qur'an folio page in kufic script
11th century Persian Qur'an folio page in kufic script

From a scholarly point of view, the most credible source providing information on events in Muhammad's life is the Qur'an, even though its chronological interpretation is complex, and even though it contains very little in the way of coherent biography.[citation needed] Next in importance are the traditional Muslim biographies of Muhammad and quotes attributed to him (the sira and hadith literature), which provide further information on Muhammad's life.[16] All, or most, of the Qur'an was apparently written down by Muhammad's secretaries while he was alive, but it was, then as now, primarily an orally related document, and the written compilation of the whole Qur'an in its definite form as we have it now was completed early after the death of Muhammad.[17] The earliest surviving written sira (Biographies of Muhammad and quotes attributed to him) dates to 150 years after Muhammad, the compilation and (critical) analysis of which took place even later.[18]

Modern historians agree that Muhammad lived during the 7th century and adopted various monotheistic traditions in an effort to replace the common polytheistic religions of the Arabian Peninsula, eventually gaining wide acceptance as a prophet.[citation needed]

Life based on Islamic traditions

Islam
Mosque
Beliefs

Allah – Oneness of God
Muhammad – Seal of Prophets
Prophets of Islam • Resurrection
Practices

Profession of Faith • Prayer
Fasting • Charity • Pilgrimage
History & Leaders

Muslim history
Ahl al-Bayt • Sahaba
Rashidun Caliphs • Shia Imams
Texts & Laws

Qur'an • Sunnah • Hadith
Fiqh • Sharia • Kalam • Tasawwuf
Major branches

Sunni • Shia
Culture & Society

Academics • Art • Philosophy
Science • Architecture • Mosques
Women • Calendar • Festivals
Demographics • Politics
See also

Glossary of Islamic terms
This box: view • talk • edit

Most Muslims, and Western academics who trust Islamic traditions, accept a much more detailed version of Muhammad's life.

Before Medina

Main article: Muhammad before Medina

Genealogy

Main article: Family tree of Muhammad

Muhammad traced his genealogy as follows:

Muhammad was born into the Quraysh tribe. He is the son of Abd Allah, who is son of Abd al-Muttalib (Shaiba) son of Hashim (Amr) ibn Abd Manaf (al-Mughira) son of Qusai (Zaid) ibn Kilab ibn Murra son of Ka'b ibn Lu'ay son of Ghalib ibn Fahr (Quraish) son of Malik ibn an-Nadr (Qais) the son of Kinana son of Khuzaimah son of Mudrikah (Amir) son of Ilyas son of Mudar son of Nizar son of Ma'ad ibn Adnan, whom the northern Arabs believed to be their common ancestor. Adnan in turn is said to have been a descendant of Ishmael, son of Abraham. (ibn means "son of" in Arabic; alternate names of people with two names are given in parentheses.)[19]

He was also called Abu-Qaasim (meaning "father of Qaasim") by some, after his short-lived first son.

Childhood

Muhammad was born into an affluent family settled in the northern Arabian town of Mecca. Tradition places it in the Year of the Elephant, commonly identified with 570. Some[citation needed] calculate his birthday as 20 April of that year, while Shi'a Muslims believe it to have been 26 April 570. Other sources calculate the year of his birth to have been 571. Muhammad's father, Abdullah, had died almost six months before he was born and the young boy was brought up by his paternal grandfather Abd al-Muttalib, of the Banu Hashim clan of the Quraysh tribe. At the age of six, Muhammad lost his mother Amina and became fully orphaned. "Many years later, when he was exiled by his Meccan opponents, on his first pilgrimage from Medina to Mecca, he stopped at his mother's grave and cried bitterly, bringing tears to the eyes of his companions."[20] When he was eight years of age, his grandfather Abd al-Muttalib, who had become his guardian, also died. Muhammad now came under the care of his uncle Abu Talib, the new leader of the Hashim clan of the Quraish tribe, the most powerful in Mecca.

Mecca was a thriving commercial center, due in great part to a shrine (now called the Kaaba) that housed statues of many Arabian gods. [citation needed] Merchants from various tribes would visit Mecca during the pilgrimage season, when all inter-tribal warfare was forbidden and they could trade in safety. While still in his teens, Muhammad began accompanying his uncle on trading journeys to Syria. He thus became well-travelled and knowledgeable about foreign ways.[citation needed]

Middle years

Muhammad became a merchant. He "was involved in trade between the Indian ocean and the Mediterranean Sea."[21] He gained a reputation for reliability and honesty that attracted a proposal from Khadijah, a forty-year-old widow in 595.[21] Muhammad consented to the marriage, which by all accounts was a happy one.

Ibn Ishaq records that Khadijah bore Muhammad six children: three sons named Al Qasem, Abdullah (who is also called Al Tayeb and Al Taher) and Ibrahim, and four daughters. He was also called Abul Qasim (father of Qasim) after his eldest son Qasim, according to Arab customs. All of Khadija's children were born before Muhammad reported receiving his first revelation. His son Qasim died at the age of two. The four daughters are said to be Zainab, Ruqayyah, Umm Kulthum, and Fatima.

The Shi'a say that Muhammad had only the one daughter, Fatima, and that the other daughters were either children of Khadijah by her previous marriage, or children of her sister.

The Beginnings of the Qur'an
The mountain of Hira where, according to Muslim tradition, Muhammad received his first revelation.
The mountain of Hira where, according to Muslim tradition, Muhammad received his first revelation.

Muhammad often retreated to Mount Hira near Mecca. Islamic tradition holds that the angel Gabriel began communicating with him here in the year 610 and commanded Muhammad to recite the following verses:[22]

Proclaim! (or read!) in the name of thy Lord and Cherisher, Who created- Created man, out of a (mere) clot of congealed blood: Proclaim! And thy Lord is Most Bountiful,- He Who taught (the use of) the pen,- Taught man that which he knew not.[23]

Upon receiving the first revelation he was scared, and when he returned home he related the event to his wife Khadijah. He was consoled and reassured by Khadijah and her Christian cousin, Waraqah ibn Nawfal. Waraqah was immediately enthusiastic, but Khadijah proceeded more cautiously, and was only satisfied that the revelations had indeed come from a good source after the conclusion of a test she had devised to determine that very thing. This was followed by a pause of three years during which Muhammad had gave himself up further to prayers and spiritual practices. When the revelations resumed he was reassured and commanded to begin preaching.[24][25]

According to Welch, the revelations were accompanied by mysterious seizures.[9] Muhammad was confident that he could distinguish his own thoughts from these messages.[26]

Rejection

His wife Khadijah and Waraqah, were the first to believe that Muhammad was a prophet. They were soon followed by Muhammad's ten-year-old cousin Ali ibn Abi Talib, close friend Abu Bakr and adopted son Zaid bin Muhammad (later known as Zaid bin Haarith.)

Around 613, Muhammad began to preach amongst Meccans most of whom ignored it and a few mocked him, while some others became his followers. There were three main groups of early converts to Islam: younger brothers and sons of great merchants; people who had fallen out of the first rank in their tribe or failed to attain it; and the weak, mostly unprotected foreigners.[27]

As the ranks of Muhammad's followers swelled, he became a threat to the local tribes and the rulers of the city, whose wealth rested upon the Kaaba, the focal point of Meccan religious life, which Muhammad threatened to overthrow. Muhammad’s denunciation of the Meccan traditional religion was especially offensive to his own tribe, the Quraysh, as they were the guardians of the Ka'aba. The great merchants tried to come to some arrangements with Muhammad in exchange for abandoning his preaching. They offered him admission into the inner circle of merchants and establishing his position in the circle by an advantageous marriage. [28] Some of Muhammad's followers fled to the Ethiopian Kingdom of Aksum and founded a small colony there under the protection of the Christian Ethiopian king. (See Islam in Ethiopia).

Several suras and parts of suras are said to date from this time, and reflect its circumstances: see for example al-Masadd, al-Humaza, parts of Maryam and al-Anbiya, al-Kafirun, and Abasa.

In 619, the "year of sorrows", both Muhammad's wife Khadijah and his uncle Abu Talib died. The relationship between Muhammad's group of followers and Muhammad's own Quraysh clan, which were already bad, worsened still further.[29] The controversial Satanic verses incident, if it happened, happened at this time. [30]

Isra and Miraj

Main article: Isra and Mi'raj

A 16th century Persian miniature painting celebrating Muhammad's ascent into the Heavens, a journey known as the Miraj. Muhammad's face is veiled, a common practice in Islamic art.
A 16th century Persian miniature painting celebrating Muhammad's ascent into the Heavens, a journey known as the Miraj. Muhammad's face is veiled, a common practice in Islamic art.

Some time in 620, Muhammad told his followers that he had experienced the Isra and Miraj, a miraculous journey said to have been accomplished in one night along with Angel Gabriel. In the first part of the journey, the Isra, he is said to have travelled from Mecca to "the farthest mosque" (in Arabic: masjid al-aqsa), which Muslims usually identify with the Temple Mount in Jerusalem. In the second part, the Miraj, Muhammad is said to have toured heaven and hell, and spoken with earlier prophets, such as Abraham, Moses, and Jesus. Ibn Ishaq, author of first biography of Muhammad, presents this event as a spiritual experience while later historians like Al-Tabari and Ibn Kathir present it as a physical journey.[31] Those Muslims subscribing to the latter view consider the place under the Dome of the Rock the site from which Muhammad ascended to heaven.
Timeline of Muhammad
Important dates and locations in the life of Muhammad
c. 569 Death of his father, `Abd Allah
c. 570 Possible date of birth, April 20: Mecca
570 Legendary unsuccessful Ethiopian attack on Mecca
576 Death of Mother
578 Death of Grandfather
c. 583 Takes trading journeys to Syria
c. 595 Meets and marries Khadijah
610 First reports of Qur'anic revelation: Mecca
c. 610 Appears as Prophet of Islam: Mecca
c. 613 Begins spreading message of Islam publicly: Mecca
c. 614 Begins to gather following: Mecca
c. 615 Emigration of Muslims to Ethiopia
616 Banu Hashim clan boycott begins
c. 618 Medinan Civil War: Medina
619 Banu Hashim clan boycott ends
619 The year of sorrows: Khadijah and Abu Talib die
c. 620 Isra and Miraj
622 Emigrates to Medina (Hijra)
624 Battle of Badr Muslims defeat Meccans
624 Expulsion of Banu Qaynuqa
625 Battle of Uhud Meccans battle Muslims
625 Expulsion of Banu Nadir
626 Attack on Dumat al-Jandal: Syria
627 Battle of the Trench
627 Destruction of Banu Qurayza
627 Bani Kalb subjugation: Dumat al-Jandal
628 Treaty of Hudaybiyya
c. 628 Gains access to Mecca shrine Kaaba
628 Conquest of the Khaybar oasis
629 First hajj pilgrimage
629 Attack on Byzantine empire fails: Battle of Mu'tah
630 Attacks and bloodlessly captures Mecca
c. 630 Battle of Hunayn
c. 630 Siege of Taif
630 Establishes theocracy: Conquest of Mecca
c. 631 Rules most of the Arabian peninsula
c. 632 Attacks the Ghassanids: Tabuk
632 Farewell hajj pilgrimage
632 Death (June 8): Medina

Hijra to Ethiopia

Main article: Migration to Abyssinia

In 615 AD/CE, a band of Muslims were counseled by the Prophet Muhammad to escape persecution in Mecca and travel to Ethiopia, which was ruled by a Christian king. (see Islam in Ethiopia) In that year, his followers were fleeing from Mecca's leading tribe, the Quraish, who sent emissaries to bring them back to Arabia, but the King of Ethiopia protected Muhammad's followers. Since then, Muhammad himself instructed his followers who came to Ethiopia, to respect and protect Ethiopia as well as live in peace with Ethiopian Christians. Accordingly, some scholars state that Ethiopia was the country that saved Islam from its near destruction and termination.

Muhammad in Medina

Hijra to Medina

Main article: Migration to Medina
Main article: Muhammad in Medina

By 622, Muhammad then emigrated to Medina, then known as Yathrib, a large agricultural oasis where there were a number of Muslim converts. By breaking the link with his own tribe, Muhammad demonstrated that tribal and family loyalties were insignificant compared to the bonds of Islam, a revolutionary idea in the tribal society of Arabia. This Hijra or emigration (traditionally translated into English as "flight") marks the beginning of the Islamic calendar. The Muslim calendar counts dates from the Hijra, which is why Muslim dates have the suffix AH (After Hijra).

Muhammad came to Medina as a mediator, invited to resolve the feud between the Arab factions of Aws and Khazraj. He ultimately did so by absorbing both factions into his Muslim community, forbidding bloodshed among Muslims. However, Medina was also home to a number of Jewish tribes, divided into three major clans: Banu Qainuqa, Banu Qurayza and Banu Nadir, and some minor groups.[32]

There was fighting in Yathrib for around a hundred years before 620. The Jewish tribes allied with other clans and were sometimes on opposing sides.[32] The recurring slaughters and disagreements over the resulting claims, especially after the great battle of Bu'ath in which all the clans were involved, made it obvious to them that the tribal conceptions of blood-feud and an eye for an eye were no longer workable unless "there was one man with authority to adjudicate in disputed cases."[32] A delegation from Medina, consisting of the representatives of the twelve important clans of Medina, invited Muhammad as a neutral outsider to Medina to serve as the chief arbitrator for the entire community.[32][33] Among the things Muhammad did in order to settle down the longstanding grievances among the tribes of Medina was drafting a document known as the Constitution of Medina (date debated), "establishing a kind of alliance or federation" among the eight Medinan tribes and Muslim emigrants from Mecca, which specified the rights and duties of all citizens and the relationship of the different communities in Medina (including that of the Muslim community to other communities specifically the Jews and other "Peoples of the Book").[32][33]

Beginnings of conflict

Relations between Mecca and Medina rapidly worsened (see surat al-Baqara). Meccans confiscated all the property that the Muslims had left in Mecca.[citation needed] In Medina, Muhammad signed treaties of alliance and mutual help with neighboring tribes. Mecca declared its hostility and status of war with the Muslims.

In March of 624, Muhammad led some three hundred warriors in a raid on a Meccan merchant caravan. The Meccans successfully defended the caravan, but then decided to teach the Muslims a lesson and marched against Medina. It should be noted that Islamic scholars question narratives regarding looting the caravan on the basis of the Qur'anic version of the account.[34][opinion needs balancing] On March 15, 624 near a place called Badr, the Meccans and the Muslims clashed. Though outnumbered more than three times (one thousand to three hundred - majority of Muslim historians put the exact total at 313) in the battle, the Muslims met with success, killing at least forty-five Meccans and taking seventy prisoners for ransom; only fourteen Muslims died.[35] This marked the real beginning of Muslim military battles.

To his followers, the victory in Badr appeared to be divine authentication of Muhammad's prophethood. Muhammad and his followers were now a dominant force in the oasis of Yathrib (Medina).

After Khadija's death, Muhammad married Aisha, the daughter of his friend Abu Bakr (who would later emerge as the first leader of the Muslims after Muhammad's death). In Medina, he married Hafsah, daughter of Umar (who would eventually become Abu Bakr's successor).

Muhammad's daughter Fatima married Ali, Muhammad's cousin. According to the Sunni, another daughter, Umm Kulthum, married Uthman. Each of these men, in later years, would emerge as successors to Muhammad and political leaders of the Muslims. Thus, all four caliphs were linked to Muhammad by marriage. Sunni Muslims regard these caliphs as the Rashidun, or Rightly Guided. (See Succession to Muhammad for more information on the controversy on the succession to the caliphate).

The conflict with Mecca

In 625 the Meccan leader Abu Sufyan marched on Medina with three thousand men. Urged on by younger Muslims fired up by the victory at Badr and against the advice of Abdallah ibn Ubayy to last out the attack inside the town, Muhammad led his force outside and fought the Battle of Uhud on March 23, that ended in a Muslim defeat (According to Watt however it was not a Muslim defeat from a military standpoint. The Meccans, thinking themselves of having Arabia under their control, had aimed to destroy Muslims completely. But they completely failed to achieve this aim. They killed 75 Muslims for the loss of 77 of their own in Badr. [36]) However, the Meccan did not occupy the town and withdrew to Mecca because he could not attack on Muhammad's position again for military loss, low morale and possibility of Muslim resistance in the town. There was also hope that Abd-Allah ibn Ubayy leading a group of Muslims in Medina could be win over by diplomacy. [37] In April 627, Abu Sufyan led another strong force against Medina, but couldn't overcome the defenders in the Battle of the Trench.

Following the Muslims' victory at the Battle of the Trench, the Muslims were able, through conversion and conquest, to extend their rule to many of the neighboring cities and tribes.[citation needed]

Muhammad and the Jewish tribes of Medina

Main article: Muhammad and the Jews

Many Medinans converted to the faith of the Meccan immigrants, but the Jewish tribes did not. Much to Muhammad's disappointment, they rejected his claim to be prophet.[33] Their opposition "may well have been for political as well as religious reasons".[38]On religious grounds, the Jews were skeptical of the possibility of a non-Jewish prophet,[39] and also had concerns about possible incompatibilities between the Qur'an and their own scriptures.[39][40] The Qur'an's response regarding the possibility of a non-Jew being a prophet was that Abraham was not a Jew. The Qur'an also claimed that it was "restoring the pure monotheism of Abraham which had been corrupted in various, clearly specified, ways by Jews and Christians".[39]

After each major battle with the Medinans, Muhammad attacked one of the Jewish tribes (see 2:100). After Badr and Uhud, the Banu Qainuqa and Banu Nadir, respectively, were expelled "with their families and possessions" from Medina. After the Battle of the Trench in 627, the Muslims accused the Jews of Banu Qurayza of conspiring with the Meccans, then wiped them out.[41]

Watt states that the Qurayza did not commit any hostile act,[42] and that they were probably negotiating with Mecca.[42] After the Qurayza had succumbed to a siege, several members of the Aws interceded on behalf of their old allies. Muhammad agreed to appoint one of their chiefs as a judge, who decided that the Qurayza men should be beheaded, the women and children enslaved, and their properties confiscated. The Muslims exacted this punishment.[43] However, there are some scholarly views that challenge this interpretation of events, citing concerns about the reliability of certain early historical sources.[44]

The truce of Hudaybiyya

Main article: Treaty of Hudaybiyya

Although Muhammad had already delivered verses (2:196-2:210) about the performing of Hajj, Muhammad and Muslims did not perform it due to the enmity of the Quraish. It was the month of Shawwal 6 A.H. when Muhammad saw in a vision that he was shaving his head after the Hajj.[45][46] Muhammad therefore decided to perform the Hajj in the following month. Hence around the 13th of March, 628 with 1400 Companions he went towards Mecca without the least intention of giving battle.[47] But the Quraish were determined to offer resistance to Muslims and they posted themselves outside Mecca, closing all access to the city.[47] In order to settle the dispute peacefully, Muhammad halted at a place called Hudaybiyya. Hence after series of talks a treaty was signed. The main points of treaty were the following:

1. The two parties and their allies should desist from hostilities against each other[48][49]
2. Muhammad, should not perform Hajj this year[48][50]
3. They may come next year to perform Hajj (unarmed) but shall not stay in Mecca for more than three days[48][50]
4. Any Muslim living in Mecca cannot settle in Medina, but Medinan Muslims may come and join Meccans (and will not be returned).[51]

Many Muslims were not satisfied with the terms of the treaty. However, the Qur'anic sura "Al-Fath" (The Victory) 48:1-48:29 assured the Muslims that the expedition from which they were now returning must be considered a victorious one.[52][53] The Muslims did benefit following the treaty; the men of Mecca and Medina could now meet in peace and discuss Islam. Hence, during the following two years the community of Islam more than doubled.[54][55][56]

Muhammad's letters to the Heads of State

According to Muslim tradition, after the signing of the truce, Muhammad sent letters to many rulers of the world, asking them to convert to Islam.[57][58][59] Hence he sent messengers (with letters) to Heraclius of the Byzantine Empire (the eastern Roman Empire), Chosroes of Persia, the chief of Yemen and to some others.[57][58]

Conquest of Mecca

Main article: Muhammad after the conquest of Mecca

The Kaaba in Mecca held a major economic and religious role for the area, it became the Muslim Qibla, or direction for Salat
The Kaaba in Mecca held a major economic and religious role for the area, it became the Muslim Qibla, or direction for Salat

Main article: Conquest of Mecca

The truce of Hudaybiyya had been in force for two years.[60][61] The tribe of Khuz'aah had a friendly relationship with Muhammad, while on the other hand their enemies, the Banu Bakr, had an alliance with the Meccans.[60][62] A clan of the Bakr made a night raid against the Khuz'aah, killing a few of them.[60][62] The Meccans helped their allies (i.e., the Banu Bakr) with weapons and, according to some sources, a few Meccans also took part in the fighting.[60] After this event, Muhammad sent a message to Mecca with three conditions, asking them to accept one of them. These were the following[63]

1. The Meccans were to pay blood-money for those slain among the Khuza'ah tribe, or
2. They should have nothing to do with the Banu Bakr, or
3. They should declare the truce of Hudaybiyya null.

The Meccans replied that they would accept only the third condition.[63] However, soon they realized their mistake and sent Abu Safyan to renew the Hudaybiyya treaty, but now his request was declined by Muhammad. Muhammad began to prepare for a campaign.[64]

In 630, Muhammad marched on Mecca with an enormous force, said to number more than ten thousand men. Most Meccans converted to Islam, and Muhammad subsequently destroyed all of the statues of Arabian gods in and around the Kaaba, without any exception. Henceforth the pilgrimage would be a Muslim pilgrimage and the shrine was converted to a Muslim shrine.

Unification of Arabia

The capitulation of Mecca and the defeat of an alliance of enemy tribes at Hunayn effectively brought the greater part of the Arabian peninsula under Muhammad's authority. However, this authority was not enforced by a regular government, as Muhammad chose instead to rule through personal relationships and tribal treaties. The Muslims were clearly the dominant force in Arabia, and most of the remaining tribes and states hastened to convert to Islam.

Death
The Al-Masjid al-Nabawi is Islam's second most sacred site; the Green dome in the background stands above Muhammad's tomb
The Al-Masjid al-Nabawi is Islam's second most sacred site; the Green dome in the background stands above Muhammad's tomb

In 632 Muhammad fell ill and suffered for several days with head pain and weakness. He succumbed on Monday, June 8, 632, in the city of Medina, at the age of sixty-three. He is buried in his tomb (what was his house) adjacent to Mosque of the Prophet in Medina.

Muhammad as a military leader

Main article: Muhammad as a general

For most of the sixty-three years of his life, Muhammad was a merchant, then a religious leader. He took up the sword late in his life. He was an active military leader for ten years.
This section is a stub. You can help by expanding it.

Family life

Main article: Muhammad's marriages

This article or section does not cite its references or sources.
Please help improve this article by introducing appropriate citations. (help, get involved!)
This article has been tagged since January 2007.

Muhammad's life is traditionally defined into two epochs: pre-hijra (emigration) in Mecca, a city in northern Arabia, from the year 570 to 622 , and post-hijra in Medina, from 622 until his death in 632. All but two of his marriages were contracted after the migration to Medina.

He married 11 or 13 women depending upon the differing accounts of who his wives were. At the age of 25, Muhammad married Khadijah which lasted for 25 years.[65] This marriage is described as "long" and "happy," and he relied upon Khadija in many ways.[66][67] After her death, friends of Muhammad advised him to marry again, but he was reluctant to do so.[67][68] It was suggested to Muhammad by Khawla bint Hakim, that he should marry Sawda bint Zama, a Muslim widow, or Aisha. Muhammad is said to have asked her to arrange for him to marry both. Later, Muhammad married additional wives, to make for a total of eleven, of whom nine or ten survived him. Scholars such as Esposito and Watt hold that most of the marriages had political or social motives.[69][70]

The status of several of Muhammad's wives is disputed by scholars. Maria al-Qibtiyya may have been a slave, a freed slave, or a wife.[citation needed] While there is some debate about the age of Aisha (Ayesha), most references, including the Bukhari Hadith, put the marriage age at 5 or 6 and consummation of the marriage at the age of 9.[71][72][73]

Muhammad had children by only two wives. Khadijah is said to have borne him four daughters and a son; only one daughter, Fatima and her children survived her father, see Shia. Some say that his daughter Zainab, mother to a daughter called Amma or Umama, survived him as well.[citation needed] Shi'a Muslims dispute the number of Muhammad's children, stating that he had only one daughter, and that the other "daughters" were step-daughters. Maria al-Qibtiyya bore him a son, but the child died when he was ten months old.

Descendants of Muhammad are known as sharifs ???? (plural: ?????? Ashraaf) or sayyid. Many rulers and notables in Muslim countries, past and present have professed such descent, with various degrees of credibility, such as the Fatimid dynasty of North Africa, the Idrisids, the current royal families of Jordan. In various Muslim countries, there are societies of varying credibility that authenticate claims of descent.[citation needed]

There is some dispute between Shia scholars regarding the genealogy of the four daughters of Khadija on whether they were born to Khadijah from her marriage to Muhammad, an earlier marriage, or if they were in fact the daughters of a widowed and dead sister of Khadija. Sunni's believe he had four daughters with Khadîjah. Shi'a accept Fatimah to be Muhammad's only surviving child,[citation needed] while some Sunni question that.[citation needed]

There is also a difference of opinion regarding whether he had two or four sons. The conflict arises from some reports on the sons of Khadijah mentioning two sons called Tahir and Tayyab,[citation needed] and another mentioning one called Abdullah who was also called Tahir and possibly also called Tayyab.[citation needed] Ibrâhîm was the only child borne to him by Maria during his residence in Medina and the last to be born. Abdullâh was born after he declared himself a prophet but died during his residence in Mecca. All his other sons died before his claims of prophecy.

In the Islamic prayer, Muslims end with the second tashahhud asking God to bless Muhammad and his descendants just as Abraham and his descendants were blessed.

Children of Khadijah:

Sons:

* Abd-Allah ibn Muhammad
* Qasim ibn Muhammad

Daughters:

* Ruqayyah bint Muhammad
* Umm Kulthum bint Muhammad
* Zainab bint Muhammad
* Fatima Zahra

Children of Maria:

* Ibrahim ibn Muhammad


Companions

Main articles: Sahaba and Salaf

The term Sahaba (companion) refers to anyone who meets three criteria: to be a contemporary of Muhammad, to have heard Muhammad speak on at least one occasion, and to be a convert to Islam. Companions are considered the ultimate sources for the oral traditions, or hadith, on which much of Muslim law and practice are based. The following are a few examples in alphabetic order:

* Abdullah ibn Abbas
* Abu Bakr
* Abu Dharr
* Ali ibn Abi Talib
* Ammar



* Bilal
* Hamza
* Al-Miqdad
* Sa'd
* Zayd



* Salman the Persian
* Talha
* Umar
* Uthman
* Zubair

Muhammad the reformer
The neutrality of this section is disputed.
Please see the discussion on the talk page.

See also: Muhammad the Reformer
Main article: Reforms under Islam (610-661)

Bernard Lewis says that there are two important political traditions in Islam - one that views Muhammad as a statesman in Medina, and another that views him as a rebel in Mecca. He sees Islam itself as a type of revolution that greatly changed the societies into which the new religion was brought.[74]

Historians generally agree that Islamic social reforms in areas such as social security, family structure, and the rights of women improved on what was present in existing Arab society.[74][75][76][77][78]

Economic reforms addressed the plight of the poor, which was becoming an issue in pre-Islamic Mecca.[79] The Qur'an requires payment of an alms tax (zakat) for the benefit of the poor,[80] and as Muhammad's position grew in power he demanded that those tribes who wanted to ally with him implement the zakat in particular.[81]

Miracles in the Muslim biographies

Main article: Islamic view of miracles

The Dome of the Rock, built atop the Temple Mount in Jerusalem, marks the spot from which Muslims believe Muhammad ascended to Paradise.
The Dome of the Rock, built atop the Temple Mount in Jerusalem, marks the spot from which Muslims believe Muhammad ascended to Paradise.

The pre-modern Muslim biographies of Muhammad envisions Muhammad as a cosmic figure, invested with superhuman qualities. Modern Muslim biographies of Muhammad however portray him as a progressive social reformer, a political leader and a model of human virtue. The view of these modern biographies is that Muhammad's real miracle, as Daniel Brown states modern historians would probably agree, 'was not a moon split or a sighing palm tree, but the transformation of the Arabs from marauding bands of nomads into world conquerors.'[82]

Carl Ernst believes that this main shift in the treatment of Muhammad has been a response to the stridently negative depictions of Muhammad created by European authors.[83] Daniel Brown adds two more reasons: First, Muslims in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries were faced with social and political turmoil. The desire for the restoration of the Muslim community encouraged them to view Muhammad as a model for social and political reform. And lastly, 'the ongoing challenge of reforming or reviving Islamic law perpetuated concern for the life of Muhammad as a normative model for human behavior.'[82] Ernst states that this main shift reflects the growth of bourgeois scientific rationalism in Muslim countries.[14]
This section is a stub. You can help by expanding it.

Traditional views of Muhammad

Seal of the Prophets
The Muslim Profession of faith, the Shahada, illustrates the Muslim conception of the role of Muhammad - "There is No God (?ilah) but God(Allah), and Muhammad is His Messenger." As shown on the Flag of Saudi Arabia
The Muslim Profession of faith, the Shahada, illustrates the Muslim conception of the role of Muhammad - "There is No God (?ilah)[84] but God(Allah), and Muhammad is His Messenger." As shown on the Flag of Saudi Arabia

Muslims believe Muhammad to be the last in a line of prophets of God (Arabic Allah) and regard his mission as one of restoring the original monotheistic faith of Adam, Abraham and other prophets of Islam that had become corrupted by man over time.[8][9][10] The Qur'an specifically refers to Muhammad as the "Seal of the Prophets", which is taken by most Muslims to believe him to be the last and greatest of the prophets.[85][14] Scholars such as Welch however hold that this Muslim belief is most likely a later interpretation of the Seal of the Prophets.[9] Carl Ernst considers this phrase to mean that Muhammad's "imprint on history is as final as a wax seal on a letter".[14] Wilferd Madelung states that the meaning of this term is not certain.[86]

More traditions
Image made in 1315 of Pre-Prophethood Muhammad re-dedicating the Black Stone at the Kaaba. From Tabriz, Persia and can be found in Rashid al-Dins Jami' al-Tawarikh ("The Universal History" or "Compendium of Chronicles"), held in the University of Edinburgh.
Image made in 1315 of Pre-Prophethood Muhammad re-dedicating the Black Stone at the Kaaba. From Tabriz, Persia and can be found in Rashid al-Dins Jami' al-Tawarikh ("The Universal History" or "Compendium of Chronicles"), held in the University of Edinburgh.

* Muslims tradition narrates miracles during his time growing up in the desert as an infant during the period when Muhammad was placed in the care of a Bedouin wet nurse - Halima Sadia.
* After he returned to Mecca, he is said to have been beloved by all around him because he was such a polite and honest child.
* As a youth, he was called upon to solve a vexing political problem for his Meccan neighbors. They were rebuilding the Kaaba and feuding over which clan should have the honor of raising the Black Stone into place. Muhammad suggested that the heads of each clan raise the Black Stone on a cloth, so that all had the honor of lifting it. Muhammad then put the stone into its place.
* As a young man and a merchant, Muslim tradition asserts that Muhammad was known to be trustworthy and honest. The other Meccans called him "Al-Amin", the trustworthy one or the honest one.[87] After he proclaimed his prophethood, however, his neighbors turned against him.

Depictions of Muhammad

Main article: Depictions of Muhammad

This article or section does not cite its references or sources.
Please help improve this article by introducing appropriate citations. (help, get involved!)
This article has been tagged since January 2007.

Muslims differ as to whether or not visual depictions of Muhammad are permissible. The position of the four main Sunni Muslim Maddhabs is that, to prevent idolatry and shirk, visual depictions of Muhammad are forbidden; some non-maddhab groups, such as the Salafi movement, take a similar line.

The Shia and others have historically taken a much less restrictive view of such depictions, allowing them if they are meant to praise Muhammad, while a school of Sufi'ism uses calligraphy of the name of Muhammad, Ali, Hussein and other important people in Muslim History to create images of the people.

Muslim veneration of Muhammad

See also: Muslim veneration for Muhammad, Praise of Muhammad in poetry, Depiction of Muhammad, Islamic music, and Qawwali

Muhammad's name, engraved in gold, adorns the walls of Hagia Sophia in Istanbul. Originally a Christian church, it was converted into a mosque after the Fall of Constantinople.
Muhammad's name, engraved in gold, adorns the walls of Hagia Sophia in Istanbul. Originally a Christian church, it was converted into a mosque after the Fall of Constantinople.

It is traditional for Muslims to illustrate and express love and veneration for Muhammad. This is observed in a number of different ways. When Muslims say or write Muhammad's name, they usually follow it with Peace be upon him or its Arabic equivalent, sallalahu alayhi wasallam, and for Shias this is extended to Peace be upon him and his descendants. In English this is often abbreviated to "(pbuh)", "(saw)" and "pbuh&hd" for Shias, or even just simply as "p". The Quran gave him the title Apostle of God (Arabic: Rasul-Allah or Rasulallah), which has also been used by Muslims, as well as the title "Prophet". Concerts of Muslim, and especially Sufi, devotional music include songs praising Muhammad. There are religious songs Nasheeds which regularly praise Muhammad.

Conversely, criticism of Muhammad is often equated with blasphemy, which is punishable by death in Pakistan.[88]

Other religious traditions in regard to Muhammad

* The Druze, who accept most but not all Qur'anic revelations, also consider him a prophet.
* Bahá'ís venerate Muhammad as one of a number of prophets or "Manifestations of God", but consider his teachings to have been superseded by those of Bahá'u'lláh.

See also

* Arabian tribes that interacted with Muhammad
* Depictions of Muhammad
* criticism of Muhammad
* Hadith
* Hanif
* Islam
* Islamic view of Muhammad
* Non-Islamic views of Muhammad
* Paraclete
* The Jyllands-Posten controversy



* List of films about Muhammad

* Mohammad, Messenger of God (aka The Message)
* Muhammad: Legacy of a Prophet (documentary)

* List of founders of world religions
* List of Islamic terms in Arabic
* Muezza
* Muhammad's marriages
* Muhammad's slaves
* Sira

Notes

1. ^ Turkish: Muhammed; click here (help·info) for the Arabic pronunciation.
2. ^ Welch, noting the frequency of Muhammad being called as "Al-Amin"(Arabic: ?????? ), a common Arab name, suggests the possibility of "Al-Amin" being Muhammad's given name as it is a masculine form from the same root as his mother's name, A'mina. cf. "Muhammad", Encyclopedia of Islam Online; The sources frequently say that he, in his youth, was called with the nickname "Al-Amin" meaning "Honest, Truthful" cf. Ernst (2004), p.85.
3. ^ According to traditional Muslim biographers, Muhammad was born c. 570 in Mecca and died June 8, 632 in Medina, both in the Hejaz region of present day Saudi Arabia.
4. ^ a b c d Encyclopedia of World History (1998), p.452
5. ^ The term Qur'an was first used in the Qur'an itself. There are two different theories about this term and its formation that are discussed in Quran#Etymology cf. "Qur'an", Encyclopedia of Islam Online.
6. ^ The Cambridge History of Islam (1977) writes that "It is appropriate to use the word 'God' rather than the transliteration 'Allah'. For one thing it cannot be denied that Islam is an offshoot of the Judaeo-Christians tradition, and for another the Christian Arabs of today have no other word for 'God' than 'Allah'" beacuse in Quran God Himself reffered himself as Allah cf p.32.
7. ^ Accad (2003)
8. ^ a b Esposito (1998), p.12; (1999) p.25; (2002) pp.4-5
9. ^ a b c d e "Muhammad", Encyclopedia of Islam Online
10. ^ a b Peters (2003), p.9
11. ^ "Qur'an and Polemics", Encyclopedia of the Qur'an (2005)
12. ^ "If…they [Christians] mean that the Qur’an confirms the textual veracity of the scriptural books which they now possess—that is, the Torah and the Gospels—this is something which some Muslims will grant them and which many Muslims will dispute. However, most Muslims will grant them most of that." (quote from Ibn Taymiyya), see Accad (2003)
13. ^ Dan McCormack. Online Etymology Dictionary. Douglas Harper. Retrieved on August 14, 2006.
14. ^ a b c d Ernst (2004), p.80
15. ^ F. E. Peters, The Quest for Historical Muhammad, International Journal of Middle East Studies (1991) p.291-315
16. ^ Reeves (2003), p.6-7
17. ^ The Cambridge History of Islam (1977), p.32
18. ^ Lewis (2002), p. 33-34
19. ^ Ar-Raheeq Al-Makhtum: The Lineage and Family of Muhammad by Saifur Rahman al-Mubarakpuri
20. ^ Reeves (2003), p.11
21. ^ a b Berkshire Encyclopedia of World History (2005), v.3, p.1025
22. ^ Brown (2003), pp.72-73
23. ^ 96:1-96:5
24. ^ Brown (2003), pp.73-74
25. ^ 93:1-93:11
26. ^
27. ^ The Cambridge History of Islam (1977), p.36
28. ^ The Cambridge History of Islam (1977), p.36
29. ^ Hourani (2003), p.17
30. ^ Some early Islamic histories recount that as Muhammad was reciting Sura Al-Najm (Q.53), as revealed to him by the angel Gabriel, Satan tempted him to utter the following lines after verses 19 and 20 :"Have you thought of Allat and al-'Uzza and Manat the third, the other; These are the exalted Gharaniq, whose intercession is hoped for. (Allat, al-'Uzza and Manat were three goddesses worshiped by the Meccans). These histories then say that these 'Satanic Verses' were shortly afterward repudiated by Muhammad at the behest of the angel Gabriel. cf Ibn Ishaq, A. Guillaume p.166. Academic scholars such as William Montgomery Watt and Guillaume argued for its authenticity while scholars such as Caetani and Burton rejected the tradition.
31. ^ Encyclopedia of Islam and the Muslim World (2003), p.482
32. ^ a b c d e The Cambridge History of Islam (1977), p. 39
33. ^ a b c
34. ^ They argue that these narratives contradict the Qur'anic version of the account, asserting that the caravan was one of the two targets which "weak believers" wanted to attack (8:5-8), but that the Muslims actually fought against Meccan army, as looting a defenceless caravan wouldn't require preparations which the Qur'an talks about (8:43). See, e.g., Tariq Hashmi. Cause of Battle of Badr, Al-Mawrid; Amin Ahsan Islahi. Tadabbur-i-Qur'an, Ist Ed., (Lahore: Faraan Foundation 2003), pp. 427-40; Shibli Nomani. Siratu al-Nabi, Ist Ed. vol. 2, (Lahore: Qazi Publishers 1981) pp. 49-52; Khalid Masud, Hayaat-e Rasul-e Ummi, 1st ed. (Lahore: Dar al-Tazkeer 2003), pp.319-25
35. ^ Glubb (2002), pp.179-186.
36. ^ Watt (1974) p.140
37. ^ Watt (1974) p.141
38. ^ Endress (2003), p.29
39. ^ a b c The Cambridge History of Islam (1977), pp.43-44
40. ^ Cohen (1995), p.23
41. ^ Esposito (1998), pp.10-11
42. ^ a b "Banu Qurayza", Encyclopedia of Islam Online
43. ^ Watt (1961), pp.173-174
44. ^ Arafat (1976)
45. ^ Khan (1998), p.242
46. ^ Lings (1987), p.249
47. ^ a b Khan (1998), p.243
48. ^ a b c Lings (1987), p.253
49. ^ Haykal (1995), p.353
50. ^ a b Khan (1998), p.245
51. ^ Khan (1998), p.246
52. ^ Lings (1987), p.255
53. ^ Khan (1998), p.247
54. ^ Lings (1987), p.259
55. ^ Khan (1998), p.248
56. ^ Haykal (1995), p.356
57. ^ a b Lings (1987), p. 260
58. ^ a b Khan (1998), pp.250-251
59. ^ Haykal (1995), p. 360
60. ^ a b c d Khan (1998), p.274
61. ^ Lings (1987), p.291
62. ^ a b Lings (1987), p.291
63. ^ a b Khan (1998), pp.274-275
64. ^ Lings (1987), p.292
65. ^ Esposito (1998), p.18
66. ^ Bullough (1998), p.119
67. ^ a b Reeves (2003), p.46
68. ^ Bullough (1998), p.119
69. ^ "Aisha", Encyclopedia of Islam Online: Watt writes: "Muhammad had a political aim in nearly all his marriages"; for example his marriage to Aisha, "must have seen in this one a means of strengthening the ties between himself and Abu Bakr, his chief follower."
70. ^ Esposito (1998), p.16
71. ^ Sahih Muslim, Book 8, Number 3310
72. ^ Sahih Bukhari Volume 7, Book 62, Number 64
73. ^ Sahih Bukhari Volume 7, Book 62, Number 88
74. ^ a b Lewis, Bernard. "Islamic Revolution", The New York Review of Books, January 21, 1998.
75. ^ Watt (1974), p.234
76. ^ Robinson (2004) p.21
77. ^ Esposito (1998), p. 98
78. ^ "Ak_h_la?", Encyclopaedia of Islam Online
79. ^ The Cambridge History of Islam (1977), p.34
80. ^ Esposito (1998), p.30
81. ^ The Cambridge History of Islam (1977), p.52
82. ^ a b Brown (1999), p.65
83. ^ Ernst (2004), p.84
84. ^ Ilah is also translated as Deity, and means God in the sense of where there can be more than one, in plural, like the Roman Gods, Allah, on the other hand, can be translated as ‘The God’, and can only mean God where there is one, alone
85. ^ For further information on the meaning of the term, See Friedmann, 'Finality of Prophethood'; G.G. Stroumsa, 'Seal of the prophets: The Nature of a Manichaen Metaphor', JSAI, 7 (1986), 61-74; C.Colpe, 'Das Siegel der Propheten', Orientalia Suecana, 33-5 (1984-6), 71-83, revised version in C.Colpe, Das Siegel der Propheten, (Berlin, 1990), 227-43
86. ^ Madelung (2004), p.17
87. ^ USC-MSA Compendium of Muslim Texts: About the Prophet Muhammad
88. ^ See, e.g., Pakistani Penal Code, Act III of 1986, s 295-C and 298-C.

References

* Accad, Martin (2003). "The Gospels in the Muslim Discourse of the Ninth to the Fourteenth Centuries: An Exegetical Inventorial Table (Part I)". Islam and Christian–Muslim Relations 14 (1).
* Arafat, W. N. (1976). "Did Prophet Muhammad ordered 900 Jews killed?". Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland (JRAS): 100-107.
* Bloom, Jonathan; Blair, Sheila (2002). Islam: A Thousand Years of Faith and Power. Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-09422-1.
* Brown, Daniel (2003). A New Introduction to Islam. Blackwell Publishing Professional. ISBN 978-0631216049.
* Brown, Daniel (1999). Rethinking Tradition in Modern Islamic Thought. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-65394-0.
* Bullough, Vern; Brenda Shelton, Sarah Slavin (1998). The Subordinated Sex: A History of Attitudes Toward Women. University of Georgia Press. ISBN 978-0820323695.
* Cohen, Mark R. (1995). Under Crescent and Cross, Reissue edition, Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0691010823.
* Crow, Karim (2005). Facing One Qiblah: Legal and Doctrinal Aspects of Sunny and Shi'ah Muslims. Ibex Publishers. ISBN 9971-77-552-
* Endress, Gerhard (2003). Islam. New Age Books. ISBN 978-817822156
* Ernst, Carl (2004). Following Muhammad: Rethinking Islam in the Contemporary World. University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 0-8078-5577-
* Esposito, John (1998). Islam: The Straight Path. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-511233-4.
* Esposito, John (1999). The Islamic Threat: Myth Or Reality?. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-513076-6.
* Esposito, John (2004). The Oxford Dictionary of Islam. Oxford University Press, USA. ISBN 978-0195125597.
* Esposito, John (2002). What Everyone Needs to Know About Islam. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-515713-3.
* Glubb, John Bagot (1970 (reprint 2002)). The Life and Times of Muhammad. Hodder & Stoughton. ISBN 0-8154-1176-6.
* Haykal, Muhammad Husayn (1995). The Life of Muhammad. Islamic Book Service. ISBN 1-57731-195-7.
* Holt, P. M.; Ann K. S. Lambton, Bernard Lewis (1977). The Cambridge History of Islam (Paperback). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0521291354.
* Hourani, Albert (2003). A History of the Arab Peoples, Revised edition, Belknap Press. ISBN 978-0674010178.
* Ishaq, Ibn (2002). The Life of Muhammad: A Translation of Ibn Ishaq's Sirat Rasul Allah. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-019636033
* Khan, Majid Ali (1998). Muhammad The Final Messenger. Islamic Book Service, New Delhi, 110002 (India). ISBN 81-85738-25-4.
* Lewis, Bernard (2002). The Arabs in History. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-280310-7.
* Lewis, Bernard (1992). Race and Slavery in the Middle East: An History Enquiry, Reprint edition, Oxford University Press, USA. ISBN 978-0195053265.
* Lings, Martin (1987). Muhammad: His Life Based on Earliest Sources. Inner Traditions International, Limited. ISBN 0-89281-170-6.
* Madelung, William (2004). The Succession to Muhammad. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0521561815.
* Muir, William (1878). Life of Mahomet. Kessinger Publishing. ISBN 0-7661-7741-6.
* Neusner, Jacob (2003). God's Rule: The Politics of World Religions. Georgetown University Press. ISBN 978-0878409105.
* Peters, F. E. (2003). Islam: A Guide for Jews and Christians. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-11553-2.
* Reeves, Minou (2003). Muhammad in Europe: A Thousand Years of Western Myth-Making. NYU Press. ISBN 978-0814775646.
* Robinson, David (2004). Muslim Societies in African History. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 052153366X.
* Schimmel, Annemarie (1992). Islam: An Introduction. SUNY Press. ISBN 0-7914-1327-6.
* Schimmel, Annemarie (1995). Mystische Dimensionen des Islam. Insel, Frankfurt. ISBN 3458334157.
* Stark, Rodney (2003). For the Glory of God: How Monotheism Led to Reformations, Science, Witch-Hunts, and the End of Slavery. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-11436-6.
* Tucker, Judith E.; Nashat, Guity (1999). Women in the Middle East and North Africa. Indiana University Press. ISBN 0-253-21264-2.
* Warraq, Ibn (1995). Why I Am Not a Muslim. Prometheus Books. ISBN 0879759844.
* Watt, W. Montgomery (1961). Muhammad: Prophet and Statesman. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-881078-4.
* Watt, W. Montgomery (1974). Muhammad: Prophet and Statesman, New Edition, Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-881078-4. .

Encyclopedias

* Berkshire Encyclopedia of World History. (2005). Ed. William H. McNeill, Jerry H. Bentley, David Christian. Berkshire Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0974309101.
* Encyclopedia of Islam & the Muslim World. (2003). Ed. Richard C. Martin, Said Amir Arjomand, Marcia Hermansen, Abdulkader Tayob, Rochelle Davis, John Obert Voll. MacMillan Reference Books. ISBN 978-0028656038.
* Encyclopaedia of Islam Online. Ed. P.J. Bearman, Th. Bianquis, C.E. Bosworth, E. van Donzel, W.P. Heinrichs. Brill Academic Publishers. ISSN 1573-3912.
* Encyclopedia of Religion (2nd edition). (2005). Ed. Lindsay Jones. MacMillan Reference Books. ISBN 978-0028657332.
* Encyclopedia of the Qur'an. (2005). Ed. Jane Dammen McAuliffe. Brill Academic Publishers. ISBN 978-9004123564.
* Encyclopedia of World History. (199). Oxford University Press. ISBN 0198602235.
* The New Encyclopedia Britannica (Rev Ed edition). (2005). Encyclopedia Britannica, Incorporated. ISBN 978-1593392369.

Further reading

* Andrae, Tor (2000). Mohammed: The Man and His Faith. Dover. ISBN 0-486-41136-2.
* Armstrong, Karen (1993). Muhammad: A Biography of the Prophet. San Francisco: Harper. ISBN 0-06-250886-5.
* Berg, Herbert, ed. (2003). Method and Theory in the Study of Islamic Origins. E. J. Brill. ISBN 90-04-12602-3.
* Cook, Michael (1983). Muhammad. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-287605-8 (reissue 1996).
* Dashti, Ali (1994). Twenty-Three Years: A Study of the Prophetic Career of Mohammad. Mazda. ISBN 1-56859-029-6.
* Hamidullah, Muhammad (1998). The Life and Work of the Prophet of Islam. [s.n.](Islamabad: Islamic Research Institute). ISBN 969-8413-00-
* Motzki, Harald, ed. (2000). The Biography of Muhammad: The Issue of the Sources (Islamic History and Civilization: Studies and Texts, Vol. 32). Brill. ISBN 90-04-11513-7.
* Rodinson, Maxime (1961). Muhammad. New Publishers. ISBN 1-56584-752-0.
* Rodinson, Maxime (2002). Muhammad: Prophet of Islam. Tauris Parke Paperbacks. ISBN 1-86064-827-4.
* Rubin, Uri (1995). The Eye of the Beholder: The Life of Muhammad as Viewed by the Early Muslims (A Textual Analysis). Darwin Press. ISBN 0-87850-110-X.
* Schimmel, Annemarie (1985). And Muhammad is His Messenger: The Veneration of the Prophet in Islamic Piety. The University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 0-8078-4128-5.
* Stillman, Norman (1975). The Jews of Arab Lands: a History and Source Book. Jewish Publication Society of America. ISBN 0-8276-0198-
* Warraq, Ibn (2000). The Quest for the Historical Muhammad. Prometheus Books. ISBN 1-57392-787-2.
* Winn, Craig (2004). Prophet of Doom. CricketSong Books. ISBN 978-0971448124.

A biography of the Prophet Mohammed:
http://www.usc.edu/dept/MSA/fundamentals/prophet/profbio.html

-- MERGED NOTE ------------

Wikidata: https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q9458 | Geni: https://www.geni.com/people/6000000000388939419

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000000388939419

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]