== Notes for [[Item:Q88235|Q88235]] ==

'''Antigonus I Monophthalmus''' (Greek: Ἀντίγονος ὁ Μονόφθαλμος, "Antigonus the One-eyed", 382 BC - 301 BC) son of Philip from Elimeia, was a Macedonian nobleman, general, and satrap under Alexander the Great. During his early life he served under Philip II, and he was a major figure in the Wars of the Diadochi after Alexander's death, declaring himself king in 306 BC and establishing the Antigonid dynasty.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antigonus_I_Monophthalmus

https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/1911_Encyclop%C3%A6dia_Britannica/Antigonus_Cyclops
--------------------
Antigonus I Monophthalmus, The One Eyed, General, Nobleman, Satrap of Emperor Alexander The Great's Europe, was born circa 382 BC; died circa 301 BC.
--------------------

'''Antigonus I Monophthalmus'''

Antigonus I Monophthalmus (Ancient Greek: Ἀντίγονος ὁ Μονόφθαλμος, Antigonus the One-eyed, 382–301 BC), son of Philip from Elimeia, was a Macedonian nobleman, general, and satrap under Alexander the Great. During his early life he served under Philip II, and he was a major figure in the Wars of the Diadochi after Alexander's death, declaring himself king in 306 BC and establishing the Antigonid dynasty.

'''Biography'''

''Career''

Antigonus was appointed governor of Greater Phrygia in 333 BC. He was primarily responsible for defending Alexander's lines of supply and communication during the latter's extended campaign against the Achaemenid Persian Empire. Following Alexander's victory at Issus, the Persian mercenary commander Memnon of Rhodes ordered a counter-attack into Asia Minor in an attempt to sever Alexander's lines of supply and communication; however, Antigonus defeated the Persian forces in three separate battles.

As part of the division of the provinces after Alexander's death in 323 BC, Antigonus also received Pamphylia and Lycia from Perdiccas, regent of the empire, at the Partition of Babylon. He incurred the enmity of Perdiccas, the regent, by refusing to assist Eumenes to obtain possession of the provinces allotted to him, Paphlagonia and Cappadocia. Leonnatus had left with his army for Greece, leaving Antigonus alone to deal with Cappadocia, a task he apparently couldn't complete without additional aid.

Perdiccas seems to have viewed this as a direct affront to his authority and went up with the royal army himself to conquer the area. From there Perdiccas turned west towards Phrygia in order to humble Antigonus, who escaped with his son Demetrius to Greece, where he obtained the favour of Antipater, regent of Macedonia (321 BC), and Craterus.

With the death of Perdiccas in 321 BC, a new attempt at division of the empire took place at Triparadisus and Antigonus found himself entrusted with the command of the war against Eumenes, who had joined Perdiccas against the coalition of Antipater, Antigonus, Ptolemy, Craterus, and the other generals. Eumenes was defeated and forced to retire to the fortress of Nora (Greek: Νῶρα) in Cappadocia, and a new army that was marching to his relief was routed by Antigonus.

When Antipater died in 319 BC, he gave the regentship to Polyperchon, excluding Cassander, his son. Antigonus and the other dynasts refused to recognize Polyperchon, since it would undermine their own ambitions. He entered into negotiations with Eumenes, but Eumenes had already been swayed by Polyperchon, who also gave him authority over anyone within the empire. Effecting his escape from Nora, he raised an army and built a fleet in Cilicia and Phoenicia, and soon after formed a coalition with the satraps of the eastern provinces. Antigonus fought against Eumenes in two great battles at Paraitacene in 317 BC and Gabiene in 316 BC. Both were inconclusive, however. Yet in the aftermath of the second battle, Antigonus managed to capture the family and riches of the Silvershields, an elite regiment within Eumenes' army, who in turn handed over Eumenes to Antigonus in return for their release. After some deliberation, Antigonus had Eumenes executed.

As a result, Antigonus now was in possession of the empire's Asian territories, his authority stretching from the eastern satrapies to Syria and Asia Minor in the west. He seized the treasures at Susa and entered Babylon. The governor of the city, Seleucus fled to Ptolemy and entered into a league with him, Lysimachus and Cassander (315 BC) against Antigonus. In 314 BC Antigonus invaded Phoenicia, under Ptolemy's control, and besieged Tyre for more than a year. His son Demetrius was defeated at the Battle of Gaza by Ptolemy in 312 BC, and after the battle, Seleucus made his way back to Babylonia. Seleucus returned to Babylon let him build up a base of his own, and he soon established control of the eastern satrapies. The Babylonian War began between Antigonus and Seleucus, where Seleucus defeated both Demetrius and Antigonus, and secured Babylonia.

After the war had been carried on with varying success from 315 to 311, peace was concluded, by which the government of Asia Minor and Syria was provisionally secured to Antigonus. This agreement was soon violated on the pretext that garrisons had been placed in some of the free Greek cities by Antigonus, and Ptolemy and Cassander renewed hostilities against him. Demetrius Poliorcetes, the son of Antigonus, wrested part of Greece from Cassander.

After defeating Ptolemy at the naval Battle of Salamis in 306 BC, Demetrius conquered Cyprus. Following the victory Antigonus assumed the title king and bestowed the same upon his son, a declaration that he now was independent from the empire. The other dynasts, Cassander, Ptolemy, Lysimachus and Seleucus, soon followed. He now prepared a large army and a formidable fleet, the command of which he gave to Demetrius, and hastened to attack Ptolemy in his own dominions. His invasion of Egypt, however, proved a failure; he was unable to penetrate Ptolemy's defences and was obliged to retire, yet inflicting high losses on Ptolemy. Demetrius in 305 BC attempted the reduction of Rhodes, which had refused to assist Antigonus against Egypt. The siege of Rhodes lasted a year and ended in 304 BC when Demetrius, meeting with obstinate resistance, was obliged to make a peace treaty upon the terms that the Rhodians would build ships for Antigonus and aid him against any enemy except for Ptolemy, on whom they bestowed the title Soter (savior) for his aid during the lengthy siege.

''The dynasts unite against Antigonus''

The most powerful dynasts of the empire, now kings in their own right, Cassander, Seleucus, Ptolemy and Lysimachus, responded to Antigonus's successes by allying with each other, often through marriage. Antigonus soon found himself at war with all four, largely because his territory shared borders with each of them. Once he had Cassander in a bad position, having gained the support of the Greeks and defeating him repeatedly, he demanded from Cassander the unconditional submission of Macedonia. Seleucus, Lysimachus and Ptolemy responded by joining forces and attacking him. Lysimachus invaded Asia Minor from Thrace, crossing the Hellespont. He had soon secured most of the Ionian cities, and Seleucus was on his way marching through Mesopotamia and Cappadocia. Antigonus was obliged to recall Demetrius from Greece, where his son had recently had a sterile encounter with Cassander in Thessaly; the two men, and their army, then moved against Lysimachus.

However, the army of father and son was defeated by the united forces of Seleucus and Lysimachus at the decisive Battle of Ipsus in 301 BC. Antigonus himself died in the battle after being struck by a javelin, in the eighty-first year of his life. Prior to Ipsus, he had never before lost a battle.[contradiction] With his death, any plans the court of Antigonus may have had of reuniting Alexander's empire came to an end. Antigonus's kingdom was divided up, with most ending up in the hands of new kingdoms under Lysimachus and Seleucus. The victors largely followed Antigonus's precedent and had themselves named as kings, but they did not claim power over the erstwhile empire of Alexander nor each other. Instead, these kings established a troubled (and in the end failed) modus vivendi with each other, and accepted their kingdoms as separate realms.

Meanwhile, Antigonus's surviving son Demetrius took control of Macedon in 294 BC; Antigonus's descendants held this possession, off and on, until it was conquered by the Roman Republic at the Battle of Pydna in 168 BC.

====[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antigonus_I_Monophthalmus#Family Family]====

Antigonus' father was a nobleman named [https://www.geni.com/people/Phillip/6000000024434932199 '''Philip''']. His mother's name is unknown. Antigonus had an older brother named [https://www.geni.com/people/Demetrius/6000000205423138843 '''Demetrius'''], a younger brother named [https://www.geni.com/people/Polemaeus/6000000006101234724 '''Polemaeus'''], father of [https://www.geni.com/people/Polemaeus/6000000006101234728 '''Polemaeus''']. His nephew [https://www.geni.com/people/Telesphorus/6000000006101234736 '''Telesphorus'''] may have been the son of a third brother. He also had a younger half-brother, [https://www.geni.com/people/Marsyas/6000000205422641923 '''Marsyas'''], from his mother's second marriage to [https://www.geni.com/people/Periander-of-Pella/6000000205423116859 '''Periander of Pella'''].

Antigonus married to [https://www.geni.com/people/Stratonice-of-Thrace/6000000008518113379 '''Stratonice'''], his [https://www.geni.com/people/Demetrius/6000000205423138843 older brother]'s widow and had two sons: [https://www.geni.com/people/Demetrius-Poliorcetes-king-of-Macedonia/6000000007265083885 '''Demetrius I Poliorcetes'''] and [https://www.geni.com/people/Philip/6000000041036239861 '''Philip'''].


'''Monophthalmus in historical fiction'''

Mary Renault, in Funeral Games, translates the sobriquet into English: "One Eye."
In the 2004 Oliver Stone film Alexander, Antigonus is played by Ian Beattie.

'''Source:''' https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antigonus_I_Monophthalmus

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Macedonia 306-301 BCE; A-P gives dob "c282 BC" which doesn't fit
its reign or death dates. Was this supposed to be c. 382 BCE?

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per01230.htm#0

"den Enögde"

Tippolderbarn til Alexandros I

KILLED AT THE BATTLE OF KINGS 301 BC (PALESTINE REVERTED TO EGYPTIAN RULE)

He was one of the genrals of Alexander the Great. He became King of Macedonia and ruled from 306 to 301 bc.

He was one of the genrals of Alexander the Great. He became King of Macedonia and ruled from 306 to 301 bc.

1 NAME Monophthalmos //
2 GIVN Monophthalmos
2 SURN
2 NICK Monophthalmos

1 NAME Monophthalmos //
2 GIVN Monophthalmos
2 SURN
2 NICK Monophthalmos

Birth: in 382 BC 1
Death: in 301 BC, Ipsus, Phrygia, Asia Minor [Turkey] 1
Event: Ancestor M
Event: Progenitor X
Event: Ruled 306 - 301 BC, King of Macedonia 1
Note:
Antigonus I MONOPHTHALMUS ("One-Eyed"), also called ANTIGONUS I CYCLOPS (b. 382 BC--d. 301, Ipsus, Phrygia, Asia Minor [now in Turkey]), Macedonian general under Alexander the Great who founded the Macedonian dynasty of the Antigonids (306-168 BC), becoming king in 306. An exceptional strategist and combat leader, he was also an astute ruler who cultivated the friendship of Athens and other Greek city-states.
Military campaigns.
In 333 Alexander had appointed Antigonus satrap of Phrygia, and upon Alexander's death he also received the governorship of Pamphylia and Lycia from the regent of the Macedonian empire, Perdiccas. He then formed an alliance against Perdiccas with Antipater, the governor of Macedonia, and with Ptolemy of Egypt, Lysimachus of Thrace, and Craterus (all of whom had served under Alexander). Perdiccas was murdered, and Antipater became regent of the empire. In 321 Antipater appointed Antigonus commander in chief of his army in Asia and sent him against Eumenes, the satrap of Cappadocia and an adherent of Perdiccas. Antigonus defeated Eumenes and then besieged him unsuccessfully in the mountain fortress Nora. Polyperchon succeeded Antipater as regent, and Antigonus joined forces against him with Cassander (Antipater's son), Ptolemy, Lysimachus, and Eumenes in 319. When Eumenes, his rival in Asia Minor (Anatolia), went over to Polyperchon, Antigonus defeated him with the aid of Seleucus and Peithon (the satraps of Babylonia and Media, respectively) at Gabiene. Then, wishing to eliminate all possible rivals, Antigonus had both Eumenes and Peithon executed; Seleucus escaped to Egypt.
Antigonus was now in complete control of Asia Minor, but Ptolemy, Lysimachus, Cassander, and Seleucus allied themselves against him in the first coalition war (315-311) in an attempt to thwart his plan of reuniting Alexander's empire. Antigonus occupied Syria and proclaimed himself regent. In order to win the support of the Greek city-states, whose resistance to subjugation presented the chief stumbling block to the formation of a Hellenistic monarchy, he announced to his assembled army that all the Greeks should be free, autonomous, and ungarrisoned.This political slogan was to be sounded again and again--almost immediately by Ptolemy and for a final time by the Romans in 196. With the aid of his officers in Greece, Antigonus drove out Cassander's Macedonian forces of occupation there and formed the island cities in the Aegean into the League of the Islanders, preparatory to his invasion of Greece. His ally, the city of Rhodes, furnished him with the necessary fleet.
While he was engaged in conquering Caria, his son, Demetrius Poliorcetes, was defeated at Gaza by Ptolemy and Seleucus (312). Seleucus returned to his former province, Babylonia. In view of this new threat from the East, Antigonus decided to make peace with all of his adversaries except Seleucus. All of the diadochoi (Alexander's successors) confirmed the existing boundaries and the freedom of the Greek cities. Antigonus, no longer regent but merely strategos (officer in charge) of the whole of Asia, was to rule in Syria and from the Hellespont to the Euphrates.
Activities in Greece.
Then Ptolemy attacked Cilicia, and the second coalition war (310-301)against Antigonus broke out. In Greece in 307, Antigonus' son Demetrius ousted Demetrius of Phaleron, Cassander's governor of Athens, and reestablished the old Athenian constitution. The grateful Athenians honoured Antigonus and Demetrius as divine saviours (theoi soteres). Cassander's influence in Greece was now broken, and in 306 Demetrius defeated Ptolemy's fleet near Salamis on the island of Cyprus and conqueredthe island. This victory gave Antigonus control of the Aegean, of theeastern Mediterranean, and of all of the Near East except Babylonia. The assembled army proclaimed him king, and his friends adorned him with the diadem. For his part, he appointed Demetrius king and co-regentand sent him the diadem. This was to become a traditional ceremony inthe Hellenistic monarchy.
In 305, after Antigonus had vainly attacked Egypt, Ptolemy also assumed the title of king, and Cassander, Lysimachus, and Seleucus followedsuit. The partition of Alexander's empire into five states had now been formally established. In 305 Antigonus sent Demetrius to conquer Rhodes, which had refused him armed support against Ptolemy. After a year's unsuccessful siege he concluded a peace treaty and an alliance with the island state, guaranteeing it autonomy and neutrality in his conflicts with Ptolemy. This concession was necessary because in the meantime Cassander had invaded Attica and was besieging Athens. Demetriusdrove him out of central Greece, and the Athenians bestowed on him a new religious honour, synnaos ("having the same temple") of the templeof the goddess Athena.
In 303 he occupied Corinth, Sicyon, and Argos in the Peloponnese, andAchaea, Elis, and almost all of Arcadia joined his side. In 302 Antigonus and Demetrius crowned their success by renewing the pan-Hellenic league, which Philip II of Macedonia had formed in 337. Ambassadors from all the Hellenic states--with the exception of Sparta, Messenia, and Thessaly--elected Antigonus and Demetrius protectors of the new league at Corinth. It was to be an "eternal" treaty, extending to the descendants of the kings. Each member state furnished a contingent of troops for a league army that was commanded by the kings or their deputies. The league was to ensure a general peace in Hellas, but first and foremost it was to aid Antigonus against Cassander.
Final campaigns.
Now at the zenith of his power, Antigonus demanded Cassander's unconditional submission. He wanted possession of Macedonia, the native landof his dynasty, and to establish his dominion over Alexander's formerempire. The other diadochoi, however, warned by Cassander's fate, nowjoined forces to attack the omnivorous old man. From Babylonia, Seleucus invaded Asia Minor, Ptolemy attacked Syria, and Lysimachus moved into the western part of Asia Minor. Docimus, the regent of Phrygia, and Phoenix, the strategos of Lycia, deserted Antigonus. He, in turn, recalled Demetrius, left his capital city, Antigoneia (which he had founded on the Orontes in 306), and crossed the Taurus Mountains. Lysimachus, who was waiting for Seleucus, avoided an engagement. In vain Antigonus sent a corps of raiders into Babylonia in order to divide his enemies' forces. In 301 the united armies of Lysimachus and Seleucus engaged the forces of Antigonus and Demetrius at Ipsus in Phrygia. Demetrius made the error of pursuing the enemy's cavalry too far, and as a result Antigonus, age 80, lost the battle and his life.
Antigonus had been an excellent strategist who, until then, had neverlost a battle. He had a genuine admiration for Greek civilization. Hefounded several cities, especially in Asia Minor, and united several small communities into unitary, large centres: Lebedus (Lebedos) and Teos, for example. Several Greek artists graced his court; Apelles painted his portrait in profile because of his missing eye

Birth: in 382 BC 1
Death: in 301 BC, Ipsus, Phrygia, Asia Minor [Turkey] 1
Event: Ancestor M
Event: Progenitor X
Event: Ruled 306 - 301 BC, King of Macedonia 1
Note:
Antigonus I MONOPHTHALMUS ("One-Eyed"), also called ANTIGONUS I CYCLOPS (b. 382 BC--d. 301, Ipsus, Phrygia, Asia Minor [now in Turkey]), Macedonian general under Alexander the Great who founded the Macedonian dynasty of the Antigonids (306-168 BC), becoming king in 306. An exceptional strategist and combat leader, he was also an astute ruler who cultivated the friendship of Athens and other Greek city-states.
Military campaigns.
In 333 Alexander had appointed Antigonus satrap of Phrygia, and upon Alexander's death he also received the governorship of Pamphylia and Lycia from the regent of the Macedonian empire, Perdiccas. He then formed an alliance against Perdiccas with Antipater, the governor of Macedonia, and with Ptolemy of Egypt, Lysimachus of Thrace, and Craterus (all of whom had served under Alexander). Perdiccas was murdered, and Antipater became regent of the empire. In 321 Antipater appointed Antigonus commander in chief of his army in Asia and sent him against Eumenes, the satrap of Cappadocia and an adherent of Perdiccas. Antigonus defeated Eumenes and then besieged him unsuccessfully in the mountain fortress Nora. Polyperchon succeeded Antipater as regent, and Antigonus joined forces against him with Cassander (Antipater's son), Ptolemy, Lysimachus, and Eumenes in 319. When Eumenes, his rival in Asia Minor (Anatolia), went over to Polyperchon, Antigonus defeated him with the aid of Seleucus and Peithon (the satraps of Babylonia and Media, respectively) at Gabiene. Then, wishing to eliminate all possible rivals, Antigonus had both Eumenes and Peithon executed; Seleucus escaped to Egypt.
Antigonus was now in complete control of Asia Minor, but Ptolemy, Lysimachus, Cassander, and Seleucus allied themselves against him in the first coalition war (315-311) in an attempt to thwart his plan of reuniting Alexander's empire. Antigonus occupied Syria and proclaimed himself regent. In order to win the support of the Greek city-states, whose resistance to subjugation presented the chief stumbling block to the formation of a Hellenistic monarchy, he announced to his assembled army that all the Greeks should be free, autonomous, and ungarrisoned.This political slogan was to be sounded again and again--almost immediately by Ptolemy and for a final time by the Romans in 196. With the aid of his officers in Greece, Antigonus drove out Cassander's Macedonian forces of occupation there and formed the island cities in the Aegean into the League of the Islanders, preparatory to his invasion of Greece. His ally, the city of Rhodes, furnished him with the necessary fleet.
While he was engaged in conquering Caria, his son, Demetrius Poliorcetes, was defeated at Gaza by Ptolemy and Seleucus (312). Seleucus returned to his former province, Babylonia. In view of this new threat from the East, Antigonus decided to make peace with all of his adversaries except Seleucus. All of the diadochoi (Alexander's successors) confirmed the existing boundaries and the freedom of the Greek cities. Antigonus, no longer regent but merely strategos (officer in charge) of the whole of Asia, was to rule in Syria and from the Hellespont to the Euphrates.
Activities in Greece.
Then Ptolemy attacked Cilicia, and the second coalition war (310-301)against Antigonus broke out. In Greece in 307, Antigonus' son Demetrius ousted Demetrius of Phaleron, Cassander's governor of Athens, and reestablished the old Athenian constitution. The grateful Athenians honoured Antigonus and Demetrius as divine saviours (theoi soteres). Cassander's influence in Greece was now broken, and in 306 Demetrius defeated Ptolemy's fleet near Salamis on the island of Cyprus and conqueredthe island. This victory gave Antigonus control of the Aegean, of theeastern Mediterranean, and of all of the Near East except Babylonia. The assembled army proclaimed him king, and his friends adorned him with the diadem. For his part, he appointed Demetrius king and co-regentand sent him the diadem. This was to become a traditional ceremony inthe Hellenistic monarchy.
In 305, after Antigonus had vainly attacked Egypt, Ptolemy also assumed the title of king, and Cassander, Lysimachus, and Seleucus followedsuit. The partition of Alexander's empire into five states had now been formally established. In 305 Antigonus sent Demetrius to conquer Rhodes, which had refused him armed support against Ptolemy. After a year's unsuccessful siege he concluded a peace treaty and an alliance with the island state, guaranteeing it autonomy and neutrality in his conflicts with Ptolemy. This concession was necessary because in the meantime Cassander had invaded Attica and was besieging Athens. Demetriusdrove him out of central Greece, and the Athenians bestowed on him a new religious honour, synnaos ("having the same temple") of the templeof the goddess Athena.
In 303 he occupied Corinth, Sicyon, and Argos in the Peloponnese, andAchaea, Elis, and almost all of Arcadia joined his side. In 302 Antigonus and Demetrius crowned their success by renewing the pan-Hellenic league, which Philip II of Macedonia had formed in 337. Ambassadors from all the Hellenic states--with the exception of Sparta, Messenia, and Thessaly--elected Antigonus and Demetrius protectors of the new league at Corinth. It was to be an "eternal" treaty, extending to the descendants of the kings. Each member state furnished a contingent of troops for a league army that was commanded by the kings or their deputies. The league was to ensure a general peace in Hellas, but first and foremost it was to aid Antigonus against Cassander.
Final campaigns.
Now at the zenith of his power, Antigonus demanded Cassander's unconditional submission. He wanted possession of Macedonia, the native landof his dynasty, and to establish his dominion over Alexander's formerempire. The other diadochoi, however, warned by Cassander's fate, nowjoined forces to attack the omnivorous old man. From Babylonia, Seleucus invaded Asia Minor, Ptolemy attacked Syria, and Lysimachus moved into the western part of Asia Minor. Docimus, the regent of Phrygia, and Phoenix, the strategos of Lycia, deserted Antigonus. He, in turn, recalled Demetrius, left his capital city, Antigoneia (which he had founded on the Orontes in 306), and crossed the Taurus Mountains. Lysimachus, who was waiting for Seleucus, avoided an engagement. In vain Antigonus sent a corps of raiders into Babylonia in order to divide his enemies' forces. In 301 the united armies of Lysimachus and Seleucus engaged the forces of Antigonus and Demetrius at Ipsus in Phrygia. Demetrius made the error of pursuing the enemy's cavalry too far, and as a result Antigonus, age 80, lost the battle and his life.
Antigonus had been an excellent strategist who, until then, had neverlost a battle. He had a genuine admiration for Greek civilization. Hefounded several cities, especially in Asia Minor, and united several small communities into unitary, large centres: Lebedus (Lebedos) and Teos, for example. Several Greek artists graced his court; Apelles painted his portrait in profile because of his missing eye

Birth: in 382 BC 1
Death: in 301 BC, Ipsus, Phrygia, Asia Minor [Turkey] 1
Event: Ancestor M
Event: Progenitor X
Event: Ruled 306 - 301 BC, King of Macedonia 1
Note:
Antigonus I MONOPHTHALMUS ("One-Eyed"), also called ANTIGONUS I CYCLOPS (b. 382 BC--d. 301, Ipsus, Phrygia, Asia Minor [now in Turkey]), Macedonian general under Alexander the Great who founded the Macedonian dynasty of the Antigonids (306-168 BC), becoming king in 306. An exceptional strategist and combat leader, he was also an astute ruler who cultivated the friendship of Athens and other Greek city-states.
Military campaigns.
In 333 Alexander had appointed Antigonus satrap of Phrygia, and upon Alexander's death he also received the governorship of Pamphylia and Lycia from the regent of the Macedonian empire, Perdiccas. He then formed an alliance against Perdiccas with Antipater, the governor of Macedonia, and with Ptolemy of Egypt, Lysimachus of Thrace, and Craterus (all of whom had served under Alexander). Perdiccas was murdered, and Antipater became regent of the empire. In 321 Antipater appointed Antigonus commander in chief of his army in Asia and sent him against Eumenes, the satrap of Cappadocia and an adherent of Perdiccas. Antigonus defeated Eumenes and then besieged him unsuccessfully in the mountain fortress Nora. Polyperchon succeeded Antipater as regent, and Antigonus joined forces against him with Cassander (Antipater's son), Ptolemy, Lysimachus, and Eumenes in 319. When Eumenes, his rival in Asia Minor (Anatolia), went over to Polyperchon, Antigonus defeated him with the aid of Seleucus and Peithon (the satraps of Babylonia and Media, respectively) at Gabiene. Then, wishing to eliminate all possible rivals, Antigonus had both Eumenes and Peithon executed; Seleucus escaped to Egypt.
Antigonus was now in complete control of Asia Minor, but Ptolemy, Lysimachus, Cassander, and Seleucus allied themselves against him in the first coalition war (315-311) in an attempt to thwart his plan of reuniting Alexander's empire. Antigonus occupied Syria and proclaimed himself regent. In order to win the support of the Greek city-states, whose resistance to subjugation presented the chief stumbling block to the formation of a Hellenistic monarchy, he announced to his assembled army that all the Greeks should be free, autonomous, and ungarrisoned.This political slogan was to be sounded again and again--almost immediately by Ptolemy and for a final time by the Romans in 196. With the aid of his officers in Greece, Antigonus drove out Cassander's Macedonian forces of occupation there and formed the island cities in the Aegean into the League of the Islanders, preparatory to his invasion of Greece. His ally, the city of Rhodes, furnished him with the necessary fleet.
While he was engaged in conquering Caria, his son, Demetrius Poliorcetes, was defeated at Gaza by Ptolemy and Seleucus (312). Seleucus returned to his former province, Babylonia. In view of this new threat from the East, Antigonus decided to make peace with all of his adversaries except Seleucus. All of the diadochoi (Alexander's successors) confirmed the existing boundaries and the freedom of the Greek cities. Antigonus, no longer regent but merely strategos (officer in charge) of the whole of Asia, was to rule in Syria and from the Hellespont to the Euphrates.
Activities in Greece.
Then Ptolemy attacked Cilicia, and the second coalition war (310-301)against Antigonus broke out. In Greece in 307, Antigonus' son Demetrius ousted Demetrius of Phaleron, Cassander's governor of Athens, and reestablished the old Athenian constitution. The grateful Athenians honoured Antigonus and Demetrius as divine saviours (theoi soteres). Cassander's influence in Greece was now broken, and in 306 Demetrius defeated Ptolemy's fleet near Salamis on the island of Cyprus and conqueredthe island. This victory gave Antigonus control of the Aegean, of theeastern Mediterranean, and of all of the Near East except Babylonia. The assembled army proclaimed him king, and his friends adorned him with the diadem. For his part, he appointed Demetrius king and co-regentand sent him the diadem. This was to become a traditional ceremony inthe Hellenistic monarchy.
In 305, after Antigonus had vainly attacked Egypt, Ptolemy also assumed the title of king, and Cassander, Lysimachus, and Seleucus followedsuit. The partition of Alexander's empire into five states had now been formally established. In 305 Antigonus sent Demetrius to conquer Rhodes, which had refused him armed support against Ptolemy. After a year's unsuccessful siege he concluded a peace treaty and an alliance with the island state, guaranteeing it autonomy and neutrality in his conflicts with Ptolemy. This concession was necessary because in the meantime Cassander had invaded Attica and was besieging Athens. Demetriusdrove him out of central Greece, and the Athenians bestowed on him a new religious honour, synnaos ("having the same temple") of the templeof the goddess Athena.
In 303 he occupied Corinth, Sicyon, and Argos in the Peloponnese, andAchaea, Elis, and almost all of Arcadia joined his side. In 302 Antigonus and Demetrius crowned their success by renewing the pan-Hellenic league, which Philip II of Macedonia had formed in 337. Ambassadors from all the Hellenic states--with the exception of Sparta, Messenia, and Thessaly--elected Antigonus and Demetrius protectors of the new league at Corinth. It was to be an "eternal" treaty, extending to the descendants of the kings. Each member state furnished a contingent of troops for a league army that was commanded by the kings or their deputies. The league was to ensure a general peace in Hellas, but first and foremost it was to aid Antigonus against Cassander.
Final campaigns.
Now at the zenith of his power, Antigonus demanded Cassander's unconditional submission. He wanted possession of Macedonia, the native landof his dynasty, and to establish his dominion over Alexander's formerempire. The other diadochoi, however, warned by Cassander's fate, nowjoined forces to attack the omnivorous old man. From Babylonia, Seleucus invaded Asia Minor, Ptolemy attacked Syria, and Lysimachus moved into the western part of Asia Minor. Docimus, the regent of Phrygia, and Phoenix, the strategos of Lycia, deserted Antigonus. He, in turn, recalled Demetrius, left his capital city, Antigoneia (which he had founded on the Orontes in 306), and crossed the Taurus Mountains. Lysimachus, who was waiting for Seleucus, avoided an engagement. In vain Antigonus sent a corps of raiders into Babylonia in order to divide his enemies' forces. In 301 the united armies of Lysimachus and Seleucus engaged the forces of Antigonus and Demetrius at Ipsus in Phrygia. Demetrius made the error of pursuing the enemy's cavalry too far, and as a result Antigonus, age 80, lost the battle and his life.
Antigonus had been an excellent strategist who, until then, had neverlost a battle. He had a genuine admiration for Greek civilization. Hefounded several cities, especially in Asia Minor, and united several small communities into unitary, large centres: Lebedus (Lebedos) and Teos, for example. Several Greek artists graced his court; Apelles painted his portrait in profile because of his missing eye

Antigonus I Monophthalmus
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Antigonus I Cyclops or Monophthalmus ("the One-eyed", so called from his having lost an eye) (382 BC - 301 BC) was a Macedonian nobleman, general, and satrap under Alexander the Great. He was a major figure in the Wars of the Diadochi after Alexander's death. He established the Antigonid dynasty and declared himself King in 306 BC.

Antigonus was appointed governor of Greater Phrygia in 333 BC, and in the division of the provinces after Alexander's death in 323 BC he also received Pamphylia and Lycia from Perdiccas, regent of the empire. He incurred the enmity of Perdiccas, the regent, by refusing to assist Eumenes to obtain possession of the provinces allotted to him. In danger of his life he escaped with his son Demetrius into Greece, where he obtained the favour of Antipater, regent of Macedonia (321 BC). Soon after, on Perdiccas's death in 321 BC, a new division of empire took place. Antigonus found himself entrusted with the command of the war against Eumenes, who had joined Perdiccas against the coalition of Antipater, Antigonus, Ptolemy, Craterus, and the other generals. Eumenes was defeated and forced to retire to the fortress of Nora in Cappadocia, and a new army that was marching to his relief was routed by Antigonus.

Polyperchon succeeded Antipater regent of the empire in 319 BC, to the exclusion of Cassander, his son. Antigonus resolved to set himself up as lord of all Asia, and in conjunction with Cassander and Ptolemy of Egypt, refused to recognize Polyperchon. He entered into negotiations with Eumenes; but Eumenes remained faithful to the royal house. Effecting his escape from Nora, he raised an army, and formed a coalition with the satraps of the eastern provinces. Antigonus fought against Eumenes two great battles at Paraitacene in 317 BC and Gabiene in 316 BC, following which Eumenes was at last delivered up to Antigonus through treachery in Persia and put to death (316 BC).

Antigonus again claimed authority over most Asia, seized the treasures at Susa and entered Babylon, of which Seleucus was governor. Seleucus fled to Ptolemy and entered into a league with him, Lysimachus and Cassander (315 BC) against Antigonus. In 314 BC Antigonus invaded Syria, under Ptolemy's control, and besieged Tyre for more than a year. His son Demetrius was defeated at the Battle of Gaza by Ptolemy in 312 BC and lost Babylonia.

After the war had been carried on with varying success from 315 to 311, peace was concluded, by which the government of Asia Minor and Syria was provisionally secured to Antigonus. This agreement was soon violated on the pretext that garrisons had been placed in some of the free Greek cities by Antigonus, and Ptolemy and Cassander renewed hostilities against him. Demetrius Poliorcetes, the son of Antigonus, wrested part of Greece from Cassander. At first Ptolemy had made a successful descent upon Asia Minor and on several of the islands of the Archipelago; but he was at length totally defeated by Demetrius at the naval battle of Salamis.

Demetrius conquered Cyprus in 306 BC. Following the victory Antigonus assumed the title king and bestowed the same upon his son, a declaration that he was claiming to be Alexander's heir. He now prepared a large army and a formidable fleet, the command of which he gave to Demetrius, and hastened to attack Ptolemy in his own dominions. His invasion of Egypt, however, proved a failure; he was unable to penetrate Ptolemy's defences and was obliged to retire. Demetrius in 305 BC attempted the reduction of Rhodes, which had refused to assist Antigonus against Egypt. The siege of Rhodes lasted a year and ended in 304 BC when Demetrius meeting with obstinate resistance, he was obliged to make a peace treaty upon the best terms that he could.

The most powerful satraps of the empire, Cassander, Seleucus, Ptolemy and Lysimachus, responded to Antigonus's assumption of the royal title by proclaiming themselves also kings. Antigonus soon found himself at war with all four, largely because his territory shared borders with each of them. He demanded from Cassander the unconditional submission of Macedonia. Seleucus, Lysimachus and Ptolemy joined forces and attacked him. He was obliged to recall Demetrius from Greece, although he was again winning success after success there, and moved against Lysimachus. The army of father and son was defeated by the united forces of Seleucus and Lysimachus at the decisive Ipsus in 301 BC. Antigonus himself died in the battle after being struck by a javelin, in the eighty-first year of his age. Prior to Ipsus, he had never before had lost a battle. With his death any plans he may have had of reuniting Alexander's Empire came to an end. The victors did not claim power over each other, but instead accepted their kingdoms as separate. Antigonus's kingdom was divided up, with most ending up in the hands of Lysimachus and Seleucus.

Demetrius took control of Macedon in 294 BC, which the family held, off and on, until it was conquered by the Roman Republic at the Battle of Pydna in 168 BC.
Preceded by:
- Antigonid dynasty
306 BC–301 BC Succeeded by:
Demetrius I of Macedon


[edit]

References

* Diodorus Siculus xviii., xx. 46-86
* Plutarch, Demetrius, Eumenes
* Nepos, Eumenes
* Justin xv. 1-4
* Köhler, "Das Reich des Antigonos," in the Sitzungsberichte d. Berl. Akad., 1898, p. 835 f.
* This article incorporates text from the Encyclopædia Britannica Eleventh Edition, a publication now in the public domain.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]