== Notes for [[Item:Q111001|Q111001]] ==

Name: Antonio Minor of Rome

Given Name: Antonio Minor

Surname: of Rome

Sex: F

_UID: A30B2AFA5118D811BE490080C8C142CC42D2

Change Date: 18 Oct 2005

Birth: 36 BC

Death: 38

Father: MARC @@ ANTHONY OF ROME b: 83 BC

Mother: Octavia of Rome

Marriage 1 Nero Claudius Germanicus Drusus b: 38 BC

Married:

Children

Tiberius Claudius Caesar Nero of Rome b: 1 AUG 10 BC in Lugundum (Lyons)

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I6862

Antonia Minor

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Antonia Minor (PIR2 A 885), also known as Antonia the Younger or simply Antonia (31 January 36 BCE-September/October 37CE) was a daughter of Roman politician Mark Antony and Octavia Minor, niece of emperor Augustus, and mother of future emperor Claudius.

Antonia is one of the most prominent Roman women. She is celebrated for her virtue and beauty. She was the youngest daughter to Octavia Minor and Mark Antony and was also the favorite niece of her mother’s younger brother, Rome’s first Emperor Augustus.

Contents [hide]

1 Birth and early life

2 Marriage to Drusus

3 Antonia's children

4 Succession of Caligula and death

5 In art and popular culture

5.1 In ancient art

5.2 In popular culture

6 References

6.1 Ancient sources

6.2 Secondary sources

[edit]Birth and early life

She was born in Athens, Greece and after 36 BCE was brought to Rome by her mother and her siblings. Antonia never had the chance to know her father, Mark Antony, who divorced her mother in 32 BCE and committed suicide in 30 BCE. She was raised by her mother, her uncle and her aunt, Livia Drusilla. Due to inheritances, she owned properties in Italy, Greece and Egypt. She was a wealthy and influential woman who often received people, who were visiting Rome. Antonia had many male friends and they included wealthy Jew Alexander the Alabarch and Lucius Vitellius, a consul and father of future Emperor Aulus Vitellius.

[edit]Marriage to Drusus

In 16 BCE, she married the Roman general and consul Nero Claudius Drusus. Drusus was the stepson of her uncle Augustus, second son to Livia Drusilla and brother to future Emperor Tiberius. They had several children, but only three survived. Their children were the famous general Germanicus, Livilla and the Roman Emperor Claudius. Antonia was grandmother to Emperor Caligula, Empress Agrippina the Younger and great-grandmother and great-aunt to Emperor Nero. Drusus died in June 9 BCE in Germany, due to complications from injuries he sustained after falling from a horse. After his death, although pressured by her uncle to remarry, she never did.

Antonia raised her children in Rome and had Tiberius as their guardian. Germanicus died in 19CE. On the orders of Tiberius and Livia Drusilla, Antonia was forbidden to go to his funeral. When Livia Drusilla died in June 29CE, Antonia took care of Caligula, Julia Agrippina, Julia Drusilla, Julia Livilla and later Claudia Antonia, her younger grandchildren.

[edit]Antonia's children

Germanicus was very popular among the citizens of Rome, who enthusiastically celebrated all his victories. He was also a favourite with Augustus, his grandfather-in-law, who, for some time, considered him as heir to the Empire. He was married to Agrippina the Elder, daughter of Julia the Elder (Augustus's own daughter) and Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa. He had nine children by Agrippina but only six lived to adulthood. They were Nero Caesar, Drusus Caesar, Gaius Caesar (Caligula), Julia Agrippina, Julia Drusilla and Julia Livilla. In 4CE, Augustus finally decided in favour of Tiberius, his stepson, but he was compelled to adopt Germanicus as a son and name him his heir. After the death of Augustus in 14CE, the Senate appointed Germanicus commander of the forces in Germania. Tiberius was made emperor, but he was highly unpopular and the legions rioted on the news. Refusing to accept Tiberius, the rebel soldiers cried for Germanicus as emperor. However, Germanicus refused. Germanicus died in Antioch, Syria in 19CE, a year after he defeated the kingdoms of Cappadocia and Commagene. His death was surrounded by speculation, and several sources refer to claims that he was poisoned by Gnaeus Calpurnius Piso, governor of Syria, under orders of the emperor Tiberius.

In 31CE, Antonia exposed a plot by her daughter Livilla and Tiberius’ notorious Praetorian prefect, Sejanus, to murder the Emperor Tiberius and Caligula and to seize the throne for themselves. Livilla had poisoned her husband, Drusus Julius Caesar, Tiberius' son, in order to remove rivals. Sejanus was murdered on Tiberius’s orders and Livilla was handed over to her formidable mother. Cassius Dio states that Antonia imprisoned Livilla in her room and allowed her to starve to death. After Livilla's death, Antonia's only remaining child was Claudius. Due to his constant illnesses and physical disabilities, she would constantly put him down. She would say a monster: a man whom nature had not finished but had merely begun or, when accusing anyone of stupidity, would exclaim, he is a bigger fool even than my son Claudius!.

[edit]Succession of Caligula and death

Forrás / Source:

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antonia_Minor

Ifjabb Antonia [szerkesztés]

Megtekintett lap (+/-)

Ez az utolsó megtekintett változat (összes); elfogadva: 2009. november 2.

Pontosság megtekintett

A Wikipédiából, a szabad enciklopédiából.

Ugrás: navigáció, keresés

Julia Antonia Minor („az ifjabb” latinul) (Kr. e. 36. január 30./31. – 37. május/október) Marcus Antonius és Octavia kisebbik lánya, Augustus római császár unokahúga, Antonia Maior testvére, Claudius császár édesanyja, Caligula nagyanyja és Nero dédanyja volt.

Nero Claudius Drusushoz – Livia császárnő kisebbik fiához, Tiberius öccséhez – ment feleségül. Öt gyermekük közül három maradt életben: Germanicus, Livilla és Claudius. Férjét hűségesen követte annak galliai és germaniai hadjáratain.

Drusus halála (Kr. u. 9.) után nem házasodott újra. Amikor fia, Germanicus 19-ben gyanús körülmények között elhunyt, Tiberius császár és Livia anyacsászárné megtiltotta, hogy megjelenjen temetésén. Livia 29-ben bekövetkezett halála után ő viselte gondját legkisebb unokáinak, az idősebb Agrippinától származó Caligulának és Drusillának.

31-ben leleplezett egy összeesküvést, melyet lánya, Livilla és Seianus, a praefectus praetorio szőtt Tiberius ellen. A császár meghálálva Antonia szerepét az összeesküvés felszámolásában, Livilla megbüntetését Antoniára bízta, aki – Tacitus közlése alapján – szobájába záratta és halálra éheztette gyermekét, így elkerülhette a család nevének bemocskolását. Antoniát csak egyetlen gyermeke – a megvetett Claudius – élte túl (Antonia egyszer szörnyetegnek nevezte kisebbik fiát, aki mind észbeliek, mind fizikum tekintetében jóval elmaradt Germanicus mögött ifjúkorában).

Antonia 37-ben, miután elnyerte az Augusta címet, öngyilkosságot követett el Caligula parancsára, miután boldogtalanságának mert hangot adni legkisebb unokája, Tiberius Gemellus meggyilkolása után. Suetonius szerint viszont Caligula megmérgeztette nagyanyját

Forrás / Source:

http://hu.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ifjabb_Antonia

--------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antonia_Minor

--------------------

Antonia Minor (PIR2 A 885), also known as Antonia the Younger or simply Antonia (31 January 36 BC-September/October 37) was a daughter of Roman politician Mark Antony and Octavia Minor, sister of emperor Augustus, and mother of future emperor Claudius.

Antonia is one of the most prominent Roman women. She is celebrated for her virtue and beauty. She was the youngest daughter to Octavia Minor and Mark Antony and was also the favorite niece of her mother’s younger brother, Rome’s first Emperor Augustus.

Read more: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antonia_Minor

--------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antonia_Minor

--------------------

Born : 36 BC

-----------------------

committed suicide

--------------------

Born : 36 BC

------------------

committed suicide

--------------------

Born : 36 BC

-----------------------

committed suicide
--------------------
She committed suicide on Caligula's orders after expressing unhappiness over the murder of her youngest grandson Tiberius Gemellus. Caligula may have given her the poison himself.
--------------------
Born : 36 BC

------------------

committed suicide
--------------------
Född: 36 f.Kr.

Död: 37-05-01

--------------------
8435152768110117. Augusta Antonia "The Younger" ROMAN EMPIRE,1601,1746 daughter of Ruler Of Rome Mark Anthony III ROMAN EMPIRE and Octavia Thurina Minor ROMAN EMPIRE, was born in 35 B.C. in Rome, , Lazio, Italy and died in 37 at age 72. General Notes:

An excellent woman, the title of Augusta was conferred upon her.

Caligula is reported by Dio Cassius, who wrote two centuries after the event, to have forced his saintly grandmother *Antonia to kill herself

Antonia married Emperor Caius Drusus Nero ROMAN EMPIRE 1601,3472 in Lyons, France. Caius was born in 42 B.C. in Palace Augustus, Roma, Italy 3472 and died on 16 March 37 in Roma, Italy 3472 at age 79.

http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.com/~mgholler/Caden/a53.htm#i547458963
--------------------
About Antonia Minor Augusta Birth and early life: She was born in Athens, Greece and after 36 BCE was brought to Rome by her mother and her siblings. Antonia never had the chance to know her father, Mark Antony, who divorced her mother in 32 BCE and committed suicide in 30 BCE. She was raised by her mother, her uncle and her aunt, Livia Drusilla. Due to inheritances, she owned properties in Italy, Greece and Egypt. She was a wealthy and influential woman who often received people, who were visiting Rome. Antonia had many male friends and they included wealthy Jew Alexander the Alabarch and Lucius Vitellius, a consul and father of future Emperor Aulus Vitellius. Marriage to Drusus: In 16 BCE, she married the Roman general and consul Nero Claudius Drusus. Drusus was the stepson of her uncle Augustus, second son to Livia Drusilla and brother to future Emperor Tiberius. They had several children, but only three survived. Their children were the famous general Germanicus, Livilla and the Roman Emperor Claudius. Antonia was grandmother to Emperor Caligula, Empress Agrippina the Younger and great-grandmother and great-aunt to Emperor Nero. Drusus died in June 9 BCE in Germany, due to complications from injuries he sustained after falling from a horse. After his death, although pressured by her uncle to remarry, she never did. Antonia raised her children in Rome and had Tiberius as their guardian. Germanicus died in 19CE. On the orders of Tiberius and Livia Drusilla, Antonia was forbidden to go to his funeral. When Livia Drusilla died in June 29CE, Antonia took care of Caligula, Julia Agrippina, Julia Drusilla, Julia Livilla and later Claudia Antonia, her younger grandchildren. Antonia's children: Germanicus was very popular among the citizens of Rome, who enthusiastically celebrated all his victories. He was also a favourite with Augustus, his grandfather-in-law, who, for some time, considered him as heir to the Empire. He was married to Agrippina the Elder, daughter of Julia the Elder (Augustus's own daughter) and Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa. He had nine children by Agrippina but only six lived to adulthood. They were Nero Caesar, Drusus Caesar, Gaius Caesar (Caligula), Julia Agrippina, Julia Drusilla and Julia Livilla. In 4CE, Augustus finally decided in favour of Tiberius, his stepson, but he was compelled to adopt Germanicus as a son and name him his heir. After the death of Augustus in 14CE, the Senate appointed Germanicus commander of the forces in Germania. Tiberius was made emperor, but he was highly unpopular and the legions rioted on the news. Refusing to accept Tiberius, the rebel soldiers cried for Germanicus as emperor. However, Germanicus refused. Germanicus died in Antioch, Syria in 19CE, a year after he defeated the kingdoms of Cappadocia and Commagene. His death was surrounded by speculation, and several sources refer to claims that he was poisoned by Gnaeus Calpurnius Piso, governor of Syria, under orders of the emperor Tiberius. In 31CE, Antonia exposed a plot by her daughter Livilla and Tiberius’ notorious Praetorian prefect, Sejanus, to murder the Emperor Tiberius and Caligula and to seize the throne for themselves. Livilla had poisoned her husband, Drusus Julius Caesar, Tiberius' son, in order to remove rivals. Sejanus was murdered on Tiberius’s orders and Livilla was handed over to her formidable mother. Cassius Dio states that Antonia imprisoned Livilla in her room and allowed her to starve to death. After Livilla's death, Antonia's only remaining child was Claudius. Due to his constant illnesses and physical disabilities, she would constantly put him down. She would say a monster: a man whom nature had not finished but had merely begun or, when accusing anyone of stupidity, would exclaim, he is a bigger fool even than my son Claudius!.
--------------------
Antonia Minor (PIR2 A 885), also known as Antonia the Younger or simply Antonia (31 January 36 BC - September/October AD 37) was the younger of two daughters of Mark Antony and Octavia Minor.[1] She was a niece of the Emperor Augustus, sister-in-law of the Emperor Tiberius, paternal grandmother of the Emperor Caligula and Empress Agrippina the Younger, mother of the Emperor Claudius, and both maternal great-grandmother and paternal great-aunt of the Emperor Nero. She was additionally the maternal great-aunt of the Empress Valeria Messalina and Faustus Cornelius Sulla Felix, and paternal grandmother of Claudia Antonia, Claudia Octavia, and Britannicus. Antonia is one of the most prominent Roman women. She is celebrated for her virtue and beauty. She was the youngest daughter to Octavia Minor and Mark Antony and was also the favorite niece of her mother’s younger brother, Rome’s first Emperor Augustus. Birth and early life [edit]

She was born in Athens, Greece and after 36 BC was brought to Rome by her mother and her siblings. Antonia never had the chance to know her father, Mark Antony, who divorced her mother in 32 BC and committed suicide in 30 BC. She was raised by her mother, her uncle and her aunt, Livia Drusilla. Due to inheritances, she owned properties in Italy, Greece and Egypt. She was a wealthy and influential woman who often received people, who were visiting Rome. Antonia had many male friends and they included wealthy Jew Alexander the Alabarch and Lucius Vitellius, a consul and father of future Emperor Aulus Vitellius. Marriage to Drusus [edit]

In 16 BC, she married the Roman general and consul Nero Claudius Drusus. Drusus was the stepson of her uncle Augustus, second son of Livia Drusilla and brother of future Emperor Tiberius. They had several children, but only three survived: the famous general Germanicus, Livilla and the Roman Emperor Claudius. Antonia was the grandmother of the Emperor Caligula, the Empress Agrippina the Younger and through Agrippina, great-grandmother and great-aunt of the Emperor Nero. Drusus died in June 9 BC in Germany, due to complications from injuries he sustained after falling from a horse. After his death, although pressured by her uncle to remarry, she never did.

Antonia raised her children in Rome. Tiberius adopted Germanicus in AD 4 (Suetonius Tiberius 15, Gai. 1., Div. Claudius 2). Germanicus died in 19 AD, allegedly poisoned through the handiwork of Gnaeus Calpurnius Piso and Munatia Plancina. On the orders of Tiberius and Livia Drusilla, Antonia was forbidden to go to his funeral (suggested, but not stated by Tacitus Annals 3.3). When Livia Drusilla died in June 29 AD, Antonia took care of Caligula, Agrippina the Younger, Julia Drusilla, Julia Livilla and later Claudia Antonia, Claudius's daughter through his second wife Aelia Paetina, her younger grandchildren. She outlived her husband, her oldest son, her daughter and several of her grandchildren.

36 BC-AD 37

Antonia the Younger, an excellent woman, had the title of Augustaconferred upon her. The daughter of Octavia the Elder and Mark Antony,she married Drusus (Claudius Drusus Nero Germanicus), born 38 B.C. in thepalace of Augustus, died 9 B.C. He was the brother of Emperor Tiberius,and son of Tiberius Claudius Drusus Nero, and his wife, Livia Drusilla,upon whom the title of Augusta was conferred later, when she became thesecond wife of Emperor Augustus. Antonia the Younger and Drusus were theparents of the following son:


1. Caesar Germanicus, who married Agrippina the Elder. See elsewhere. Herestored to Herod Agrippa II. the largest part of his great grandfatherHerod the Great's dominions. Herod the Great, born about 70 B.C., anEdomite descended from Esau, was son of Cypros, an Arabian woman, andAntipater, her husband, who had been appointed Procurator of Judea byJulius Caesar in 47 B.C. he is known in history for the slaughter of theinnocent first-born children (Bible New Testament , Gospel of St. Matthew2:16). He had also murdered many relatives, including all his children byhis first wife. It was his great grandson, Herod Agrippa II., tetrarch ofGalilee, before whom St. Paul in 62 A.D., made his memorable defenserecorded in the New Testament, Book of Acts, Chapter 26. Maintained inhis power by the Romans, and faithful to their interests, he adopted theJewish religion and tried to dissuade the Jews from rebelling. Agrippinathe Elder was one of the most virtuous and heroic women of her time, born12 B.C., died 33 A.D., daughter of Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa, the greatestmilitary commander after Julius Caesar, and of Julia, daughter ofAugustus. She accompanied her husband, Caesar Germanicus, in his militaryexpeditions until his death at Antioch, 19 A.D. Her husband's uncle, theEmperor Tiberius Claudius Caesar, jealous of the affection of the peoplefor Agrippina, banished her to a small island, where she died of hungerin 33 A.D.

Antonia Minor
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.

Julia Antonia Minor ("the younger") (30 January/31 January 36 BC - May-October 37 AD) was the daughter of Mark Antony and Octavia.


She married Drusus -- the son of the empress Livia and brother of the emperor Tiberius -- and their children were Germanicus, Livilla, and the emperor Claudius. She was the grandmother of Caligula and Agrippina the Younger, and the great-grandmother of Nero.

She never remarried after the death of her husband in 9 BC. When her son Germanicus died in 19 AD, she was forbidden to go to the funeral by orders of Tiberius and Livia. After the death of Livia in 29 AD, she took care of Germanicus and Agrippina the Elder's youngest children---Caligula and Drusilla.

In 31 AD she exposed a plot between her daughter Livilla and Sejanus, Tiberius's Praetorian Prefect. This led to Sejanus's downfall and to the death of Livilla. Tiberius handed Livilla over to her formidable mother. According to Tacitus, Antonia imprisoned Livilla in her rooms, effectively starving her to death. Claudius, her biggest disappointment (she once called him a "monster") was the only one of her children to survive her.

She committed suicide in 37 AD on Caligula's orders after expressing unhappiness over the murder of her youngest grandson, Tiberius Gemellus. There is a passage in Suetonius's "Life of Gaius" that mentions how Caligula may have given her poison himself.


wtf 4:565

[4627] d 37 AD

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]