== Notes for [[Item:Q106466|Q106466]] ==

‘Abdu Manāf ibn Quṣayy (Arabic: عبد مناف بن قصي‎) was a Quraishi and great-great-grandfather of the Islamic prophet Muhammad and Ali. His father was Quṣayy ibn Kilāb.

‘Abdu Manāf married a woman named Atikah and had six sons: Abd Shams ibn Abd Manaf, Nawfal, Hashim ibn Abd Manaf (after whom the Banu Hashim clan was named), Muttalib ibn Abd Manaf,[1] Hala and Barra.[1] Muttalib was younger than Hashim and became his successor.

The grave of ‘Abdu Manāf can be found in Jannatul Mualla cemetery, in Mecca, Saudi Arabia.

Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abd_Manaf_ibn_Qusai
--------------------
‘Abd Manāf ibn Quṣai (Arabic: عبد مناف بن قصي‎) was a Quraishi and great-great-grandfather of Islamic prophet Muhammad. His father was Quṣai ibn Kilāb.

'Abd Manāf was already honoured in his father's lifetime however Qusai preferred his first-born 'Abd ad-Dar and invested him with all his rights, powers, and transferred the ownership of the House of Assembly shortly before his death.

After Quṣayy's death Abd Manaf and his brother 'Abd ad-Dar apparently quarreled, and the effects of this conflict continued among their descendants and affected the internal Makkah right up to Muhammad's time. 'Abd ad-Dar was supported by their cousins Makhzum, Sahm, Jumah, their uncle Adi and their families. Abd Manaf contested his inheritance and was supported by their nephew Asad, their uncle Zuhrah ibn Kilab, their father's uncle Taym ibn Murrah (of Banu Taym), and al-Harith ibn Fihr.

‘Abdu Manāf married several wives of influential tribes, including 'Ātikah bint Murrah ibn Hilāl ibn Fālij ibn Dhakwān of Bani Qays Aylan, Hilal of the Banu Hawāzin, Raytah of Ta'if, and Waqida bint Amr.

Raytah had only the son Abd or Abdu'l Amr, who died childless; Waqida also had one son, Nawfal. The Hawazin heiress Atikah, however, bore him five sons and six daughters. The boys were twin sons called Amr (more commonly known as Hashim ibn 'Abd Manaf), Abd Shams, Muttalib, Hala and Barra.[5] Muttalib was younger than Hashim and became his successor. The daughters were Tumadir/Tamadur, Qilaba, Hayya, Raytah/Rita, Umm Akhtham, and Umm Sufyan.
--------------------
* Wilaadat (Birth):
* Wafaat (Death):

--------------------
Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abd_al-Uzza_ibn_Qusai
--------------------
Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abd_ibn_Qusai
--------------------
Progenitor of ''Banu Abd-ud Daar'' Tribe.

Source 1: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abd-al-Dar_ibn_Qusai

Source 2: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Banu_Abd-al-dar

Source 3: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aminah_bint_Wahb

----

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hashim_ibn_Abd_Manaf

----

Source:

https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abd_Manaf_ibn_Qusai

----

https://maltagenealogy.com/cordova/

1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1. Abd Manaf bin Quasi, King of Quraysh, married to Atikah bint Murrah al-Hulaliyya, with issue.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abd_Manaf_ibn_Qusai

He is whom the clan of Banu Abd Manaf is named after. His father was Qusai ibn Kilab.
When his father died, he took charge of his work. He too distinguished himself by his ability, and he was noted for his generosity and good judgment.
He had four sons: Nawfal, Abd Shams, Hashim, for who the Banu Hashim clan was named, and Muttalib [1]. Muttalib was younger than Hashim, and became his successor.
There is a legend that is not taken as factual by either Shia nor Sunnis:
There was a noted chieftain in the city of Mecca, Abde Munaf. Two twins were born to him, but they were Siamese twins with their backs joined by birth. The chieftain approached the wise men of the city for advice, and they said, "Now they are children, but when they grow up they will face problems."
Munaf separated his children with his sword. One boy was named Hashim and the other Ummaya. When they were separated, another chieftain watching the children crying bitterly, said, "God forbid! A sword has been used to separate the two brothers. God bless! It shouldn’t so happen that their family tree should keep fighting with swords."

Abd Manaf ibn Qusai
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

This person is among the Sahaba's ancestors.

Abd Manaf ibn Qusai (Arabic: ??? ???? ?? ??? ) is whom the clan of Banu Abd Manaf is named after. His father was Qusai ibn Kilab.

When his father died, he took charge of his work. He too distinguished himself by his ability, and he was noted for his generosity and good judgment.

He had four sons: Wahhab ibn Abd-al-Manaf, Abd Shams ibn Abd Manaf, Hashim ibn Abd Manaf, for who the Banu Hashim clan was named, and Muttalib ibn Abd Manaf [1].

He had a son named Nawfal ibn Abd Manaf [1].

Muttalib was younger than Hashim, and became his successor.

There is a legend that is not taken as factual by either Shia nor Sunnis:

There was a noted chieftain in the city of Mecca, Abde Munaf. Two twins were born to him, but they were Siamese twins with their backs joined by birth. The chieftain approached the wise men of the city for advice, and they said, "Now they are children, but when they grow up they will face problems."

Munaf separated his children with his sword. One boy was named Hashim and the other Ummaiya. When they were separated, another chieftain watching the children crying bitterly, said, "God forbid! A sword has been used to separate the two brothers. God bless! It shouldn’t so happen that their family tree should keep fighting with swords." [2]

[edit] See also

* Family tree of Abd al-Manaf ibn Qusai
* Sahaba
* Abd-al-Manaf (name)

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000001132083703

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]]
== Merged content ==
[[Category:11]]
[[Category:Test cases using output parameter]][[Category:Pages]]