== Notes for [[Item:Q88661|Q88661]] ==

ID: I62254

Name: SENNACHERIB @@ OF ASSYRIA

Prefix: King

Given Name: SENNACHERIB @@

Surname: OF ASSYRIA

Sex: M

_UID: 06E000A9431DC448890093368A82CF3159ED

Change Date: 26 Nov 2005

Note:

Sennacherib, king of Assyria, who ruled from 705 bc to 681 bc, son of Sargon II. One of Sennacherib’s first acts as king was a military expedition against the usurper Merodach-baladan of Babylonia, whom he defeated and expelled from Babylon in 703 bc. Sennacherib appointed Bel-ibni king of Babylon and then marched eastward to subdue the Medians. A rebellion, instigated by Merodach-baladan and Hezekiah of Judah, then broke out in the west. Sennacherib returned in 701 bc to capture Sidon and other Phoenician towns and to defeat an Ethiopian-Egyptian army at Ekron, but he failed to take the Phoenician city of Tyre. He then turned on Judah, capturing 46 towns and exacting a heavy tribute from Hezekiah. When he also demanded the surrender of Jerusalem, Hezekiah at first refused but later submitted. Palestine remained at peace with Assyria for the remainder of Sennacherib's reign. The biblical accounts of a second expedition into Jerusalem, the war against Taharqa (Tirhakah) of Egypt, and the miraculous destruction of Sennacherib's army by pestilence are not confirmed by Assyrian records.

Sennacherib later renewed his campaign in Babylonia, where Merodach-baladan had again seized power and displaced Bel-ibni. He defeated the usurper, placing his own son, Ashur-nadin-shum, on the throne. The next 11 years were spent mainly in the south against the Elamites, who in 694 bc captured Babylon. Three years later Sennacherib defeated the combined Elamites and Babylonians at Khalulu on the Tigris river, and in 689 bc he sacked and burned Babylon. Sennacherib was murdered by one or more of his sons in 681 bc. He is famous as the builder of the magnificent Kuyunjik (Palace Without a Rival) at Nineveh, his capital.

© 1993-2003 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

Death: Y

Father: Sargon II of Assyria

Marriage 1 Zakutu

Married:

Children

Esarhaddon of Assyria

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I62254
--------------------
•ID: I62254 •Name: SENNACHERIB @@ OF ASSYRIA •Prefix: King •Given Name: SENNACHERIB @@ •Surname: OF ASSYRIA •Sex: M •_UID: 06E000A9431DC448890093368A82CF3159ED •Change Date: 26 Nov 2005 •Note: Sennacherib, king of Assyria, who ruled from 705 bc to 681 bc, son of Sargon II. One of Sennacherib’s first acts as king was a military expedition against the usurper Merodach-baladan of Babylonia, whom he defeated and expelled from Babylon in 703 bc. Sennacherib appointed Bel-ibni king of Babylon and then marched eastward to subdue the Medians. A rebellion, instigated by Merodach-baladan and Hezekiah of Judah, then broke out in the west. Sennacherib returned in 701 bc to capture Sidon and other Phoenician towns and to defeat an Ethiopian-Egyptian army at Ekron, but he failed to take the Phoenician city of Tyre. He then turned on Judah, capturing 46 towns and exacting a heavy tribute from Hezekiah. When he also demanded the surrender of Jerusalem, Hezekiah at first refused but later submitted. Palestine remained at peace with Assyria for the remainder of Sennacherib's reign. The biblical accounts of a second expedition into Jerusalem, the war against Taharqa (Tirhakah) of Egypt, and the miraculous destruction of Sennacherib's army by pestilence are not confirmed by Assyrian records.

Sennacherib later renewed his campaign in Babylonia, where Merodach-baladan had again seized power and displaced Bel-ibni. He defeated the usurper, placing his own son, Ashur-nadin-shum, on the throne. The next 11 years were spent mainly in the south against the Elamites, who in 694 bc captured Babylon. Three years later Sennacherib defeated the combined Elamites and Babylonians at Khalulu on the Tigris river, and in 689 bc he sacked and burned Babylon. Sennacherib was murdered by one or more of his sons in 681 bc. He is famous as the builder of the magnificent Kuyunjik (Palace Without a Rival) at Nineveh, his capital.

© 1993-2003 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

•Death: Y

Father: Sargon II of Assyria

Marriage 1 Zakutu •Married: Children 1. Esarhaddon of Assyria http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp%2Dfam&id=I62254

SennacheribFrom Wikipedia, the free encyclopediaJump to: navigation, search Sennacherib King of Assyria

Sennacherib during his Babylonian war, relief from his palace in Nineveh Reign 705 – 681 BC Akkadian Sîn-ahhī-erība Greek Σενναχηριμ (Sennacherim) Hebrew Sanherib Died 681 BC Predecessor Sargon II Successor Esarhaddon Father Sargon II

Sennacherib (pronounced /səˈnækərɪb/; Akkadian: Sîn-ahhī-erība "Sîn has replaced (lost) brothers for me") was the son of Sargon II, whom he succeeded on the throne of Assyria (705 – 681 BC).

Contents [hide] 1 Rise to power 2 War with Babylon 3 War with Judah 3.1 Background 3.2 Sennacherib's account 3.3 Biblical account 3.4 Disaster in Egypt according to Herodotus 3.5 As recorded by Josephus 4 Building projects 5 Patricide 6 In popular culture 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links

[edit] Rise to powerAs the crown prince, Sennacherib was placed in charge of the Assyrian Empire while his father, Sargon II, was on campaign. Unlike his predecessors, Sennacherib's reign was not largely marked by military campaigns, but mainly by architectural renovations, constructions, and expansions. After the violent death of his father, Sennacherib encountered numerous problems in establishing his power and faced threats to his domain. However, he was able to overcome these power struggles and ultimately carry out his building projects. During his reign, he moved the empire's capital from his father's newly-constructed city of Dur-Sharrukin to the old city and former capital of Nineveh. It is considered striking that Sennacherib not only left his father's city, but also doesn’t name him in any official inscription during his reign.

[edit] War with Babylon Assyrian warriors armed with slings from the palace of Sennacherib, 7th century BCEDuring his reign Sennacherib encountered various problems with Babylonia. His first campaign took place in 703 BC against Marduk-apla-iddina II who had seized the throne of Babylon and gathered an alliance supported by Chaldeans, Aramaeans, and Elamites. We can date the visit of Babylonian ambassadors to Hezekiah of Judah in this period. The allies wanted to make use of the unrest that arose at the accession of Sennacherib. Sennacherib split his army and had one part attack the stationed enemy at Kish while he and the rest of the army proceeded to capture the city Cutha. After that was done the king returned swiftly to aid the rest of his army. The rebellion was defeated and Marduk-apla-iddina II fled. Babylon was taken, and its palace plundered but its citizens were left unharmed. The Assyrians searched for Marduk-apla-iddina II, especially in the southern marshes, but he was not found. The rebellion forces in the Babylonian cities were wiped out and a Babylonian named Bel-ibni who was raised at the Assyrian court was placed on the throne. When the Assyrians left, Marduk-apla-iddina II started to prepare another rebellion. In 700 BC the Assyrian army returned to fight the rebels in the marshes again. Not surprisingly, Marduk-apla-iddina II fled again to Elam and died there.

Bel-Ibni proved to be disloyal to Assyria and was taken back a prisoner. Sennacherib tried to solve the problem of the Babylonian rebellion by placing someone loyal to him on the throne, namely his son Ashur-nadin-shumi. It didn’t help. Another campaign was led six years later, in 694 BC, to destroy the Elamite base on the shore of the Persian Gulf. To accomplish this, Sennacherib had obtained Phoenician and Syrian boats which sailed with the rest of his army down the Tigris to the sea. The Phoenicians were not used to the tide of the Persian Gulf which caused a delay. The Assyrians battled the Chaldeans at the river Ulaya and won the day. While the Assyrians were busy at the Persian Gulf, the Elamites invaded northern Babylonia in a complete surprise. Sennacherib's son was captured and taken to Elam and his throne was taken over by Nergal-ushezib. The Assyrians fought their way back north and captured various cities, in the meanwhile a year had passed as it was now 693 BC.

A large battle was fought against the Babylonian rebels at Nippur, their king was captured and in turn taken to Nineveh. For the loss of his son Sennacherib launched another campaign into Elam where his army started to plunder cities. The Elamite king fled to the mountains and Sennacherib was forced to return home because of the coming winter. Another rebellion leader, named Mushezib-Marduk claimed the Babylonian throne and was supported by Elam. The last great battle was fought in 691 BC with an uncertain result which enabled Mushezib-Marduk to remain on the throne for another two years. This was only a brief respite because shortly afterwards Babylon was besieged which led to its fall in 689 BC. Sennacherib claimed to have destroyed the city and indeed the city was unoccupied for several years.

[edit] War with Judah[edit] BackgroundIn 701 BC, a rebellion backed by Egypt and Babylonia broke out in Judah, led by King Hezekiah. In response Sennacherib sacked a number of cities in Judah. He laid siege to Jerusalem, but soon returned to Nineveh, with Jerusalem not having been sacked, in order to put down an attempted coup. This event was recorded by Sennacherib himself, by Herodotus, Josephus, and by several Biblical writers. According to the Bible, Sennacherib also withdrew because the "angel of Yahweh went out and put to death a 185,000 in the Assyrian camp" (2 Kings 19:35).

[edit] Sennacherib's account Assyrian siege ramp at Lachish.Some of the Assyrian chronicles, such as the baked-clay Taylor prism now preserved in the British Museum, and the similar Sennacherib prism, preserved in the Oriental Institute, Chicago, date from very close to the time. (see also: Military history of the Neo-Assyrian Empire)[1] (The Taylor Prism itself bears the date "the month of Tammuz; eponym of Galihu, governor of Hatarikka" which is Tammuz in the year 689 BC, according to the Assyrian Eponym List). Assyrian accounts do not treat it as a disaster, but a great victory — they maintain that the siege was so successful that Hezekiah was forced to give a monetary tribute, and the Assyrians left victoriously, without losses of thousands of men, and without sacking Jerusalem. Part of this is contained in the Biblical account, but it is still debated fiercely by historians. In the Taylor Prism, Sennacherib states that he had shut up Hezekiah the Judahite within Jerusalem, his own royal city, like a caged bird.

Sennacherib first recounts several of his previous victories, and how his enemies had become overwhelmed by his presence. He was able to do this to Great Sidon, Little Sidon, Bit-Zitti, Zaribtu, Mahalliba, Ushu, Akzib and Akko. After taking each of these cities, Sennacherib installed a puppet leader named Ethbaal as ruler over the entire region. Sennacherib then turned his attention to Beth-Dagon, Joppa, Banai-Barqa, and Azjuru, cities that were ruled by Sidqia and also fell to Sennacherib.

Egypt and Nubia then came to the aid of the stricken cities. Sennacherib defeated the Egyptians and, by his own account, single-handedly captured the Egyptian and Nubian charioteers. Sennacherib captured and sacked several other cities, including Lachish (the second most-strongly fortified city in the Kingdom of Judah). He punished the "criminal" citizens of the cities, and he reinstalled Padi, their leader, who had been held as a hostage in Jerusalem.

After this, Sennacherib turned to King Hezekiah of Judah, who refused to submit to him. Forty-six of Hezekiah's cities (cities in 1st millennium BC terms ranged in size from large modern-day towns to villages) were conquered by Sennacherib, but Jerusalem did not fall. His own account of this invasion, as given in the Taylor prism, is as follows:

“ Because Hezekiah, king of Judah, would not submit to my yoke, I came up against him, and by force of arms and by the might of my power I took 46 of his strong fenced cities; and of the smaller towns which were scattered about, I took and plundered a countless number. From these places I took and carried off 200,156 persons, old and young, male and female, together with horses and mules, asses and camels, oxen and sheep, a countless multitude; and Hezekiah himself I shut up in Jerusalem, his capital city, like a bird in a cage, building towers round the city to hem him in, and raising banks of earth against the gates, so as to prevent escape... Then upon Hezekiah there fell the fear of the power of my arms, and he sent out to me the chiefs and the elders of Jerusalem with 30 talents of gold and 800 talents of silver, and diverse treasures, a rich and immense booty... All these things were brought to me at Nineveh, the seat of my government. ”

[edit] Biblical accountThe Biblical account of Sennacherib's siege of Jerusalem begins with the destruction of the Northern Kingdom of Israel and its capital Samaria. According to the Hebrew Bible, the ten northern tribes came to be known as the Ten Lost Tribes, because as recorded in II Kings 17, they were carried off and settled with other peoples as was the Assyrian policy. II Kings 18-19 (and parallel passage II Chronicles 32:1-23) details Sennacherib's attack on Judah and capital Jerusalem. Hezekiah had rebelled against the Assyrians, so they had captured all of the towns in Judah. Hezekiah realized his error and sent great tribute to Sennacherib. But the Assyrians nevertheless marched toward Jerusalem. Sennacherib sent his supreme commander with an army to besiege Jerusalem while he himself went to fight with the Egyptians. The supreme commander met with Hezekiah's officials and threatened them to surrender; while hailing insults so the people of the city could hear, blaspheming Judah and particularly Jehovah. When the King Hezekiah heard of this, he tore his clothes (as was the custom of the day for displaying deep anguish) and prayed to Jehovah in the Temple. Isaiah the prophet told the king that Jehovah would take care of the whole matter and that he would return to his own lands. That night, the Angel of Jehovah killed 185,000 Assyrian troops. Jewish tradition maintains that the angel Gabriel (along with Michael in the Targum's version) was the angel sent to destroy the Assyrian troops, and that the destruction occurred on Passover night.[2][3][4] Sennacherib soon returned to Nineveh in disgrace. Some years later, while Sennacherib was worshiping in the temple of his god Nisroch, two of his sons killed him and fled to Armenia. Some[who?] suggest that Psalm 46 was composed as a Song of Deliverance that was led by the Korahite Levitical singers and accompanied by the Alamoth (maidens with tambourines) and sung by the inhabitants of Jerusalem after their successful defense of the city from the siege.

[edit] Disaster in Egypt according to HerodotusThe Greek historian Herodotus, who wrote his Histories ca. 450 BC, speaks of a divinely-appointed disaster destroying an army of Sennacherib (2:141):

“ when Sanacharib, king of the Arabians and Assyrians, marched his vast army into Egypt, the warriors one and all refused to come to his (i.e., the Pharaoh Sethos) aid. On this the monarch, greatly distressed, entered into the inner sanctuary, and, before the image of the god, bewailed the fate which impended over him. As he wept he fell asleep, and dreamed that the god came and stood at his side, bidding him be of good cheer, and go boldly forth to meet the Arabian host, which would do him no hurt, as he himself would send those who should help him. Sethos, then, relying on the dream, collected such of the Egyptians as were willing to follow him, who were none of them warriors, but traders, artisans, and market people; and with these marched to Pelusium, which commands the entrance into Egypt, and there pitched his camp. As the two armies lay here opposite one another, there came in the night, a multitude of field-mice, which devoured all the quivers and bowstrings of the enemy, and ate the thongs by which they managed their shields. Next morning they commenced their fight, and great multitudes fell, as they had no arms with which to defend themselves. There stands to this day in the temple of Vulcan, a stone statue of Sethos, with a mouse in his hand, and an inscription to this effect - 'Look on me, and learn to reverence the gods.' ”

According to F. Ll. Griffith, an attractive hypothesis is to identify the Pharaoh as Taharqa before his succession, and Sethos as his Memphitic priestly title, "supposing that he was then governor of Lower Egypt and high-priest of Ptah, and that in his office of governor he prepared to move on the defensive against a threatened attack by Sennacherib. While Taharqa was still in the neighbourhood of Pelusium, some unexpected disaster may have befallen the Assyrian host on the borders of Kingdom of Judah and arrested their march on Egypt." (Stories of the High Priests of Memphis: The Sethon of Herodotus and the Demotic Tales of Khamuas (1900), p. 11.

[edit] As recorded by JosephusJosephus' Jewish Antiquities, book ten, verses 21-23 relate an account by the Babylonian historian Berossus, in which Berosus claims a disease befell an Assyrian army led by Rabshakeh, and one-hundred and eighty thousand men were lost. Earlier in the book, the account of Herodotus is also mentioned. [5]

[edit] Building projects View of ancient Nineveh, Description de L'Univers (Alain Manesson Mallet, 1719).During Sennacherib's reign, Nineveh evolved into the leading Metropolis of the empire. His building projects started almost as soon as he became king. Already in 703 BC he had built a palace complete with park and artificial irrigation he called his new home ‘The palace without rival’. For this ambitious project an old palace was torn down to make more room. In addition to his own large gardens, several small gardens were made for the citizens of Nineveh. He also constructed the first ever aqueduct, at Jerwan in 690 BCE,[6] which supplied the large demand of water in Nineveh. The narrow alleys and squares of Nineveh were cleaned up and enlarged, and a royal road and avenue were constructed, which crossed a bridge on its approach to the park gate and which was lined on both sides with stelae. Temples were restored and built during his reign, as is the duty of the king. Most notable is his work on the Assur (god) and the new year (Akitu) temples. He also expanded the city defences which included a moat surrounding the city walls. Some of his city walls have been restored and can still be seen nowadays. The labour for his giant building project was performed by people of Que, Cilicia, Philistia, Tyre, and Chaldeans, Aramaeans, and Mannaeans who were there involuntarily.

Sennacherib has been credited with the invention of the Archimedes screw for the purpose of irrigation, although evidence for this is contentious.[7]

[edit] PatricideSennacherib was killed by two of his sons for his desecration of Babylon.[8][9] One story tells of one of Sennacherib's sons toppling a giant lamassu onto him, crushing him to death. He was ultimately succeeded by another son, Esarhaddon.

[edit] In popular cultureAn 1813 poem by Lord Byron, The Destruction of Sennacherib, commemorates Sennacherib's campaign in Judea from the Hebrew point of view. Written in anapestic tetrameter, the poem was popular in school recitations.

Sennacherib is briefly mentioned in the science-fiction novel Children of Dune by Frank Herbert, and in Neal Stephenson's Snow Crash.

Sennacherib is also mentioned in the science-fiction novel The War of the Worlds by author H. G. Wells. Chapter 8: "I believed that the destruction of Sennacherib had been repeated, that God had repented, that the Angel of Death had slain them in the night."

[edit] See also Ancient Near East portal Ahikar, Sennacherib's Chancellor Rabshakeh, Sennacherib's cupbearer [edit] References1.^ Kchanson.com 2.^ "Wesley's Notes on the Bible" II Chronicles 32 3.^ The legends of the Jews, Volume 6 By Louis Ginzberg, Henrietta Szold, Paul Radin 4.^ Adam Clarke's Commentary - 2 Chronicles 32 5.^ http://books.google.com/books?id=U06oqM41ZLgC&lpg=PP1&dq=Jewish%20Antiquities&pg=PA415#v=onepage&q=Jewish%20Antiquities&f=false 6.^ von Soden, Wolfram. (1985). The Ancient Orient: An Introduction to the Study of the Ancient Near East. (pp.58). Grand Rapids: Erdman's Publishing Company. 7.^ Stephanie Dalley and John Peter Oleson (January 2003). "Sennacherib, Archimedes, and the Water Screw: The Context of Invention in the Ancient World", Technology and Culture 44 (1). 8.^ Dalley, Stephanie (2008). Esther's revenge at Susa: from Sennacherib to Ahasuerus. Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press. pp. 64–66. ISBN 0-19-921663-0. http://books.google.com/books?id=tRY39cGC_K8C. 9.^ The British Museum: Sennacherib, king of Assyria (704-681 BC) [edit] Further reading[1] Daniel David Luckenbill, The Annals of Sennacherib, Oriental Institute Publications 2, University of Chicago Press, 1924 Edwards – The Cambridge ancient history volume III part 2, 2nd edition, pp. 103–119. Faust, Avraham, "Settlement and Demography in Seventh-Century Judah and the Extent and Intensity of Sennacherib's Campaign," Palestine Exploration Quarterly, 140,3 (2008), 168-194. [edit] External links[www.youtube.com/watch?v=W_dXZ_Ohltg Rare Stela of Sennacherib.] Prism of Sennacherib The murderer of Sennacherib - by Simo Parpola Sennacherib's Invasion of Judah - by Craig C. Broyles Interactive Map of Sennacherib's Invasion of Judah, including the accounts of Sennacherib, Herodotus, 2 Kings, Isaiah and Micah States that the prism is preserved in the Oriental Institute, University of Chicago. A site on the study of King Sennacherib by Jack Taylor, II First Campaign of Sennacherib Translated Cylinder 113203. British Museum Preceded by Sargon II King of Babylon 705 – 703 BC Succeeded by Marduk-zakir-shumi II King of Assyria 705 – 681 BC Succeeded by Esarhaddon Preceded by Mušezib-Marduk King of Babylon 689 – 681 BC Succeeded by Esarhaddon [show]v ·t ·eAssyrian kings

Early Bronze Age "Kings who lived in tents" ca. 2500 – 2000 BC Tudiya ·Adamu ·Yangi ·Suhlamu ·Harharu ·Mandaru ·Imsu ·Harsu ·Didanu ·Hana ·Zuabu ·Nuabu ·Abazu ·Belu ·Azarah ·Ushpia ·Apiashal

"Kings who were forefathers" ca. 2000 BC Apiashal ·Hale ·Samani ·Hayani ·Ilu-Mer ·Yakmesi ·Yakmeni ·Yazkur-el ·Ila-kabkaba ·Aminu

"Kings whose eponyms are destroyed" ca. 2000 – 1900 BC Sulili ·Kikkia ·Akiya ·Puzur-Ashur I ·Shallim-ahhe ·Ilushuma

Middle Bronze Age Old Assyrian period ca. 1906 – 1380 BC Erishum I ·Ikunum ·Sargon I ·Puzur-Ashur II ·Naram-Suen ·Erishum II ·Shamshi-Adad I ·Ishme-Dagan I ·Mut-Ashkur ·Rimush ·Asinum ·(Seven usurpers: Ashur-dugul ·Ashur-apla-idi ·Nasir-Sin ·Sin-namir ·Ipqi-Ishtar ·Adad-salulu ·Adasi) ·Bel-bani ·Libaya ·Sharma-Adad I ·Iptar-Sin ·Bazaya ·Lullaya ·Shu-Ninua ·Sharma-Adad II ·Erishum III ·Shamshi-Adad II ·Ishme-Dagan II ·Shamshi-Adad III ·Ashur-nirari I ·Puzur-Ashur III ·Enlil-nasir I ·Nur-ili ·Ashur-shaduni ·Ashur-rabi I ·Ashur-nadin-ahhe I ·Enlil-nasir II ·Ashur-nirari II ·Ashur-bel-nisheshu ·Ashur-rim-nisheshu ·Ashur-nadin-ahhe II

Late Bronze Age Middle Assyrian period ca. 1353 – 1180 BC Eriba-Adad I ·Ashur-uballit I ·Enlil-nirari ·Arik-den-ili ·Adad-nirari I ·Shalmaneser I ·Tukulti-Ninurta I ·Ashur-nadin-apli ·Ashur-nirari III ·Enlil-kudurri-usur ·Ninurta-apal-Ekur

Iron Age Middle Assyrian period ca. 1179 – 912 BC Ashur-Dan I ·Ninurta-tukulti-Ashur ·Mutakkil-nusku ·Ashur-resh-ishi I ·Tiglath-Pileser I ·Asharid-apal-Ekur ·Ashur-bel-kala ·Eriba-Adad II ·Shamshi-Adad IV ·Ashur-nasir-pal I ·Shalmaneser II ·Ashur-nirari IV ·Ashur-rabi II ·Ashur-resh-ishi II ·Tiglath-Pileser II ·Ashur-Dan II

Neo-Assyrian Empire ca. 912 – 609 BC Adad-nirari II ·Tukulti-Ninurta II ·Ashur-nasir-pal II ·Shalmaneser III ·Shamshi-Adad V ·Shammu-ramat (regent) ·Adad-nirari III ·Shalmaneser IV ·Ashur-Dan III ·Ashur-nirari V ·Tiglath-Pileser III ·Shalmaneser V ·Sargon II ·Sennacherib ·Esarhaddon ·Ashurbanipal ·Ashur-etil-ilani ·Sin-shumu-lishir ·Sin-shar-ishkun ·Ashur-uballit II

Persondata Name Sennacherib Alternative names Short description Date of birth Place of birth Date of death Place of death

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sennacherib&oldid=536926397" View page ratingsRate this page Rate this page Page ratings What's this?Current average ratings. Trustworthy

Objective

Complete

Well-written

Adequate clarityI am highly knowledgeable about this topic (optional) I have a relevant college/university degreeIt is part of my professionIt is a deep personal passionThe source of my knowledge is not listed here I would like to help improve Wikipedia, send me an e-mail (optional) We will send you a confirmation e-mail. We will not share your e-mail address with outside parties as per our feedback privacy statement.Submit ratings

Saved successfullyYour ratings have not been submitted yetYour ratings have expiredPlease reevaluate this page and submit new ratings. An error has occurred. Please try again later. Thanks! Your ratings have been saved.Do you want to create an account?An account will help you track your edits, get involved in discussions, and be a part of the community.Create an accountorLog inMaybe later Thanks! Your ratings have been saved.Did you know that you can edit this page?Edit this pageMaybe later Categories: 681 BC deathsMurdered monarchsAssyrian kingsBabylonian kingsMonarchs of the Hebrew BibleAssyriaFertile CrescentHidden categories: Wikipedia move-protected pagesWikipedia protected pages without expiryAll articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2010WikiProject Ancient Near East articlesPersondata templates without short description parameter

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sennacherib

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per02148.htm#0

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Assyria 705-681 BC, king of Babylon 705-681 BC, assassinated

OR "SIN-AHHE-ERIBA"; KING OF BABYLON 705-703 BC, 689-681 BC; SACKED BABYLON 689
BC; KING OF ASSYRIA 705-681 BC; ASSASSINATED

2 Kin 18:13; 2 Chr 32:1, 2; Isa 36:1, 2, 4, 8; 37:8, 11, 17, 18, 21, 33, 37; 37:4, 6, 8, 10, 11, 17, 18, 21, 33, 37; 38:6,

535, 625, 903 Now in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah did Sennacherib king of Assyria come up against all the fenced cities of Judan, and took them.

538, 906 Killed by sons Adrammelech and sharezer while worshipping in the house of Nisroch his god.

2 Kin 18:13; 2 Chr 32:1, 2; Isa 36:1, 2, 4, 8; 37:8, 11, 17, 18, 21, 33, 37; 37:4, 6, 8, 10, 11, 17, 18, 21, 33, 37; 38:6,

535, 625, 903 Now in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah did Sennacherib king of Assyria come up against all the fenced cities of Judan, and took them.

538, 906 Killed by sons Adrammelech and sharezer while worshipping in the house of Nisroch his god.

Sennacherib
This entry incorporates text from Easton's Bible Dictionary, 1897, with some modernisation.

Sennacherib (In Akkadian Sin-ehhe-erib, "Sin (the moon god) has taken the place of brothers to me") was the son of Sargon II, whom he succeeded on the throne of Assyria in (705–681 BC). His reign was tested several times by revolts – each of which was brought down.

In 701 BC, an Egyptian-backed rebellion broke out in Judah and was led by Hezekiah. Sennacherib was able to sack many cites in Judah; however, he was not able to take its capital, Jerusalem. This famous event was recorded by Sennacherib himself, by Herodotus, and by several biblical writers.

"And the Lord sent an angel, which cut off all the mighty men of valour, and the leaders and captains in the camp of the king of Assyria" (2 Chronicles 32:21). There is no mention of this great disaster in the Assyrian annals.


Sennacherib's account
Sennacherib first recounts several of his previous victories, and how his enemies had become overwhelmed by his presence. He was able to do this to Great Sidon, Little Sidon, Bit-Zitti, Zaribtu, Mahalliba, Ushu, Akzib and Akko. After taking each of these cities, Sennacherib installed a puppet leader named Ethbaal as ruler over the entire region. Sennacherib then turned his attention to Beth-Dagon, Joppa, Banai-Barqa, and Azjuru, cities that were ruled by Sidqia and also fell to Sennacherib.

Egypt and Nubia then came to the aid of the stricken cities. Sennacherib defeated the Egyptians and, by his own account, single-handedly captured the Egyptian and Nubian charioteers. Sennacherib captured and sacked several other cities, including Lachish. He punished the "criminal" citizens of the cities, and he reinstalled Padi their leader, who had been held as a hostage in Jerusalem.

After this, Sennacherib turned to King Hezekiah of Judah, who stubbornly refused to submit to him. Forty-six of Hezekiah's cities were conquered by Sennacherib, but Jerusalem did not fall. His own account of this invasion, as given in the Assyrian annals, is as follows:

Because Hezekiah, king of Judah, would not submit to my yoke, I came up against him, and by force of arms and by the might of my power I took 46 of his strong fenced cities; and of the smaller towns which were scattered about, I took and plundered a countless number. From these places I took and carried off 200,156 persons, old and young, male and female, together with horses and mules, asses and camels, oxen and sheep, a countless multitude; and Hezekiah himself I shut up in Jerusalem, his capital city, like a bird in a cage, building towers round the city to hem him in, and raising banks of earth against the gates, so as to prevent escape... Then upon Hezekiah there fell the fear of the power of my arms, and he sent out to me the chiefs and the elders of Jerusalem with 30 talents of gold and 800 talents of silver, and divers treasures, a rich and immense booty... All these things were brought to me at Nineveh, the seat of my government.

Isaiah's account
Isaiah's account of Sennacherib's siege of Jerusalem is rather long. It starts with the obvious, about Sennacherib's march against the cities of Judah, and simply states that Sennacherib takes them. Isaiah then recounts how Hezekiah prayed to the God of Israel to save Jerusalem. His account then ended in the way the God of Israel defeats Sennacherib's army: many of Sennacherib's troops are simply killed in their sleep.


The disaster according to Herodotus
The Greek historian Herodotus, who wrote his Histories ca. 440 BC, also speaks of a Divinely-appointed disaster destroying an army of Sennacherib in this same campaign (2:141):

when Sanacharib, king of the Arabians and Assyrians, marched his vast army into Egypt, the warriors one and all refused to come to his [ie., the Pharoah Sethos'] aid. On this the monarch, greatly distressed, entered into the inner sanctuary, and, before the image of the god, bewailed the fate which impended over him. As he wept he fell asleep, and dreamed that the god came and stood at his side, bidding him be of good cheer, and go boldly forth to meet the Arabian host, which would do him no hurt, as he himself would send those who should help him. Sethos, then, relying on the dream, collected such of the Egyptians as were willing to follow him, who were none of them warriors, but traders, artisans, and market people; and with these marched to Pelusium, which commands the entrance into Egypt, and there pitched his camp. As the two armies lay here opposite one another, there came in the night, a multitude of field-mice, which devoured all the quivers and bowstrings of the enemy, and ate the thongs by which they managed their shields. Next morning they commenced their fight, and great multitudes fell, as they had no arms with which to defend themselves. There stands to this day in the temple of Vulcan, a stone statue of Sethos, with a mouse in his hand, and an inscription to this effect - "Look on me, and learn to reverence the gods."

Detailed analysis
Sennacherib's first act was to break up the powerful combination of princes who were in league against him, among whom was Hezekiah, who had entered into an alliance with Egypt. Sennacherib accordingly led a very powerful army (reportedly 200,000 men in size) into Judah, and devastated the land on every side, taking and destroying many cities (2 Kings 18:13-16; compare Isaiah 22, 24, 29, and 2 Chronicles 32:1-8).

(See Isa. 22:1-13 for a description of the feelings of the inhabitants of Jerusalem at such a crisis.)

Hezekiah was not disposed to become an Assyrian vassal. He accordingly at once sought help from Egypt (2 Kings 18:20-24). Sennacherib, hearing of this, marched a second time into Palestine (2 Kings 18:17, 37; 19; 2 Chr. 32:9-23; Isa. 36:2-22. Isa. 37:25 should be rendered "dried up all the Nile-arms of Matsor", i.e., of Egypt, so called from the "Matsor" or great fortification across the isthmus of Suez, that protected it from invasions from the east). Sennacherib sent envoys to try to persuade Hezekiah to surrender, but in vain. He next sent a threatening letter (2 Kings 19:10-14), which Hezekiah carried into the temple and spread before the Lord. Isaiah again brought an encouraging message to the pious king (2 Kings 19:20-34). "In that night" the angel of the Lord went forth and smote the camp of the Assyrians. In the morning, "behold, they were all dead corpses". The Assyrian army was annihilated.

Sennacherib did not campaign again against Jerusalem. He was murdered by two of his own sons (Adrammelech and Sharezer), and was succeeded by another son, Esarhaddon (681 BC), after a reign of twenty-four years.

In popular culture
Lord Byron's poem The Destruction of Sennacherib ("The Assyrian came down like a wolf on the fold...") is a retelling of the story contained in 2 Kings.
See also
Rabshakeh – Sennacherib's cupbearer
Ahikar, Chancellor of Sennacherib
Preceded by:
Sargon II King of Assyria
705–681 BC Succeeded by:
Esarhaddon

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]