== Notes for [[Item:Q89160|Q89160]] ==

====enWikipedia, [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ashur-rabi_I Ashur-rabi I].====
>"Ashur-rabi I was a king of Assyria in the 15th century BC. The son of the former king Enlil-nasir I, he seized the throne after a successful coup against Ashur-shaduni, who had been the king for only one month.[3]
>Note: The length of Ashur-rabi I's reign is broken off in all known copies of the Assyrian King List and it is impossible to calculate how long it lasted.[1] The dates used here are speculative approximations by Düring (2020).[2])"

====Source Citations====
# Hunger, Hermann (2009). "How uncertain is Mesopotamian chronology?". In Warburton, David A. (ed.). ''Time's Up! Dating the Minoan Eruption of Santorini. Monographs of the Danish Institute at Athens''. Athens: The Danish Institute at Athens. ISBN 978-8779346529.
# Düring, Bleda S. (2020). ''The Imperialisation of Assyria: An Archaeological Approach''. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. xvi. ISBN 978-1108778701.
# ''Who's Who in the Ancient Near East'', by Gwendolyn Leick.

====Other Sources====
* '''en.Wikipedia, [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Assyrian_kings List of Assyrian Kings]'''
* [https://pantheon.world/profile/person/Ashur-rabi_I/ '''Pantheon World'''] states: "Ashur-rabi I was a king of Assyria in the 15th century BC. [Wikipedia articles for Ashur-rabi I are available in 19 languages. Some articles are more researched than others.]
* '''YouTube:''' ''The Epic of Ancient Assyria Podcast'' – [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cdEq9aDg6W8 Part 1 | Early Assyria, Ashur and the Anatolian Colonies”].
* '''YouTube:''' ''The Epic of Ancient Assyria Podcast'' – [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R7YyJ18XYfg Part 2 | Ashur during the Age of Shamshi-Adad”].
* '''YouTube:''' ''The Epic of Ancient Assyria Podcast'' – [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ODPsrRiopog Part 3 | The Middle Assyrian Empire (Beginnings)].
* '''YouTube:''' ''The Epic of Ancient Assyria Podcast'' – [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=svUT9gcUrbw Part 4 | Adad-nirari I, Shalmaneser I and Tukulti-Ninurta I].

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]