== Notes for [[Item:Q91099|Q91099]] ==

Caecilia Metella (died 89 BC) was the second daughter of Quintus Caecilius Metellus Balearicus, consul in 123 BC. Her oldest sister was a Vestal virgin.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Caecilia_Metella_Balearica

Appius Claudius Pulcher (c. 139 BC – 76 BC) was a Roman politician of the 1st century BC. There is uncertainty about who is father was. It was most probably the Appius Claudius Pulcher who was consul in 143 BC.[1] He was a supporter of Lucius Cornelius Sulla and served as praetor in 88 BC. He was exiled in that year by Gaius Marius while Sulla was away in the east. He returned to Rome after Lucius Cornelius Cinna died in 84 BC, and served as consul in 79 BC and as governor of Roman Macedonia from 78 BC to 76 BC.

This Appius Claudius Pulcher was married to Caecilia Metella Balearica (b. c. 125 BC) and was the father of:

* Appius Claudius Pulcher
* Gaius Claudius Pulcher
* Publius Claudius Pulcher, who changed his name to Publius Clodius
* Claudia Tertia, who married Quintus Marcius Rex, referred to as "Clodia Marcii"
* Claudia (who changed her name to Clodia), wife of Quintus Caecilius Metellus Celer, therefore referred to as "Clodia Metelli"
* Claudia (b. c. 90 BC – aft. 66 BC), first wife of Lucius Licinius Lucullus, whom she divorced in 66 BC; referred to as "Clodia Luculli"

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Appius_Claudius_Pulcher_(consul_79_BC)



----

* From [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Caecilia_Metella_Balearica '''Wikipedia'''], the free encyclopedia

'''Caecilia Metella''' (died 89 BC) was the second daughter of Quintus Caecilius Metellus Balearicus, consul in 123 BC. Her oldest sister was a Vestal virgin.

Metella was married to Appius Claudius Pulcher, a politician of an old, although somewhat impoverished, patrician family. As a member of an important family and married into another, Balearica was one of Rome's most esteemed matronas. She had a reputation of virtue and modesty, allied to an irreproachable conduct as a mother of two boys (Appius and Gaius) and three (or four) girls (Claudia Prima, Claudia Secunda, and Claudia Tertulla - this one known to history as Clodia).

While pregnant with her sixth child, Metella had a dream of Juno complaining about the neglect of her temple. As any other Roman would, she took the dream very seriously and proceeded to clean the temple herself, with the help of the censor Lucius Julius Caesar. Shortly afterwards, Metella died in childbirth. Her youngest son was to be the notorious Publius Clodius.

=Sources=

* Manuel Dejante Pinto de Magalhães Arnao Metello and João Carlos Metello de Nápoles, "Metellos de Portugal, Brasil e Roma", Torres Novas, 1998

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]