== Notes for [[Item:Q1991|Q1991]] ==

{geni:about_me} '''Surya''' (Devanagari: सूर्य Sūrya, "the Supreme Light"[2])Suraya or Phra Athit is the chief solar deity inHinduism. The term Surya also refers to the Sun, in general. Surya is the chief of the Navagraha, Indian "Classical planets" and important elements of Hindu astrology. He is often depicted riding a chariot harnessed by seven horses or one horse with seven heads,[1] which represent the seven colours of the rainbow or the seven chakras. He also presides over Sunday. Surya is regarded as the Supreme Deity by Saura sect, which is now a very small following. Smartas worship him as the five primary forms of God. Surya as the Sun is worshipped at dawn by most Hindus and has many temples dedicated to him across India. He also enjoys worship as a part of the Navagraha. He is especially worshipped in the Hindu festivals of Ratha Saptami, Makar Sankranti, Chhathand Samba Dashami.
<p>Depictions</p>
<p>Surya sculpture Sometimes, Surya is depicted with two hands holding a lotus in both; sometimes he has four hands holding a lotus,chakra, a conch, and a mace. Arka form Surya is worshiped in various forms throughout India. One of the most important epithet (form) of 'Surya' is 'Arka'. The "Arka" form is worshiped mostly in North India and Eastern parts of India. The temples dedicated to 'Arka' form of Surya are Konarka Temple in Orissa, Uttararka and Lolarka in Uttar Pradesh, Balarka in Rajasthan. There was an old sun-temple in (Bahraich, Uttar Pradesh) named Balarka Surya Mandir, built by King Tilokchand Arkawanshi in early 10th century AD. The temple was destroyed in the 14th century during Turkish invasions. The grandest Surya temple is Konark surya temples built by Ganga Vamsi king Narasimha Dev of Orissa. The Sun Temple, Modhera, at Modhera in Gujarat, is a temple dedicated to the Hindu Sun-God, Surya. It was built in 1026 AD by King Bhimdev of the Solanki dynasty. 'Mitra' form of Surya 'Surya' is also known as 'Mitra' (meaning friend) for his life nourishing properties. Mitra form of 'Surya' had been worshiped mostly in Gujarat, where a clan of Suryawanshi kings was known as Mitrawanshi kshatriyas, also known by its distorted name Maitrakas (मैत्रक) Religious role and relationships
<p>Surya with consorts Saranyu and Chhaya</p>
<p>See also: Ratha Saptami</p>
<p>Vivasvata (Surya, Osiris, Sirius, Sothis) had three queens;Saranyu (also called Saraniya, Saranya, Sanjna, or Sangya) (the Orion Belt), Ragyi, and Prabha. Saranyu was the mother of Vaivasvata Manu or Sraddhadeva Manu (the seventh, i.e. present Manu) and the twins Yama (the Lord of Death) and his sister Yami. She also bore him the twins known as the Ashvins, divine horsemen and physicians to the Devas. Saranyu, being unable to bear the extreme radiance of Surya, created a superficial entity from her shadow called Chhaya and instructed her to act as Surya's wife in her absence. Chhaya mothered two sons – Savarni Manu (the eighth, i.e. next Manu) and Shani (the planet Saturn), and two daughters – Tapti and Vishti.[3] He also has a son, Revanta, or Raivata, by Ragyi. Interestingly, Surya's two sons Shani and Yama (Pollux and Castor) are responsible for the judgment of human life. Shani gives us the results of one's deeds through one's life through appropriate punishments and rewards while Yama grants the results of one's deeds after death.[4]
<p>In Ramayana, Surya is described as father of the King Sugriva, who helped Rama and Lakshmana in defeating the demon king Ravana. He also trains Hanuman as his guru. The Suryavanshi /Suryavansha dynasty of kings, Rama being one of them, also claims descent from Surya.
<p>In the Mahabharata, Princess Kunti receives instruction for a mantra from the sage Durvasa; by reciting which, she would be able to summon any god and bear a child by him. Incredulous of the power of this mantra, Kunti unwittingly tests it on Surya, but when Surya appears, she gets scared and requests him to go back. However, Surya has an obligation to fulfil the mantra before returning. Surya miraculously causes Kunti to bear the child immediately whilst retaining her virginity so that she, as an unmarried princess, need not face any embarrassment or be subjected to questions from society. Kunti feels compelled to abandon the child, Karna, who grows up to become one of the central characters in the great battle of Kurukshetra.
<p>--------------------</p>
<p>http://www.gloriousindia.com/history/dynasties/ikshvaku/ikshvaku.html</p>
<p>--------------------</p>
<p>SURYA OR ONE BELONGING TO THE SOLAR DYNASTY</p>
<p>https://sites.google.com/site/nisdpr/</p>
<p>Connection with the Kuru Dynasty of kings , Kuru Kingdom From Mahabharata, Book 1, Chapter 94</p>
<p>Samvarana begat upon his wife, Tapati, the daughter of Surya, a son named Kuru. He was installed on the throne by his people. It is after his name that the field called Kurujangala has become so famous in the world. Devoted to asceticism, he made that field (Kurukshetra) sacred by practising asceticism there.
<p>Kuru’s wife, Vahini, brought forth five sons, viz., Avikshit, Bhavishyanta, Chaitraratha, Muni and the celebrated Janamejaya (Janamejaya the 2nd). </p>
<p>https://youtu.be/GCk4XiE0mQ8</p>

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]