== Notes for [[Item:Q57723|Q57723]] ==

Mayor (Alguacil Mayor) of the town of Concepcion de La Vega in 1623 and until at least 1640.[http://www.archivesportaleurope.net/ead-display/-/ead/pl/aicode/ES-41091-AGI10/type/fa/id/ES-41091-AGI-UD-1859526/unitid/ES-41091-AGI-UD-1859526+-+ES-41091-AGI-UD-395592/search/0/pedro+polanco+henao Confirmacion de oficio: Pedro Polanco de Henao 1623]

Pedro (Pérez) Polanco de Henao, grandfather of Capt. Pedro Pérez Polanco, appears as the owner of Hato de Guanagua/Buenagua/Bonagua in la Vega en 1605 (later referred as Buenagua in Gil-Bermejo's source and today called Bonagua). Source- pag 437, Rodríguez Demorizi, Emilio. [https://books.google.se/books?redir_esc=y&id=ujF7wAEACAAJ&focus=searchwithinvolume&q=Guanagua "Relaciones Históricas de Santo Domingo, Vol II page 437"].

Pedro Polanco de Henao as Alcalde of La Vega in 1640 Gil-Bermejo García, Juana. [https://books.google.se/books?id=zzjwG6q7FecC&pg=PA249&dq=Polanco+La+espa%C3%B1ola:+anotaciones+hist%C3%B3ricas&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwj0gY26o8fcAhXCCewKHfkYCsYQ6AEILDAA#v=onepage&q=Polanco%20La%20espa%C3%B1ola%3A%20anotaciones%20hist%C3%B3ricas&f=false "La española: anotaciones históricas, 1600-1650 (p. 249)" ]

He was alcalde ordinario of Santiago de los Caballeros in 1646. [http://pares.mcu.es/ParesBusquedas20/catalogo/show/397774 "Méritos del Capitan y Sargento Mayor Don Pedro Perez Polanco. Carta del Gobernador Francisco Segura Sandoval y Castilla (1680)". Archivo General de Indias, Santo_Domingo, 64,R.2,N.39. pp. Image no. 140-141.]

In his book "Los Escribanos en el Santo Domingo Colonial", Mons Eduardo Polanco Brito quotes the probanza de hidalguia (proof of nobility) of his grandson Pedro Polanco de Henao (Attached in media section)

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]