== Notes for [[Item:Q99808|Q99808]] ==

Hasdai (Abu Yusuf ben Yitzhak ben Ezra) ibn Shaprut (Hebrew: חסדאי אבן שפרוט) born about 915 at Jaén; died about 975 at Córdoba in Spain, was a Jewish scholar, physician, diplomat, and patron of science. His father, Isaac ben Ezra, was a wealthy and learned Jew of Jaén. Hasdai acquired in his youth a thorough knowledge of Hebrew, Arabic, and Latin, the last-named language being at that time known only to the higher clergy of Spain. He also studied medicine, and is said to have discovered a universal panacea, called Al-Faruk.

>>''Ibn Abi 'UKaibia writes of him: "Hasdai b. Isaac was among the foremost Jewish scholars versed in their law. He opened to his coreligionists in Andalusia the gates of knowledge of the religious law, of chronology, etc. Before his time they had to apply to the Jews of Baghdad on legal questions, and on matters referring to the calendar and the dates of the festivals" (ed. Müller, ii. 50).''

Appointed physician to the caliph Abd ar-Rahman III (912-961), he, by his engaging manners, knowledge, character, and extraordinary ability, gained his master's confidence to such a degree that he became the caliph's confidant and faithful counselor. Without bearing the title of vizier he was in reality minister of foreign affairs; he had also control of the customs and ship-dues in the port of Córdoba. Hasdai arranged the alliances formed by the caliph with foreign powers, and he received the envoys sent by the latter to Córdoba.

In 949 an embassy was sent by Constantine VII. to form a diplomatic league between the hard-pressed Byzantine empire and the powerful ruler of Spain. Among the presents brought by the embassy was a magnificent codex of Dioscorides' work on botany, which the Arabic physicians and naturalists valued highly. Hasdai, with the aid of a learned Greek monk named Nicholas, translated it into Arabic, making it thereby the common property of the Arabs and of medieval Europe.

Hasdai ibn Shaprut had a business relationship with the “Regent” of the Zirid-Fatimid Empire based in Kairouan; she was sister of Ma‘ādh Abū Tamīm ibn Badis al-Mu‘izz li Dīn Allāh (932 – 975) (her name was Umm al-'Aziz) – she had a fleet of ships she rented to Hasdai ibn Shaprut. This gave Hasdai ibn Shaprut a competitive advantage over ALL other shippers in the Mediterranean Basin – he could get his products transported on ships protected by the Fatmid Army and Navy.

Al-Muʿizz, was the most powerful of the Fāṭimid caliphs, whose armies conquered Egypt and who made the newly founded Al-Qāhirah (Cairo) his capital in 972–973. He was about 22 years of age when he succeeded his father, al-Mansur, in 953 with the title of al-Muʿizz. His authority was acknowledged over the greater part of the region now comprising Morocco, Algeria, and Tunisia, and he soon took the island of Sicily.

===The court of caliph Abd ar-Rahman III
Hasdai rendered important services to the caliph by his treatment of an embassy headed by John of Gorze, sent to Córdoba in 956 by Otto I. The caliph, fearing that the letter of the German emperor might contain matter derogatory to Islam, commissioned Hasdai to open the negotiations with the envoys. Hasdai, who soon perceived that the letter could not be delivered to the caliph in its present form, persuaded the envoys to send for another letter which should contain no objectionable matter. John of Gorze said that he had "never seen a man of such subtle intellect as the Jew Hasdeu" ("Vita Johannis Gorziensis," ch. cxxi., in G. H. Pertz, Monumenta Germaniæ, iv. 371).

Hasdai secured a great diplomatic triumph during the difficulties which arose between the kingdoms of Leon and Navarre, when the ambitious Queen Toda sought the aid of 'Abd al-Rahman in reinstating her deposed grandson Sancho. Hasdai was sent to the court of Navarre; and he succeeded after a long struggle in persuading the queen to go to Córdoba with her son and grandson, in order to prostrate herself before the caliph, her old enemy, and implore the aid of his arms (958). The proud Navarrese allowed herself to be vanquished by Hasdai – as a Jewish poet of the time expressed himself, "by the charm of his words, the strength of his wisdom, the force of his cunning, and his thousand tricks."
Hasdai retained his high position under 'Abd al-Rahman's son and successor, Al-Hakam II, who even surpassed his father in his love for science.

==Jewish activity

>===''Khazaria''
Hasdai was very active in behalf of his co-religionists and Jewish science. Allegedly, When he heard that in Central Asia there was a Jewish state with a Jewish ruler, he desired to enter into correspondence with this monarch; and when the report of the existence of the state of the Khazars was confirmed by two Jews, Mar Saul and Mar Joseph, who had come in the retinue of an embassy from the Croatian king to Córdoba, Hasdai entrusted to them a letter, written in good Hebrew addressed to the Jewish king, in which he gave an account of his position in the Western state, described the geographical situation of Andalusia and its relation to foreign countries, and asked for detailed information in regard to the Khazars, their origin, their political and military organization, etc. See also the '''Khazar Correspondence.'''

Hasdai sent a letter to Empress Helena of Byzantium in which he pleaded for religious liberty to be granted to the Jews of Byzantium. He pointed to his own warm relations with the Muslim Caliph in Córdoba as well as his benevolent attitude towards the Christians of Spain. See http://www.lib.cam.ac.uk/Taylor-Schechter/exhibition.html, T-S J2.71.

Hasdai sent rich presents to the yeshiva of Sura and that of Pumbedita, and corresponded with Dosa, the son of Saadia Gaon. He was also instrumental in transferring the center of Jewish theological studies from Babylonia to Spain, by appointing Moses ben Hanoch, who had been stranded at Córdoba, director of a school, and thereby detaching Judaism from its dependence on the East, to the great joy of the caliph, as Abraham ibn Daud says (Sefer ha-Kabbalah p. 68).

Ibn Abi 'UKaibia writes of him: "Hasdai b. Isaac was among the foremost Jewish scholars versed in their law. He opened to his coreligionists in Andalusia the gates of knowledge of the religious law, of chronology, etc. Before his time they had to apply to the Jews of Baghdad on legal questions, and on matters referring to the calendar and the dates of the festivals" (ed. Müller, ii. 50).

Hasdai marks the beginning of the florescence of Andalusian Jewish culture, and the rise of poetry and of the study of Hebrew grammar among the Spanish Jews. Himself a scholar, he encouraged scholarship among his coreligionists by the purchase of Hebrew books, which he imported from the East, and by supporting Jewish scholars whom he gathered about him. Among the latter were Menahem ben Saruq of Tortosa, the protégé of Hasdai's father, and Dunash ben Labrat, both of whom addressed poems to their patron. Dunash, however, prejudiced Hasdai to such a degree against Menahem that Hasdai caused Menahem to be maltreated.

==Personal life

We have no record of a wife. The Sephardic Jewish family originating from Turkey that has the surname Chiprut claims descent from Hasdai. In addition several families throughout the Jewish Diaspora carry variations of the Hasdai name which came about when moving from one country to another [i.e.: Hazday, Hazdai, Hasday]

When Hibat Allah converted to Islam, Isaac ibn Ezra (Abu Hasdai Yitzhak ibn Ezra ibn Shaprut) converted too. Isaac ibn Ezra (son of Abraham ibn Ezra ibn Shaprut), had a son named Hasdai ben Isaac ibn ezra bn Shaprut (Abu Yusuf ben Yitzhak bin Ezra ibn Shaprut). Some Jewish scholars view Hasdai ibn Shaprut's father (the apostate previously known as Isaac bin Ezra) as the primary driver for enticing the heads of Jewish Academies, in Babylon, to come to Spain. The goal, as speculated among scholars, was to debase Jewish centers of learning, erode the power base of the Exilarchate, and help bring the fall of the Radhanite trade network; thereby shifting economic power plus intellectual and political authority to al-Andalus. Also, in 949, he became the right hand man (vizier) to the Muslim caliph of the Caliph of Cordoba

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Jewish Encyclopedia. 1901–1906.
The Letter of Rabbi Hasdai ibn Shaprut

==Bibliography
* Filosseno Luzzatto, Notice sur Abou-Jousouf Hasdai ibn-Shaprout, Paris, 1852;
* Reinhart Dozy, Geschichte der Mauren in Spanien, ii.53;
* Rios, Hist. i.145;
* Geiger, Das Judenthum und Seine Gesch. ii.82;
* Carmoly, Histoire des Médecins Juifs, p. 30 (very inadequate);
* Cassel, in Miscellany of Hebrew Literature, i.73;
* Grätz, Gesch. v.360.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD766E431EFBBFA9822EF79916C9B94
geni:6000000017139852481

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]