== Notes for [[Item:Q111534|Q111534]] ==

7° rey de Asturias, 783-788

FUENTES:

-http://www.abcgenealogia.com/Asturias00.html

--------------------
Mauregatus of Asturias

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mauregatus

Mauregatus the Usurper (Spanish: Mauregato) was the king of Asturias from 783 to 788 or 789. He was an illegitimate son of Alfonso I, supposedly by a Moorish serf. He usurped the throne on the death of Silo, his brother-in-law (the husband of his half sister Adosinda). The nobility had elected Alfonso II at Adosinda's insistence, but Mauregatus assembled a large army of supporters and forced Alfonso into Álava.

Nothing is known in detail of his reign. The adoptionist dispute was raging between Elipandus, Archbishop of Toledo, and Beatus of Liébana and even occasioned the intervention of Charlemagne. Mauregatus also sent back an invading Moslem force.

Sometime during his reign a hymn to Saint James was composed with an acrostic mentioning the king's name. This is considered to presage the legend of the saint's burial at Santiago de Compostela.

Maugerato became king of Asturias by usurping throne after Silo King of Asturias died.
He was an illigitimate son of Alfonso I whose mother was a Muslim serf. Half brother to Adosinda, and Bermudo.
1: Collins, Roger. Visigothic Spain, 409-711.
Blackwell publishing 2004.
2: King, P.D., King Chindasuinth and the first territorial law code of the Visigothic kingdon.
Edward James-Oxford-Clarendon Press 1980, PP. 131-157.

Rey de Asturias (783-789)
Hijo bastardo del rey Alfonso I y de una cautiva árabe traída en una de las expediciones que hiciera aquel monarca por tierras ribereñas del Duero. La nobleza apoyó a Mauregato, por no haberse olvidado de los desafueros de Fruela I, para que usurpase el trono al Alfonso II, hijo de éste. También se dice que Mauregato fue ayudado por los musulmanes, a quienes pidió ayuda, a los cuales tuvo que pagar tributo en señal de vasallaje. Estuvo casado con Cruesa, de la cual tuvo un hijo llamado Hermenegildo. Tuvo que hacer frente a la herejía de Fidelio

He ruled from 783 to 788.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]