== Notes for [[Item:Q111242|Q111242]] ==

----
=== Teodemaro
* King of the Suebi or Swabians of Spain
* In office 561 – 570
* Predecessor: Ariamiro
* Successor: Miro
* Born: at the end of the 5th century
* Death: 570
* Children: Miro

----

===Biography

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theodemir_(Suebian_king)

'''Theodemir''' or '''Theodemar''' (also Teodomiro,[1] Latin: Theodemirus; died 570) was one of the last Suevic kings of Galicia and one of the first Chalcedonian Christians to hold the title. He succeeded Ariamir sometime between the end of May 561 and the year 566 and ruled until his death.

Theodemir has been posited as the first Orthodox Christian monarch of the Suevi since the death of Rechiar and the monarch who brought about the conversion of his people from Arianism to orthodoxy with the help of the missionary Martin of Dumio. This theory is largely based on the Historia Suevorum of Isidore of Seville: regni potestatem Theodimirus suscepit: qui confestim Arrianae impietatis errore destructo Suevos catholicae fidei reddidit.[2] However, other sources, notably John of Biclarum and Gregory of Tours, plus the minutes of the First Council of Braga, give or imply different occurrences: John that Reccared I of the Visigoths brought about the conversion of both peoples, Gregory that the saintly intercession of Martin of Tours at the bequest of the king Chararic brought it about, and the minutes of First Braga that Ariamir was the first to lift the ban on orthodox Catholic synods.

Most scholars have attempted to meld these stories. It has been alleged that Theodemir must have been a successor of Ariamir's, since Ariamir was the first Suevic monarch to lift the ban on Catholic synods; Isidore therefore gets the chronology wrong.[3][4] Reinhart suggested that Chararic was converted first through the relics of Saint Martin and that Theodemir was converted later through the preaching of Martin of Dumio.[5] Felix Dahn equated Chararic with Theodemir, even saying that the latter was the name he took upon baptism.[5] It has also been suggested that Theodemir and Ariamir were the same person and the son of Chararic.[5] Ferreiro believes the conversion of the Suevi was progressive and stepwise and that Thoedemir was responsible for beginning a persecution of the Arians in his kingdom to root out their heresy.[6]

In 569 Theodemir called the First Council of Lugo,[7] which increased the number of dioceses within the kingdom. In 570 he was attacked by the Arian king of the Visigoths, Leovigild.

----

===Genealogy

https://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/VANDALS,%20SUEVI,%20VISIGOTHS.htm

'''No parents identified'''.

* '''TEODEMIRO''' (-570). He succeeded in 561 as TEODEMIRO King of the Suevi at Lugo. He divided his territories into two ecclesiastical provinces at the assembly at Lugo, Braga and Lugo, in 569[103]. m ---. The name of Teodemiro's wife or concubine is not known. King Teodemiro & his [wife] had one child:
**1. MIRÓN (-583). The primary source which confirms his parentage has not yet been identified. He succeeded his father in 570 as MIRÓN King of the Suevi at Lugo. The Iohannis Abbatis Biclarensis Chronica records that "Miro Suevorum rex" made war against "Runcones" in 572[104]. He made an alliance with Leovigildo King of the Visigoths in 579, but helped the latter's son Hermenegildo after he had rebelled and been captured in Seville. Gregory of Tours records that "Mir King of Galicia" supported Hermenegildo, son of Leovigildo King of the Visigoths, against his father but died immediately after returning to his own country[105]. King Mirón was himself captured and obliged to swear loyalty to the Visigothic king[106]. The Iohannis Abbatis Biclarensis Chronica records the death in 583 of "Miro Suevorum rex"[107]. m as her first husband, SISEGUTIA, daughter of ---. The Iohannis Abbatis Biclarensis Chronica records that "Audeca" succeeded in 584 "in Gallaccia Suevorum regnum" and married "Sisegutiam relictam Mironis regis"[108]. She married secondly (584) as his [second] wife, Audica, who had deposed King Eborico. King Mirón & his wife had two children:
***a) EBORICO (-after 585). The Iohannis Abbatis Biclarensis Chronica names "Eboricus filius eius" when recording that he succeeded his father in 583 "in provincia Gallacciæ"[109]. Gregory of Tours names "Euric" as son of "Mir King of Galicia" when recording that he succeeded his father and sought to renew a pact with King Leovigildo[110]. He succeeded his father in 583 as EBORICO King of the Suevi at Lugo. He was deposed in 584 by Audica[111]. The Iohannis Abbatis Biclarensis Chronica records that he became a monk after he was deposed[112].
***b) daughter . Gregory of Tours records that Audica, a relation of Euric, married the sister of the latter[113]. m as his [first] wife, AUDICA, son of ---.




----
===References
* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Galician_monarchs
* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kingdom_of_the_Suebi
* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Suebi

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]