== Notes for [[Item:Q107535|Q107535]] ==

https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alavides https://iranicaonline.org/articles/alids-of-tabarestan-daylaman-and-gilan
=====
Zayd's rebellion inspired other revolts by members of his clan, especially in the Hejaz, the most famous among these being the revolt of Muhammad al-Nafs az-Zakiyya against the Abbasids in 762. Zaydi agitation continued until 785 and re-erupted in Tabaristan under the leadership of the Zayd's son, Hasan ibn Zayd ibn Ali.

His revolt attracted many supporters, among them the ruler of Rustamids, the son of Farīdūn (a descendant of Rostam Farrokhzād), Abd ar-Rahman ibn Rustam.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Revolt_of_Zayd_ibn_Ali
https://www.wikizero.com/tr/Hasan_bin_Zeyd%27%C3%BCl-Alevi
--------------------
Hasan bin Zeyd'ûl-Alevî is the grandson of Imam Zeyd 's son Ali Zeyn el-'ıb'i-Dîn . 785 years in Taberistan 'became notorious as the movement began in hûruç.

Spread of Zaydî-Alevism towards Turkistan AH 98 / AD 717 in the "Yazid bin Mühelleb" Taberistan , Gürgan and after conquering these neighborhoods in cities around the Abbasids from Al-Mansur Alevism propaganda continuously over forty years, until the transfer was carried out. In Hijri 138/756 AD , a new sect called Sinbâd (Sünbâd / Sonpâth) , which had disruptive effects on the Islamic jurisdictions and led many to follow.

Taberistan Revolt led by "Hasan bin Zeyd'ûl-Alevi" In M. 785 after thirty years of this incident, " Ali Zayn al-Abi-Din 's grandson Hassan bin Zaid ' al-Alawi" Tabaristan from 'in "Dynasty-i- Ahl al-Bayt " stocks, he began to invite. Even "Bani Bâdüsîyân" known by the name " Rüstemdad " ruler of "the Abd'û-Rahman ibn Rustam" at Hasan bin Zayd 'was subject to cross-ul-Alevî'y ones.

The support of Feridun's son Bâdüsyân to Hasan bin Zeyd'ûl-Alevî Deylaman , Amul and all Taberistan in the city "Alevism" in this period that continued vigorous propaganda " Rüstemd are from Feridun's son Bâdüsyân" reign macaques to go by the Abbasids 's against the leader of the revolutionaries who maintain fa'aaliyet Hasan bin Zayd bin Ali ' UL- He also gave great rewards to Alevi.] ...[Hassan bin Zayd est finalement tombé malade et a continué à régner pendant un an. Pendant cette période, le frère de Hassan, Muhammad ibn Zayd, était basé à Gorgan et lui-même était en poste à Amol. Le gendre de Da'i, Ahmad ibn Muhammad, a également exercé des fonctions gouvernementales à Amol. Da'i est décédé le lundi 3 Rajab 270 AH et a été enterré dans le quartier de Rastkui, qu'il avait préparé avant sa mort. Le da'i n'avait pas d'enfants au moment de sa mort et, sur cette base, dans son testament, il avait présenté l'héritier du gouvernement comme son frère; Mais contrairement à la volonté de Da'i Ahmad ibn Muhammad, il est arrivé au pouvoir. ]...[ Da'i Kabir était l'un des opposants aux califes abbassides - qui étaient pour la plupart sunnites - et donc, contrairement à la règle abbasside, qui utilisait du noir, il portait des vêtements et des drapeaux blancs. Bien que la religion officielle des Alaouites de Tabarestan était à l'époque du requérant Zaydi Cependant, dans la tradition officielle Zaydi, il n'est pas connu sous le nom d'Imam, ce qui était dû à la violence des Da'i.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000000163048944

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]