== Notes for [[Item:Q87949|Q87949]] ==

http://www.livius.org/la-ld/laodice/laodice01.html

="Laodice"=
'''Laodice''' (mid-third century BCE): Seleucid princess, wife of king '''Mithridates II of Pontus'''.

==Relatives:==
* Father: '''Antiochus II Theos'''
* Mother: '''Laodice I'''
* Husband: '''Mithridates II of Pontus'''
* Children:

# '''Laodice III''';
# ''another'' '''Laodice'''

------------------------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laodice_(wife_of_Mithridates_II_of_Pontus)

=Laodice (wife of Mithridates II of Pontus)
'''Laodice''' (flourished 3rd century BC) was a Greek Princess of the Seleucid Empire. Laodice was of Greek Macedonian and Persian descent.
*She was one of the daughters and youngest child born to the Seleucid Monarchs '''Antiochus II Theos''' and '''Laodice I'''.[1]
*Among her siblings were her brothers '''Seleucus II Callinicus''' and '''Antiochus Hierax'''.
*Laodice was born and raised in the Seleucid Empire.
*Anywhere from 245 BC to 239 BC, her mother and Seleucus II arranged for her to marry King Mithridates II of Pontus.[2][3] Laodice married Mithridates II, as a part of a political alliance between the Seleucid Empire and the Kingdom of Pontus. In 245 BC, her mother and Seleucus II were in the Third Syrian War. To gain support from the Kingdom of Pontus, Laodice was given to Mithridates II in marriage and as a marriage gift, Phrygia was transferred as well.[4]
*Through her marriage Laodice became Queen of Pontus. Mithridates’ marriage to Laodice was one of the most important features in his reign and was an ambitious marriage policy he initiated.[5] Through his political alliance and marriage to Laodice, Mithridates II allied himself to the most important royal house in Asia and gaining impressive recognition for Pontus as a political power in the Hellenistic world.[6] This marriage also strengthened the pro-Seleucid orientation in foreign policy of Pontus.[7]
*The marriage occurred early in the reign of '''Seleucus II Callinicus''', so he could secure Anatolia behind him, so that Seleucus II could turn his attention to war with the Egyptian Greek Pharaoh Ptolemy III Euergetes.[8]
*At some point, Laodice may have influenced '''Mithridates II''' by her desire to weaken the Seleucid state, by supporting her first brother '''Seleucus II Callinicus''' in joint rule with her other brother '''Antiochus Hierax''', who were at civil war with each other.[9]
*Laodice bore '''Mithridates II''' three children, two daughters:
# '''Laodice III''',
# '''Laodice of Pontus''' and a son
# '''Mithridates III of Pontus'''.[10]
=

--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laodice_(wife_of_Mithridates_II_of_Pontus)
--------------------
'''
=Laodice=
'''

Laodice (flourished between second half 3rd century BC and first half 2nd century BC) was a Greek Princess from the Seleucid Empire and the wife of the King Mithridates III of Pontus. Laodice appears to have come from obscure origins. Laodice could have been a supposed daughter of the Seleucid King Antiochus IV Epiphanes. This is based on the assumption that the sister of Alexander Balas who appeared in Rome with him in 153 BC as a genuine daughter of Antiochus IV Epiphanes was the Laodice who married Mithridates III. Antiochus IV Epiphanes had two daughters who were Laodice VI from this marriage to his sister-wife Laodice IV [4] and his other daughter was Antiochis the child from his concubine. However this assumption shows that Antiochus IV Epiphanes may have had another daughter called Laodice, however this is not certain. The assumption shows that there could some confusion about the identity of this Laodice and Laodice VI. Laodice bore Mithridates III three children: Mithridates IV of Pontus,[7] Pharnaces I of Pontus [8] and Laodice.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laodice_(wife_of_Mithridates_III_of_Pontus)

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]