== Notes for [[Item:Q100658|Q100658]] ==

Isaac Benveniste (Zag): Son of Joseph,; father of Sheshet Benveniste (No. 19).

He was physician in ordinary to the king of Aragon in the early part of the thirteenth century, and lived at Barcelona; such was the esteem in which he was held that be was distinguished by the title of "Nasi" (prince).

In 1215 he summoned a meeting of delegates from all the Jewish communities of southern France, from Narbonne to Marseilles, to convene at St.Gilles.  The convention, of which the influential Levi b. Moses of Narbonne was chairman, met for the purpose of electing delegates to Rome in order to frustrate the plans of Pope Innocent III., and to hinder any measures that the Lateran Council might devise against the Jews.

The efforts of the deputies, however, were fruitless; for the Lateran Council decided that the Jews were to wear a special badge.  It is due in large measure to the efforts of Benveniste that the provisions of this law were not strictly enforced in Aragon.  On the recommendation of Jaime I. and with the consent of the bishops of the land, Pope Honorius sent a diploma to Benveniste, exempting him, in recognition of his services, his abstention from usury, and his title of "catholicorum studiosus," from every indignity.  It was further stipulated that the Jews of Aragon were not to be forced to wear badges.

===References
*Jews, Christian Society, & Royal Power in Medieval Barcelona. By Elka Klein. Page 203. < [https://books.google.com/books?id=f9h_e-3JOYAC&lpg=PA87&dq=Tolsana%20Gracian&pg=PA203#v=onepage&q&f=false GoogleBooks] >

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD87857C1EFBBFA9822EF79916CB10A
geni:6000000015844566843

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]