== Notes for [[Item:Q87292|Q87292]] ==

ID: I22760

Name: Lucius Vipsanius

Given Name: Lucius

Surname: Vipsanius

Sex: M

_UID: D8D9A7EAFD50D811BE490080C8C142CC96B2

Change Date: 3 Oct 2005 1

Death: deceased

Marriage 1 Spouse Unknown

Children

Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa b: 63 BC

Sources:

Abbrev: Pullen010502.FTW

Title: Pullen010502.FTW

Note:

Call number:

Text: Date of Import: Jan 5, 2002

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I22760

--------------------------------------

Lucius Vipsanius Agrippa

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Lucius Vipsanius Agrippa is the father of Roman politician and general Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa, distinguished Roman woman Vipsania Polla, and another Lucius Vipsanius Agrippa.

The family of Lucius Vipsanius originated from the Italian countryside of humble and plebeian origins. The family was of the equestrian rank and had acquired wealth. However, the Roman aristocracy considered them undistinguished and unsophisticated. Little is known of the life of Lucius Vipsanius Agrippa.

The Pantheon, built by the Roman Emperor Hadrian in Rome in 118, was based on the design by his son Marcus. The name of Lucius Vipsanius and his son are inscribed on the building.

Forrás / Source:

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Vipsanius_Agrippa
--------------------
* Reference: [https://www.ancestry.com/family-tree/person/tree/39342685/person/19355345828 Ancestry Genealogy] - [https://www.geni.com/projects/SmartCopy/18783 SmartCopy]: ''Jun 17 2018, 23:57:03 UTC''

Lucius Vipsanius Agrippa
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Lucius Vipsanius Agrippa is the father of another Lucius Vipsanius Agrippa, Roman Politician and General Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa and distinguished Roman woman Vipsania Polla.

The family of Lucius Vipsanius originated from the Italian countryside and were of humble and plebs origins. The family was of equestrian rank and were wealthy. However, the Roman aristocracy considered them undistinguished and unsophisticated. Little is known of the life of Lucius Vipsanius Agrippa.

The Pantheon, built by the Roman Emperor Hadrian in Rome in 118, was based on the design by his son Marcus. The name of Lucius Vipsanius and his son are inscribed on the building.


[edit] Source
http://www.livius.org/vi-vr/vipsanius/agrippa.html

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Vipsanius_Agrippa"

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]