== Notes for [[Item:Q85797|Q85797]] ==

His occupation was General of the Franks, Magister Militum " de L'Armée Romaine D'Occident (vers 380, sous Gratien), Consul (385). Flavius passed away in 385, at age 35 in Byzantium

--------------------
https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flavius_Bauto

Flavius Bauto (died c. 385) was a Romanised Frank who served as a magister militum of the Western Roman Empire.

When the usurper Magnus Maximus invaded Italy in an attempt to replace Valentinian II, Bauto led the forces of the Eastern Emperor Theodosius I and defeated the rebel. He died soon after, likely of natural causes. His daughter, Aelia Eudoxia married Emperor Arcadius in 395, becoming one of the more powerful empresses of Late Antiquity. He was succeeded by his son, Arbogastes.

Bauto opposed Ambrosius when the latter proposed to remove the pagan Altar of Victory from the senate of Rome. He lost the case and the Altar of Victory was removed. After his death, Arbogastes became the leader of a short pagan revival.

SOURCE NOTES:
http://homepages.rootsweb.com/~cousin/html/p277.htm#i16742

RESEARCH NOTES:
a general of the Franks in the service of Rome. Also called Bauto des
Francs. Consul (FLAVIVS BAVTO) in Rome, in 385.

AKA: Bauto of the Franks

Magister Militum

A FRANK; GENERAL IN THE ROMAN ARMY

Flavius Bauto (died c. 385) was a Romanised Frank who served as a magister militum of the Western Roman Empire. When the usurper Magnus Maximus invaded Italy in an attempt to replace Valentinian II, Bauto led the forces of the Eastern Emperor Theodosius I and defeated the rebel. He died soon after, likely of natural causes. His daughter, Aelia Eudoxia married Emperor Arcadius in 395, becoming one of the more powerful empresses of Late Antiquity. He was succeeded by his son Arbogastes.
Bauto opposed Ambrosius when the latter proposed to remove the pagan Altar of Victory from the senate of Rome. He lost the case and the Altar of Victory was removed. After his death Arbogastes became the leader of a short pagan revival.

-- MERGED NOTE ------------

Wikidata: https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q519483 | Geni: https://www.geni.com/people/6000000006101378800

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]