== Notes for [[Item:Q115905|Q115905]] ==

García García de Aza (en latín, Garsias Garsie de Aza: ; floruit 1126–1159) fue un noble y magnate castellano, famoso por su riqueza, figura prominente de la España medieval.Su apellido, "García" (también "Garcés"), es un patronímico, el cual significa "Hijo de García" , mientras que su segundo apellido que va compuesto con el primero, "de Aza" es un apellido toponímico que se encuentra con frecuencia en documentos contemporáneos, en este caso indica que ostentaba el feudo de Aza.​ Fue hijo de García Ordóñez, y de la condesa Eva, segunda esposa de García Ordoñez. Luego de la muerte de García Ordoñez, Eva volvió a contraer matrimonio, casó con Pedro González de Lara, García García de Aza fue medio hermano de los hijos de Eva y Pedro, por lo que fue aliado de la Casa de Lara.

======================

GARCIA GARCEZ DE AZA, Senhor de Montijo, Penafiel e Castelo de Serracim.

---------

Chapter 3. AZA, LERMA

===Family

*https://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/SPANISH%20NOBILITY%20LATER%20MEDIEVAL.htm#GarciaGarciadied1160

GARCÍA García de Aza, son of conde GARCÍA Ordóñez, Tenente en Nájera y Grañón & his second wife Eva --- (1106, before 29 Sep-16 Dec 1160). Salazar y Castro records his parentage[142]. A charter dated 1106 records "eodem anno in die sancti Michaelis" that "comes Garsia" baptised "suum filium in Sancti Emiliani ecclesiam"[143]. The primary source which names his mother has not yet been identified. The Chronica Adefonsi Imperatoris records that "…García Garcés…" made peace with Alfonso VII King of Castile after his accession in 1126[144]. Alférez of Alfonso VII King of Castile 12 Dec 1126 to 13 Nov 1127[145]. "…Garcia Garciaci signifer regis…" subscribed the charter dated 13 Nov 1127 under which King Alfonso VII donated "el castillo de San Jorge en la Sierra del Pindo" to Santiago de Compostela[146]. "Aldefonsus…tocius Hyspanie imperator…cum uxore mea imperatrice domna Rica et…filiis meis Sanctio et Ferrando regibus" donated property to the abbey of Silos by charter dated 28 Oct 1155, confirmed by "…Garcia Garçiaz de Aza…"[147]. "Garcia Garciez filius comite Garcie…cum uxore mea Sancia" donated part of "albergeria de Oterdaios sicut mater mea et fratres mei dederunt" to Burgos Cathedral by charter dated Dec 1159, witnessed by "…Diago Fernandez, Gonzaluo Padiela, comdessa domna Eluira, dona Maria ermana de la condesa…"[148].

'''[m''' firstly --- de Lara, daughter of ---. This otherwise unrecorded earlier marriage of García García de Aza is suggested by the following document: "Rodericus comes…cum consanguinibus meis: Semeno Enechez et mater eius dompna Maria, Don Garcia, D. Malrico, Gonsalbo de Marañon, Don Nuño, Don Rodrico, Don Alvaro, Don Pedro Garciaz, comitissa Doña Elbira, Domna Milia, Domna Santia Garciaz, Domna Mayor Garciaz, Domna Maria Garciaz" donated "villam…Gormeces" to San Pedro de Arlança, by charter dated 7 Feb 1140[149]. The family relationships between Rodrigo González de Lara, the main donor, and "consanguinibus meis" have been traced except in the case of the three presumed sisters "…Domna Santia Garciaz, Domna Mayor Garciaz, Domna Maria Garciaz". The connection between these sisters and the Aza family is indicated by the sister Mayor donating property, in the charter dated 24 May 1182 (see below), which had previously been donated by their supposed father. However, no close relationship between Rodrigo González de Lara and either García García de Aza or his known wife Sancha Pérez de Traba has yet been found. One explanation for the presence of the three sisters in this document is that their mother was a close relative of the Lara family, maybe the sister of Rodrigo González. If this is correct, she would have been --- González, daughter of GONZALO Núñez [de Lara] & his wife Goto [Núñez]. This would also explain the absence of the other known children of García García de Aza in the document, on the assumption that they were born from his marriage to Sancha Pérez and so were not directly related to Rodrigo González.''']'''

'''m''' [secondly] SANCHA Pérez de Traba, daughter of conde PEDRO Froílaz de Traba & his second wife condesa Mayor Rodríguez (-after Dec 1159). "Garcia Garciez…cum uxore mea Sancia Pedrez et filiis meis" donated property to the abbey of Silos by charter dated 29 Mar 1157, witnessed by "…Maria Andrez, Maria Ylianez de Vila Tella et Gonsalbus Garciez suus filius…Pedro Garciez de Aza…"[150]. "Garcia Garciez filius comite Garcie…cum uxore mea Sancia" donated part of "albergeria de Oterdaios sicut mater mea et fratres mei dederunt" to Burgos Cathedral by charter dated Dec 1159, witnessed by "…Diago Fernandez, Gonzaluo Padiela, comdessa domna Eluira, dona Maria ermana de la condesa…"[151].

García García & his [first] wife had three children:
* 1. SANCHA Garcia (-after 7 Feb 1140). ...
* 2. MAYOR García de Aza (-after 24 May 1182). ...
* 3. MARÍA Garcia (-after 1140). ...

García García & his [second] wife had [seven] children:
* 4. PEDRO García de Lerma (-after 22 Aug 1202). ...
*5. GÓMEZ García de Roa (-after 11 Feb 1191). ...
* 6. ORDOÑO García (-after 1188). ...
* 7. GONZALO García . ...
* 8. GARCÍA García (-after 1166). ...
* 9. [RODRIGO García de Aza . ...
* 10. [JUANA de Aza . ....

-----------

(NFP, Tomo XXI, ttº Moraes, p1 N7).

—————————————

----

https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garc%C3%ADa_Garc%C3%ADa_de_Aza

García García de Aza (in Latin , Garsias Garsie de Aza :; floruit 1126-1159) was a noble and Castilian, famous for its wealth tycoon, a prominent figure in Spain medieval. 1 2 Your name, "Smith" (also "Garcés"), is a patronímico , which means "Son of García", while its second surname which is composed with the first, "of Aza " is a place name surname that is frequently found in contemporary documents, in this case it indicates that he held the fiefdom of Aza. 3 He was the son of García Ordóñez, and Countess Eva, second wife of García Ordóñez. 4 After García Ordóñez's death, Eva remarried, married Pedro González de Lara, García García de Aza was the half-brother of Eva and Pedro's children, for which he was an ally of the Casa de Lara. 5

Calatrava Castle, which was probably defended by García during Alfonso VII's campaign of 1147.

According to La Chronica Adefonsi imperatoris , a document from the time that recounts the events during the reign of Alfonso VII of León and Castilla , called The Emperor, when this king first entered León after his proclamation, in March 1126, García García was among the Castilians who came to pay homage and fidelity to him. 6 García served Alfonso as second lieutenant from December 12, 1126 to November 13, 1127, while his brother Pedro García was second lieutenant between May 29 and September 18, 1131. 7This position was generally reserved for the younger nobles at the beginning of their careers, the different dates of their respective positions reflect the difference in their ages. In 1142 García García was a civil judge in Ávila . 2

In 1147, during Alfonso VII's summer campaign to Almería , García does not seem to have joined the army until later, since there is no document from Alfonso VII's court until June 4, when he was in Calatrava . It also does not appear in any of the later royal letters issued during the campaign, suggesting that it may have been sent to Calatrava with a garrison and therefore did not participate in the sieges of Andújar , Baeza , or Almería. 8

On November 10, 1155, García sold a property in Alcolea to his half brother Manrique Pérez de Lara for a thousand maravedís. The sale document was drawn up by a certain Sancho, who signed it as "Chancellor of Count Manrique." 9

===Family

García married a younger daughter of Pedro Fróilaz de Traba , sometimes called Eva and other times Sancha. 1 October García and his wife had at the least two daughters, Elvira and Mayor, who married Gonzalo de Maranhao.

It is possible that he had two more daughters, Sancha and María, and a natural daughter, Juana, a religious in the Monastery of Santo Domingo de Caleruega . 11

===Bibliography
* Simon F. Barton. The Aristocracy in Twelfth-century León and Castile . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.
* Simon R. Doubleday. The Lara Family: Crown and Nobility in Medieval Spain . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 2001.
* Richard A. Fletcher . Saint James's Catapult: The Life and Times of Diego Gelmírez of Santiago de Compostela . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1984.
* Glenn Edward Lipskey. The Chronicle of Alfonso the Emperor: A Translation of the Chronica Adefonsi imperatoris. PhD dissertation, Northwestern University. 1972.
* Gonzalo Martínez Díez. "Family origins of Santo Domingo, the lineages of Aza and Guzmán". Santo Domingo de Caleruega, in its socio-political context, 1170–1221 , edd. Cándido Aniz Iriarte and Luis Vicente Díaz Martín. Editorial San Esteban, 1994, 173–228.
* Faustino Menéndez Pidal de Navascués. "The seals of the lords of Molina". Yearbook of Medieval Studies , 14 (1984), 101–119.
* Antonio Sánchez de Mora. The Castilian nobility in the middle of the Middle Ages: the lineage of Lara (SS. XI – XIII) . Doctoral Thesis, University of Seville , 2003.

----

Costados:

https://www.facebook.com/FamiliaMoraesNavarro/posts/171312663009492

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]