== Notes for [[Item:Q90828|Q90828]] ==

Nerón Claudio Druso o Druso el Mayor (38 a. C. - 9 a. C.), hijo de Livia y de su primer esposo, Tiberio Claudio Nerón.

Debido a que Druso nació cuando su madre ya estaba casada y viviendo con Augusto, corrieron los rumores de que el emperador era el verdadero padre. Para acallar las malas lenguas, Augusto envió al niño a vivir con su padre.

Hermano del que sería emperador, Tiberio, se casó con Antonia Minor, hija menor de Marco Antonio y de la hermana de Augusto, Octavia, y fue padre de Germánico y del emperador Claudio.

Augusto prefería abiertamente a Druso que a Tiberio y presionó al Senado romano para que permitiera que Druso aspirara a cargos públicos cinco años antes de la edad permitida. De esta manera, Druso fue cuestor en el 18 a. C. y pretor en el 11 a. C. Alcanzó el consulado el 9 a. C.

Soldado de gran prestigio y popularidad, luchó en los Alpes y Germania. Encargado de ejecutar el plan de Augusto para la consolidación de la frontera renana de la Galia que permitiría las incursiones posteriores en territorio de Germania[1] Druso ordenó la instalación de un castella o fortín de vigilancia sobre el asentamiento celta de nombre Argentorate, acción que fue oficialmente fechada en el año 12 a. C. por la ciudad de Estrasburgo para la celebración del bimilenario de su fundación en 1988.[2]

Favorito para suceder a Augusto, murió el 14 de septiembre del 9 a. C. en los brazos de su hermano Tiberio. Druso tenía 29 años y estaba en Germania, cuando su caballo resbaló y le desgarró un muslo. Fue enterrado en el Mausoleo de Augusto.

http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Druso_el_Mayor
----------------------
English: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nero_Claudius_Drusus

Nero Claudius Drusus Germanicus (14 January 38 BC - 14 September 9 BC), born Decimus Claudius Drusus also called Drusus, Drusus I, Nero Drusus, or Drusus the Elder was a Roman politician and military commander. He was a fully patrician Claudian on his father's side but his maternal grandmother was from a plebeian family. He was the stepson of the Emperor Augustus, brother of the Emperor Tiberius, paternal grandfather of the Emperor Caligula, father of the Emperor Claudius, and maternal great-grandfather of the Emperor Nero.

Childhood Drusus was the youngest son of Roman Empress Livia Drusilla from her marriage to Tiberius Claudius Nero. Drusus was born between 18 March 38 BC and 13 April 38 BC. He was born shortly after Livia divorced Tiberius Nero and married Augustus (17 January, 38 BC), giving rise to rumors that Augustus was the real father, although this is widely discredited by modern historians as Augustus had not yet met Livia when Drusus would have been conceived (During his reign, Claudius revived this rumor to give the impression that Augustus was his paternal grandfather in addition to being his maternal great-uncle). Before Augustus married Livia, Tiberius Claudius Nero was declared Drusus' biological father. According to Suetonius, he was born with the praenomen Decimus, but it was later changed to Nero. He was raised in Claudius Nero's house with his brother, the future emperor Tiberius, until his father's death. Drusus and his brother Tiberius developed a famously close relationship in this environment that would last the rest of their lives. Tiberius named his eldest son after his brother (a departure from Roman naming convention), and Drusus did likewise.

Marriage Drusus married Antonia Minor, the daughter of Mark Antony and Augustus' sister, Octavia Minor, and gained a reputation of being completely faithful to her. Their children were Germanicus and Claudius, a daughter Livilla (Little Livia), and at least two others who did not survive infancy. After Drusus' death, Antonia never remarried, though she outlived him by nearly five decades. Three Emperors were direct descendants of Drusus, Claudius (his son), Caligula (Germanicus's son, Drusus's grandson), and Nero (Gremanicus's grandson, Drusus's great-grandson),

Career Augustus bestowed many honors on his stepsons. In 19 BC, Drusus was granted the ability to hold all public offices five years before the minimum age. When Tiberius left Italy during his term as praetor in 16 BC, Drusus legislated in his place. He became quaestor the following year, fighting against Raetian bandits in the Alps. Drusus repelled them, gaining honors, but was unable to smash their forces, and required reinforcement from Tiberius. The brothers easily defeated the local Alpine tribes.

In 13 BC, Drusus was sent to govern Gaul to quell riots caused by the actions of a previous administrator. While there, a tribe of Germans entered Gaul and proceeded to attack Roman settlements. Drusus mobilized his legions and beat the invaders back across the Rhine. He penetrated deep into German territory, traveling as far as the North Sea and placing a yearly tribute on the Frisians. As a reward, Drusus was made praetor urbanus for 11 BC.

Drusus did not have it in him to stay in Rome. In the spring of his term, he set out for the German border once more. He pushed once more into the territory of the various German tribes, only stopping at the onset of winter. He was attacked while making his way back to Roman territory, but managed to rout the German force. His troops proclaimed him Imperator and he was granted triumphal ornaments, as well as the office of proconsul for the following year. In 10 BC, the Chatti joined with the Sicambri and attacked Drusus' camp, but were easily defeated. Drusus then went to meet Augustus and Tiberius in Lugdunum (at which point Claudius was born), and traveled with them to Rome. He was easily elected Consul for 9 BC, but once more left the city before assuming office. He once again smashed the Chatti, and then began a campaign against the Marcomanni, but was turned back across the Rhine. Drusus died soon after in consequence of a fall from a horse, lingering on for a month after the accident, by which point Tiberius had joined him. Interestingly, soon before his death he wrote a letter to Tiberius complaining about the style in which Augustus ruled. This letter was delivered to Tiberius as he was with Augustus and Livia and when asked if he could read it was told he must read it out loud. He tried to avoid bad parts but Livia saw through his attempt and after reading ordered Drusus back to Rome. Suetonius reports that he had refused to return to Rome just before his death. Drusus' body was brought back to the city, and his ashes were deposited in the "Mausoleum of Augustus". He remained extremely popular with the legionaries, who erected a monument in Moguntiacum (modern Mainz) on his behalf. Remnants of this are still standing. His family was granted the hereditary honorific "Germanicus", which was given to his eldest son before passing to his youngest. Augustus later wrote a biography of him which did not survive.

Question of paternity There has been some speculation about the paternity of Drusus, some suggesting that he was Augustus' biological son. However this idea is widely discredited by modern historians as Augustus never acknowledged Drusus as his son, nor did he make any attempt to adopt him. Augustus' only biological child was Julia the Elder, his daughter by Scribonia. She gave birth to the five grandchildren (Gaius Caesar, Lucius Caesar, Agrippa Postumus, Agrippina the Elder, and Julia the Younger), whom he adopted as his heirs. After the deaths of 2 of his grandsons by Julia, and the banishment of the third, Augustus never moved to adopt Drusus' sons, Germanicus and Claudius. Augustus chose the much older Tiberius, who was definitely not related by blood, as sole heir and invested him with the powers of principate. Augustus seems to have had Tiberius adopt Germanicus as heir because of the latter's marriage to his granddaughter Agrippina (the last of Augustus' living grandchildren not in disgrace), and not because of any secret blood relationship.

Another reason the theory is unlikely is because Augustus and Livia were married for 51 years and never had children after their marriage. It may have been that Augustus and Livia were incapable of having their own children together despite the fact they had both successfully had children with other people (Augustus had Julia with Scribonia and Livia had Tiberius and Drusus with their father.) Finally, Augustus didn't know Livia at the time that Drusus would have been conceived,[dubious – discuss] meaning he couldn't have begotten a child by her.

--------------------
ID: I6861 Name: Nero Claudius Germanicus Drusus Given Name: Nero Claudius Germanicus Surname: Drusus Nickname: Drusus Senior Sex: M _UID: A20B2AFA5118D811BE490080C8C142CC41C2 Change Date: 18 Jul 2004 Birth: 38 BC Death: 9

Father: Tiberius Claudius Nero b: 63 BC Mother: Livia Drusilla b: ABT 58 BC

Marriage 1 Antonio Minor of Rome b: 36 BC Married: Children
Tiberius Claudius Caesar Nero of Rome b: 1 AUG 10 BC in Lugundum (Lyons)

Forrás / Source: http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I6861

Nero Claudius Drusus From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Nero Claudius Drusus Germanicus (14 January 38 BC - 14 September 9 BC), born Decimus Claudius Drusus also called Drusus, Drusus I, Nero Drusus, or Drusus the Elder was a Roman politician and military commander. He was a patrician Claudian on his father's side but his mother came from the Livii Drusi, a plebeian family. Contents [hide] 1 Childhood 2 Marriage 3 Career 4 Question of paternity 5 See also 6 External links [edit]Childhood

Drusus was the youngest son of Roman Empress Livia Drusilla from her marriage to Tiberius Nero. Drusus was born between 18 March 38 BC and 13 April 38 BC. He was born shortly before Livia divorced Tiberius Nero and married Augustus (17 January, 38 BC), giving rise to rumors that Augustus was the real father, although this is widely discredited by modern historians as Augustus had not yet met Livia when Drusus would have been conceived. Before Augustus married Livia, Tiberius Claudius Nero was declared Drusus' biological father. According to Suetonius, he was born with the praenomen Decimus, but it was later changed to Nero. He was raised in Claudius Nero's house with his brother, the future emperor Tiberius, until his father's death. Drusus and his brother Tiberius developed a famously close relationship in this environment that would last the rest of their lives. Tiberius named his eldest son after his brother (a departure from Roman naming convention), and Drusus did likewise. [edit]Marriage

Drusus married Antonia Minor, the daughter of Mark Antony and Augustus' sister, Octavia Minor, and gained a reputation of being completely faithful to her. Their children were Germanicus, Livilla, the future Emperor Claudius, and at least two others who did not survive infancy. After Drusus' death, Antonia never remarried, though she outlived him by nearly five decades.

Forrás / Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nero_Claudius_Drusus
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nero_Claudius_Drusus
--------------------

ID: I67877 Name: Drusus Nero Germanicus of ROME Suffix: Roman Consul Title: Roman Consul Sex: M Birth: in 38 B.C. Death: in 9 B.C.,Germany Note: Sources: Pfafman; Kraentzler 1770, 1826; Robinson. Pfafman: Full name--Nero Claudius Drusus Germanicus. Roman general. Governor of Gaul, 13 to 10 B.C. Consul in 9 B.C. Brother of Roman Emperor Tiberius. Born 38 B.C., died 9 B.C. K: Drusus Nero Germanicus, Emperor of Rome. Caius Octavius Augustus (Augustus Caesar) (RIN 7960) was his step-father. Robinson: Drusus. Change Date: 12 JUL 2000 at 21:32:52
--------------------
Born : 38 BC - - Died : 9 BC - -

Free 1 : : Killed in fall from horse

--------------------
Born : 38 BC - - Died : 9 BC - -

--------------------------------------
Killed in fall from horse

--------------------
Born : 38 BC - - Died : 9 BC - -

Free 1 : : Killed in fall from horse

--------------------
Född: 38 f.Kr.

Död: 9 f.Kr.

Noteringar

General och Guvernör av Gaul. Dog efter fall från häst

--------------------
General, Guvernör Nero Claudius Germanicus Drusus av Romarriket

Blev högst 29 år.

Far: Quaestor Tiberius Claudius Nero av Romarriket (85 f.Kr. - 33 f.Kr.)

Mor: Kejsarinna Livia Drusella av Romarriket (57 f.Kr. - 29)

Född: 38 f.Kr.

Död: 9 f.Kr.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Familj med Antonia d.y. av Romarriket (36 f.Kr. - 37)

Barn:

Germanicus av Romarriket (15 f.Kr. - 19)

Tiberius Claudius Nero av Romarriket (10 f.Kr. - 54)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Noteringar

General och Guvernör av Gaul. Dog efter fall från häst

--------------------
Born : 38 BC - -

Died : 9 BC - -

----------------------

Killed in fall from horse

--------------------
http://www.genealogy4u.com/genealogy/getperson.php?personID=I52720&tree=western2007

Nero Cladious DRUSUS

DEATH: Also shown as Died 0009

SURNAME: Also shown as Nero

GIVEN_NAMES: Also shown as Drusus Claudius

BIRTH: Also shown as Born 0038 BC

DEATH: Also shown as Died 0009 BC

Nero Claudius Drusus Germanicus, born Decimus Claudius Drusus and variously called Drusus, Drusus I, Drusus Claudius Nero, or Drusus the Elder (14 January 38 - 9 BC) was the youngest son of Livia, wife of Augustus, and her first husband, Tiberius Claudius Nero, and was thus a patrician Claudian on both sides.

Birth

Drusus was born shortly before Livia divorced Tiberius Claudius Nero and married Augustus (17 January, 38 BC), giving rise to rumors that Augustus was the real father, although this is widely discredited by modern historians as Augustus had not yet met Livia when Drusus would have been conceived. Before Augustus married Livia, Tiberius Claudius Nero was declared Drusus' biological father. According to Suetonius, he was born with the praenomen Decimus, but it was later changed to Nero. He was raised in Claudius Nero's house with his brother, the future emperor Tiberius, until his father's death. Drusus and Tiberius developed a famously close relationship in this environment that would last the rest of their lives. Tiberius named his eldest son after his brother (in violation of Roman naming standards), and Drusus did likewise.

Marriage

Drusus married Antonia Minor, the daughter of Mark Antony and Augustus's sister, Octavia Minor, and gained a reputation of being completely faithful to her. Their children were Germanicus, Livilla, the future Emperor Claudius, and at least two others who did not survive infancy. After Drusus' death, Antonia never remarried, though she outlived him by nearly 5 decades.

Augustus bestowed many honors on his step-sons. In 19 BC, Drusus was granted the ability to hold all public offices 5 years before the minimum age. When Tiberius left Italy during his term as praetor in 16 BC, Drusus legislated in his place. He became quaestor the following year, fighting against Raetian bandits in the alps. Drusus repelled them, gaining honors, but was unable to smash their forces, and required reinforcement from Tiberius. The brothers easily defeated the local Alpine tribes. In 13 BC, Drusus was sent to govern Gaul to quell riots caused by the actions of a previous administrator. While there, a tribe of Germans entered Gaul and proceeded to attack Roman settlements. Drusus mobilized his legions and beat the invaders back across the Rhine. He penetrated deep into German territory, traveling as far as the North Sea and placing a yearly tribute on the Frisians. As a reward, Drusus was made praetor urbanus for 11 BC.

Drusus did not have it in him to stay in Rome. In the spring of his term, he set out for the German border once more. He pushed once more into the territory of the various German tribes, only stopping at the onset of winter. He was attacked while making his way back to Roman territory, but managed to rout the German force. His troops proclaimed him Imperator and he was granted triumphal ornaments, as well as the office of proconsul for the following year. In 10 BC, the Chatti joined with the Sicambri and attacked Drusus' camp, but were easily defeated. Drusus then went to meet Augustus and Tiberius in Lugdunum (at which point Claudius was born), and traveled with them to Rome. He was easily elected Consul for 9 BC, but once more left the city before assuming office. He once again smashed the Chatti, and then began a campaign against the Marcomanni, but was turned back across the Rhine. Drusus died soon after in consequence of a fall from a horse, lingering on for a month after the accident, by which point Tiberius had joined him. Suetonius reports that he had refused to return to Rome just before his death. Drusus' body was brought back to the city, and his ashes were deposited in the "Mausoleum of Augustus." He remained extremely popular with the legionaries, who erected a monument in Moguntiacum (modern Mainz) on his behalf. His family was granted the hereditary honorific "Germanicus", which was given to his eldest son before passing to his youngest. Augustus later wrote a biography of him which did not survive.

Biological Father

[edit] Evidence that Augustus was the biological father of Drusus

Augustus was infamous for being chronically "sickly" (although he lived to be 75), and records of the symptoms he suffered from match those of Wilson's disease, an autosomal recessive genetic disease.

Tiberius was already 4 when Augustus married Livia, while she supposedly was already pregnant with Drusus. Drusus' son was Germanicus, and Germanicus married Agrippina the Elder. Their son was Caligula. Caligula, often called "the Mad Emperor", was affected by more severe symptoms that match with Wilson's disease; apart from the intestinal problems and immune system weakness of Augustus, he was mentally unstable and suffered from psychosis.

Because Wilson's disease is recessive autosomal, each of his parents would have to have been a latent carrier for the disease. It is entirely possible that Agrippina inherited the allele for Wilson's disease from her grandfather Augustus, but the only way Caligula could have Wilson's disease is if his father Germanicus was also a carrier. As it is a rare disease, it is unlikely that Germanicus inherited it from his normal-type mother. Thus Germanicus had to have been given the allele by Drusus, and the only way that Drusus could have the allele for Wilson's disease is if he got it from his biological parent: Augustus. This linkage shows that Augustus was Drusus' biological father.

Nero also probably suffered from Wilson's disease, and he was the son of Caligula's sister Agrippina the Younger and Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus. Claudius, brother of Germanicus, probably also suffered symptoms of Wilson's disease, lending further proof to the genetic mapping. (Compare this pedigree to that of, say, the presence of the hemophilia gene in the monarchs of Europe descended from Queen Victoria).

Evidence that Augustus was not the biological father of Drusus

Augustus never acknowledged Drusus as his son, he didn't even adopt him. He believed he only had one known biological child, Julia the Elder, his daughter by Scribonia. She gave birth to the five grandchildren (3 boys, 2 girls), whom he adopted as his heirs. After the deaths of 2 of his grandsons by Julia, and the banishment of the third, Augustus never moved to adopt Drusus' sons, Germanicus and Claudius. They were nearly the same age as Julia's sons (Germanicus was older than Postumus), and would have been his illegitimate grandsons if he were Drusus' father. Instead Augustus chose the much older Tiberius, who was definitely not related by blood, as sole heir and invested him with the powers of principate. Augustus seems to have had Tiberius adopt Germanicus as heir because of the latter's marriage to his granddaughter Agrippina (the last of Augustus' living grandchildren not in disgrace), and not because of any secret blood relationship.

Augustus and Livia were married for 51 years and both young when they married. Augustus was 25 and Livia was 19 but they never had children after their marriage. It may have been that Augustus and Livia were incapable of having their own children together. They had both successfully had children with other people (Augustus had Julia with Scribonia and Livia had Tiberius and Drusus with their father) but not with each other
--------------------
Nero Claudius Drusus Germanicus (14 January 38 BC - 14 September 9 BC), born Decimus Claudius Drusus also called Drusus, Drusus I, Nero Drusus, or Drusus the Elder was a Roman politician and military commander. He was a fully patrician Claudian on his father's side but his maternal grandmother was from a plebeian family. He was the stepson of the Emperor Augustus, brother of the Emperor Tiberius, paternal grandfather of the Emperor Caligula, father of the Emperor Claudius, and maternal great-grandfather of the Emperor Nero. Childhood Drusus was the youngest son of Roman Empress Livia Drusilla from her marriage to Tiberius Claudius Nero. Drusus was born between 18 March 38 BC and 13 April 38 BC. He was born shortly after Livia divorced Tiberius Nero and married Augustus (17 January, 38 BC), giving rise to rumors that Augustus was the real father, although this is widely discredited by modern historians as Augustus had not yet met Livia when Drusus would have been conceived (During his reign, Claudius revived this rumor to give the impression that Augustus was his paternal grandfather in addition to being his maternal great-uncle). Before Augustus married Livia, Tiberius Claudius Nero was declared Drusus' biological father. According to Suetonius, he was born with the praenomen Decimus, but it was later changed to Nero. He was raised in Claudius Nero's house with his brother, the future emperor Tiberius, until his father's death. Drusus and his brother Tiberius developed a famously close relationship in this environment that would last the rest of their lives. Tiberius named his eldest son after his brother (a departure from Roman naming convention), and Drusus did likewise. Marriage Drusus married Antonia Minor, the daughter of Mark Antony and Augustus' sister, Octavia Minor, and gained a reputation of being completely faithful to her. Their children were Germanicus and Claudius, a daughter Livilla (Little Livia), and at least two others who did not survive infancy. After Drusus' death, Antonia never remarried, though she outlived him by nearly five decades. Three Emperors were direct descendants of Drusus, Claudius (his son), Caligula (Germanicus's son, Drusus's grandson), and Nero (Gremanicus's grandson, Drusus's great-grandson), Career Augustus bestowed many honors on his stepsons. In 19 BC, Drusus was granted the ability to hold all public offices five years before the minimum age. When Tiberius left Italy during his term as praetor in 16 BC, Drusus legislated in his place. He became quaestor the following year, fighting against Raetian bandits in the Alps. Drusus repelled them, gaining honors, but was unable to smash their forces, and required reinforcement from Tiberius. The brothers easily defeated the local Alpine tribes. In 13 BC, Drusus was sent to govern Gaul to quell riots caused by the actions of a previous administrator. While there, a tribe of Germans entered Gaul and proceeded to attack Roman settlements. Drusus mobilized his legions and beat the invaders back across the Rhine. He penetrated deep into German territory, traveling as far as the North Sea and placing a yearly tribute on the Frisians. As a reward, Drusus was made praetor urbanus for 11 BC. Drusus did not have it in him to stay in Rome. In the spring of his term, he set out for the German border once more. He pushed once more into the territory of the various German tribes, only stopping at the onset of winter. He was attacked while making his way back to Roman territory, but managed to rout the German force. His troops proclaimed him Imperator and he was granted triumphal ornaments, as well as the office of proconsul for the following year. In 10 BC, the Chatti joined with the Sicambri and attacked Drusus' camp, but were easily defeated. Drusus then went to meet Augustus and Tiberius in Lugdunum (at which point Claudius was born), and traveled with them to Rome. He was easily elected Consul for 9 BC, but once more left the city before assuming office. He once again smashed the Chatti, and then began a campaign against the Marcomanni, but was turned back across the Rhine. Drusus died soon after in consequence of a fall from a horse, lingering on for a month after the accident, by which point Tiberius had joined him. Interestingly, soon before his death he wrote a letter to Tiberius complaining about the style in which Augustus ruled. This letter was delivered to Tiberius as he was with Augustus and Livia and when asked if he could read it was told he must read it out loud. He tried to avoid bad parts but Livia saw through his attempt and after reading ordered Drusus back to Rome. Suetonius reports that he had refused to return to Rome just before his death. Drusus' body was brought back to the city, and his ashes were deposited in the "Mausoleum of Augustus". He remained extremely popular with the legionaries, who erected a monument in Moguntiacum (modern Mainz) on his behalf. Remnants of this are still standing. His family was granted the hereditary honorific "Germanicus", which was given to his eldest son before passing to his youngest. Augustus later wrote a biography of him which did not survive.
--------------------
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nero_Claudius_Drusus

Nero Claudius Drusus Germanicus (January 14, 38 BC[1] – Summer of 9 BC[2]), born Decimus Claudius Drusus also called Drusus Claudius Nero,[3] Drusus, Drusus I, Nero Drusus, or Drusus the Elder was a Roman politician and military commander. He was a patrician Claudian on his legal father's side but his maternal grandmother was from a plebeian family. He was the son of Livia Drusilla and the legal stepson of her second husband, the Emperor Augustus. He was also brother of the Emperor Tiberius, father to both the Emperor Claudius and general Germanicus, paternal grandfather of the Emperor Caligula, and maternal great-grandfather of the Emperor Nero.

He launched the first major Roman campaigns across the Rhine and began the conquest of Germania, becoming the first Roman general to reach the Weser and Elbe rivers. In 12 BC, Drusus led a successful campaign into Germania, subjugating the Sicambri. Later that year he led a naval expedition against Germanic tribes along the North Sea coast, conquering the Batavi and the Frisii, and defeating the Chauci near the mouth of the Weser. In 11 BC, he conquered the Usipetes and the Marsi, extending Roman control to the Upper Weser. In 10 BC, he launched a campaign against the Chatti and the resurgent Sicambri, subjugating both. The following year he conquered the Mattiaci, while defeating the Marcomanni and the Cherusci, defeating the latter near the Elbe. However, Drusus died later that year, depriving Rome of one of its best generals.
--------------------
Ægtefælle: Antonia Minor Claudius, romersk kejser Fulde navn: Decimus Claudius Drusus. Født: 14 januar 38 BC Død: 14 September 9 BC (i alderen 29) i Tyskland Begravelse: Mausoleum af Augustus Nero Claudius Drusus Germanicus (14. januar 38 f.Kr. – 14. september 9 f.Kr.), født Decimus Claudius Drusus også kaldet Drusus, Drusus I, Nero Drusus, eller Drusus den Ældre. Han var en romersk politiker og hærfører. Han var en fuldt patricier – Claudian på sin fars side, men hans mormor var fra en plebejer familie. Han var søn af Livia Drusilla og stedsøn af hendes anden mand, kejser Augustus. Han var også bror til kejser Tiberius – far til kejser Claudius, farfaren var kejser Caligula, og moderens oldefar kejser Nero. Han lancerede de første store romerske kampagner på tværs af Rhinen og begyndte erobringen af Germania. Han var den første romerske general, der nåede floderne Weser og Elben. I 12 f.Kr. førte Drusus en vellykket kampagne i Germania og undertvang Sicambrierne. Senere samme år førte han en flådeekspedition mod germanske stammer langs Vesterhavets kyst og erobrede Batavi og Frisii samt besejrede Chauci nær mundingen af floden Weser. I 11 f.Kr erobrede han Usipeterne og Marsierne, hvilket medfører romersk kontrol til øvre Weser. I 10 f.Kr. lancerede han en kampagne mod Chatti og den genopståede Sicambri og undertvang begge. Det følgende år erobrede han Mattiaci og besejrede Marcomanni og Cherusci. Han besejrede sidstnævnte nær Elben. Men Drusus døde imidlertid senere samme år og fratog derved Rom en af en sine bedste generaler.

Drusus var den yngste søn af den romerske kejserinde Livia Drusilla fra hendes ægteskab med Tiberius Claudius Nero. Drusus blev født mellem 18 marts 38 f.Kr. og 13. april 38 f.Kr.. Han blev født, kort efter Livia blev skilt fra Tiberius Nero og gift med Augustus (17. januar, 38 f.Kr.). Det gav anledning til rygter om, at Augustus var den egentlige far, selv om det er almindeligt miskrediteret af moderne historikere, eftersom Augustus endnu ikke havde mødt Livia. Under hans regeringstid, genoplivede Claudius dette rygte for at give det indtryk, at Augustus var hans farfar ud over at være hans moders grandonkel). Før Augustus gift Livia blev Tiberius Claudius Nero erklæret for Drusus' 'biologiske far. Ifølge Suetonius blev han født med praenomen Decimus, men det blev senere ændret til Nero – et usædvanlig eksempel på anvendelse af en anden cognomen som praenomen snarere end en agnomen:: "Nero" var en traditionel cognomen[cognomen, (lat. 'tilnavn, familienavn'), tredje og sidste led i en romersk borgers navn, fx Marcus Tullius Cicero. Cognomen var oprindelig arveligt inden for en gren af samme familie, men omkring Kristi fødsel blev det til et personligt navn] af Claudius familien, mens " Drusus " oprindeligt tilhørte Livius dynastiet. (Det er muligt, at Drusus oprindeligt blev givet cognomen, som traditionelt hørte til hans mors familie, på grund af tvivl – grundløse, som de siden har vist sig at være – som om han virkelig var berettiget til cognomen af en mand, der kan have været populær, menes ikke at være hans far: i det mindste vidste verden, hvem hans mor var). Han voksede op i Claudius Nero hus sammen med sin bror, den kommende kejser. Tiberius, indtil hans fars død udviklede Drusus og hans bror Tiberius et berømt nært forhold i dette miljø, som varede resten af deres liv. Tiberius opkaldte sin ældste søn efter sin bror (en afvigelse fra romersk Naming Convention), og Drusus gjorde det samme.

Ægteskab [redigér]

Drusus blev gift med Antonia Minor, som var datter af Marcus Antonius og Augustus 'søster Octavia Minor, og han fik ry for at være helt tro mod hende. Deres børn var Germanicus og Claudius, en datter Livilla (Little Livia) og mindst to andre, der ikke overlevede barndommen. Efter Drusus' død giftede Antonia sig aldrig igen, men hun overlevede ham næsten fem årtier. Tre kejsere var direkte efterkommere af Drusus: Claudius (hans søn), Caligula (Germanicus 'søn, Drusus' barnebarn) og Nero (Germanicus 'barnebarn, Drusus' oldebarn). Karriere [redigér]

Augustus skænkede mange æresbevisninger til sine stedsønner. I år 19 f.Kr. blev Drusus givet mulighed for at styre alle offentlige kontorer fem år før minimumsalderen. Da Tiberius forlod Italien i løbet af hans embedsperiode som prætor i 16 f.Kr., blev Drusus lovgiver i hans sted. Han blev Kvæstor[Kvæstor (lat. quaestor) var det første embede på den politiske rangstige cursus honorum i Romerriget. Kvæstorernes opgave var at holde øje med finanserne og skatterne. Som 25-årig kunne man blive valgt til kvæstor. Valget foregik på Comitia Tributa. Når man havde aftjent et år som kvæstor, indtrådte man i senatet] det følgende år og kæmpede imod Raetian banditterne i Alperne . Drusus nedkæmpede dem og opnåede æresbevisninger; men han var ude af stand til at smadre deres styrker, og krævede forstærkning fra Tiberius. Brødrene besejrede let de lokale alpine stammer.

* https://www.findagrave.com/memorial/190200327/nero_claudius-drusus

Nero Claudius Drusus Germanicus (January 14, 38 BC – summer of 9 BC), born Decimus Claudius Drusus, also called Drusus Claudius Nero, Drusus, Drusus I, Nero Drusus, or Drusus the Elder was a Roman politician and military commander. He was a patrician Claudian on his legal father's side but his maternal grandmother was from a plebeian family. He was the son of Livia Drusilla and the legal stepson of her second husband, the Emperor Augustus. He was also brother of the Emperor Tiberius, father to both the Emperor Claudius and general Germanicus, paternal grandfather of the Emperor Caligula, and maternal great-grandfather of the Emperor Nero. He launched the first major Roman campaigns across the Rhine and began the conquest of Germania, becoming the first Roman general to reach the Weser and Elbe rivers. In 12 BC, Drusus led a successful campaign into Germania, subjugating the Sicambri. Later that year he led a naval expedition against Germanic tribes along the North Sea coast, conquering the Batavi and the Frisii, and defeating the Chauci near the mouth of the Weser. In 11 BC, he conquered the Usipetes and the Marsi, extending Roman control to the Upper Weser. In 10 BC, he launched a campaign against the Chatti and the resurgent Sicambri, subjugating both. The following year, while serving as consul, he conquered the Mattiaci and defeated the Marcomanni and the Cherusci, the latter near the Elbe. However, Drusus died later that year, depriving Rome of one of its best generals.

[FAVthomas.FTW]

Killed in fall from horse.

[De La Pole.FTW]

Sources: Pfafman; Kraentzler 1770, 1826; Robinson. Pfafman: Full name--Nero Claudius Drusus Germanicus. Roman general. Governor of Gaul, 13 to 10 B.C. Consul in 9 B.C. Brother of Roman Emperor Tiberius. Born 38 B.C., died 9 B.C. K: Drusus Nero Germanicus, Emperor of Rome. Caius Octavius Augustus (Augustus Caesar) (RIN 7960) was his step-father.
Robinson: Drusus.

Bust of Nero Claudius Drusus
http://trees.ancestry.com/rd?f=image&guid=f3820425-09bf-47ad-8d1e-164d2be28e64&tid=261097&pid=-1974859294

Bust of Nero Claudius Drusus
http://trees.ancestry.com/rd?f=image&guid=f3820425-09bf-47ad-8d1e-164d2be28e64&tid=261097&pid=-1974859294

OR "DRUSUS MAJOR" (AFTERWARDS "GERMANICUS); B. 38 BC ROMAN GENERAL; GOVERNOR OF
GAUL 13-10 BC; CONSUL 9 BC; SON-IN-LAW OF AUGUSTUS CAESAR AND BROTHER OF
TIBERIUS; DIED 9 BC

He was a Roman General, Governor of Gaul from 13 to 10 b.c, and Consul in 9 b.c.

He was a Roman General, Governor of Gaul from 13 to 10 b.c, and Consul in 9 b.c.

Name Suffix:<NSFX> Governor Of Gaul

Name Suffix:<NSFX> Governor Of Gaul

Governor of Gaul

Nero
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.
Jump to: navigation, search
For other uses, see Nero (disambiguation).

NeroNero Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus (December 15, 37–June 9, 68), born Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus, also called (50–54) Nero Claudius Drusus Germanicus, was the fifth and last Roman Emperor of the Julio-Claudian dynasty. On February 25, 50 Nero became heir to the then-Emperor, his grand-uncle and adoptive father Claudius, as Nero Claudius Caesar Drusus, succeeding to the throne on October 13, 54 with Claudius' death. In 66 he added the prefix Imperator to his name. In 68 Nero was deposed. His subsequent death was reportedly the result of suicide assisted by his scribe Epaphroditos.

Contents [hide]
1 Life
1.1 Family
1.2 Rise to power
1.2.1 Birth under Caligula
1.2.2 Conspiracies
1.2.3 Adoption by Claudius
1.3 Emperor
1.3.1 Becoming Augustus
1.3.2 A series of scandals
1.3.3 Disturbed peace and major rebellions
1.3.4 Great Fire of Rome
1.3.5 Nero the artist and the widower
1.3.6 Suicide
2 Depictions of Nero
2.1 Depictions in later legends
2.2 Depiction in the New Testament
2.3 Depictions in fiction
2.4 Depictions in Culture
3 External links
3.1 Primary sources
3.2 Secondary material



[edit]
Life
[edit]
Family
Born in Antium (modern day Anzio), he was the only son of Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus and Agrippina the younger, sister and reputed lover of Caligula.

His father was grandson to an elder Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus and Aemilia Lepida through their son Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus. He was also great-grandson to Mark Antony and Octavia through their daughter Antonia Major.

His mother was the namesake of her own mother Agrippina the elder who was granddaughter to Octavia's brother Caesar Augustus and his wife Scribonia through their daughter Julia Caesaris and her husband Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa. His maternal grandfather Germanicus was himself grandson to Tiberius Claudius Nero and Livia, adoptive grandson to her second husband Caesar Augustus, nephew and adoptive son of Tiberius, son of Drusus through his wife Antonia Minor (sister to Antonia Major), and brother to Claudius.

For a complete picture of his family relationships, it is useful to consult the article Julio-Claudian Family Tree.

[edit]
Rise to power
[edit]
Birth under Caligula
Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus was born on December 15, 37. At the time he was not expected to ever become Augustus. His maternal uncle Caligula had only started his own reign on March 16 of that year at the age of twenty-five. His predecessors Octavian and Tiberius had lived to become seventy-six and seventy-nine respectively. Providing that Caligula lived long enough to match them, he could produce his own heirs.

Lucius would come to the attention of his uncle soon after his birth. Agrippina reportedly asked her brother to name the child. This would be an act of favor and would mark the child as a possible heir to his uncle. However Caligula only offered to name his nephew Claudius after their lame and stuttering uncle, apparently implying that he was as unlikely to become Augustus as Claudius.

The relationship between brother and sister would soon apparently improve. A prominent scandal early in the new reign was Caligula's particularly close relationship to his three sisters Drusilla, Julia Livilla, and Agrippina. All three are featured with their brother in Roman currency of the time. The three women seem to have gained his favor and likely some amount of influence. The writings of Josephus, Suetonius, and Dio Cassius report on their reputed sexual relationship with their brother. Drusilla's sudden death in 38 would apparently only serve to ensure this belief: she was reportedly Caligula's favorite and was consequently buried with the honors of an Augusta. Caligula proceeded in having her deified, the first woman in Roman history to achieve this honor.

Lucius had then become the son of an influential and notorious woman. But she would soon lose her position by her brother. Caligula had remained childless. His closest male relatives at the time were his brothers-in-law Marcus Aemilius Lepidus(husband of Drusilla), Marcus Vinicius (husband of Livilla), and Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus (husband of Agrippina). They were the likely heirs should Caligula die early. However, after the death of his wife, Lepidus apparently lost his chances, though not his ambitions, to succeed his brother-in-law.

[edit]
Conspiracies
In September 39 Caligula left Rome with his escort, heading north to join his legions in a campaign against the Germanic tribes. The campaign had to be postponed for the following year due to Caligula's preoccupation with a conspiracy against him. Reportedly Lepidus had managed to become lover to both Agrippina and Livilla, apparently seeking their help in gaining the throne. Consequently, he was immediately executed. Caligula also ordered the execution of Gnaeus Cornelius Lentulus Gaetulicus, the popular Legate of Germania Superior, and his replacement with Servius Sulpicius Galba. However, it remains uncertain whether he was connected to Lepidus' conspiracy. Agrippina and Livilla were soon exiled to the Pontian islands. Lucius was presumably separated from his mother at this point.

Lucius' father died of edema in 40. Lucius was now effectively an orphan with an uncertain fate under the increasingly erratic Caligula. His luck would change again the following year. On January 24, 41 Caligula, his wife Caesonia Milonia, and their infant daughter Julia Drusilla were murdered by a conspiracy under Cassius Chaera. The Praetorian Guard helped Claudius gain the throne. Among Claudius' first decisions was the recalling of his nieces from exile.

Agrippina was soon remarried to the wealthy Gaius Sallustius Crispus Passienus. He died between 44 and 47, and Agrippina was reportedly suspected of poisoning him in order to inherit his fortune. Lucius was the only heir to his now-wealthy mother.

[edit]
Adoption by Claudius
Ten-year-old Lucius was still considered unlikely to ever gain the throne. Claudius, fifty-seven years old at this point, had reigned longer than his predecessor and arguably more effectively. Claudius had already had three marriages. He had married Plautia Urgulanilla and Aelia Paetina as a private citizen. He was married to Valeria Messalina as an Augustus. They had two children, Britannicus (b. 41) and Octavia (b. 42). Messalina was still only twenty-five years old and likely to produce more heirs.

Messalina, however, was executed in 48, accused of conspiring against her husband. The ambitious Agrippina soon set her sights upon replacing her deceased aunt. On January 1, 49 she became the fourth wife of Tiberius Claudius Nero Caesar Drusus. The marriage would last for five years.

Early in the year 50 the Roman Senate offered Agrippina the honorable title of Augusta, previously only held by Livia (14-29). On February 25, 50 Lucius was officially adopted by Claudius as Nero Claudius Caesar Drusus (see adoption in Rome). Nero was older than his adoptive brother Britannicus and effectively became heir to the throne at the time of his adoption.

Claudius honored his adoptive son in several ways. Nero was proclaimed an adult in 51 at the age of fourteen. He was appointed proconsul, entered and first addressed the Senate, made joint public appearances with Claudius, and was featured in coinage. In 53 he married his adoptive sister Octavia.

[edit]
Emperor
[edit]
Becoming Augustus
Claudius died on October 13, 54, and Nero was soon established as Augustus in his place. He was seventeen years old, the youngest Emperor yet. Historians generally consider Nero to have acted as a figurehead early in his reign. Actual decisions were likely to have been left to the more capable hands of his mother Agrippina the younger (whom Tacitus claims poisoned Claudius), his tutor Seneca, and the praefectus praetorianus Burrus. The first five years under Nero became known as examples of fine administration, even resulting in the coinage of the term "Quinquennium Neronis".

The matters of the Empire were handled effectively and the Senate enjoyed a period of renewed influence in state affairs. Problems, however, would soon arise from Nero's personal life and the increasing competition for influence among Agrippina and the two male advisers. Nero was reportedly unsatisfied with his marriage and tended to neglect Octavia. He entered an affair with Claudia Acte, a former slave. In 55. Agrippina attempted to intervene in favor of Octavia and demanded that her son dismiss Acte. Burrus and Seneca, on the other hand, chose to support their charge's decision.

Nero resisted the intervention of his mother in his personal affairs. Her influence over her son declining, Agrippina turned to a younger candidate for the throne. Fifteen-year-old Britannicus was still legally a minor under the charge of Nero but was approaching legal adulthood. Britannicus was a likely heir to Nero and ensuring her influence over him could strengthen her position. However, the youth died suddenly and suspiciously on February 12, 55. His proclamation as an adult had been set for February 13. The timing suggests poisoning and Burrus is suspected to have been involved in this murder. Agrippina's power soon further declined while Burrus and Seneca jointly became the most influential men in Rome. As Nero grew angrier at Agrippina’s unofficial rule through him, he began to plot his own mother’s murder, justifying his tactics by claiming she was conspiring against him, which was not the case. Nero made many attempts on her life. He tried to poison her three times, rigged the ceiling above her bed to collapse and sent her off on a boat doomed to sink in the Bay of Naples (forgetting that she could swim). Finally he hired an assassin to club her to death. Afterwards, it was said that he was "haunted" by his mother's ghosts later on.

[edit]
A series of scandals
While his advisers took care of affairs of state, Nero surrounded himself with a circle of favorites. Roman historians report nights of drunken revelry and violence while more mundane matters of politics were neglected. Among his new favorites was Marcus Salvius Otho. By all accounts Otho was as dissolute as Nero but served as a good and intimate friend to him. Some sources even consider them to be lovers. Otho early introduced Nero to one particular woman who would marry first the favorite (Otho) and then the Emperor: Poppaea Sabina, described as a woman of great beauty, charm, and wit. Gossip of Nero, Otho, and Poppaea each forming parts of a love triangle can be found in numerous sources (Plutarch Galba 19.2-20.2; Suetonius Otho iii.1-2; Tacitus two versions: Histories 1.13.3-4; Annals xiii.45-46; and Dio Cassius lxi.11.2-4).

By 58, Poppaea had become established in her position as Nero's favorite mistress. The following year (59) would mark a turning point in the emperor's reign. Nero and/or Poppaea reportedly machinated the murder of Agrippina. Seneca attempted to convince the Senate that she was orchestrating a conspiracy against her son, but the reputation of the Emperor was damaged beyond repair by this case of matricide. Otho was soon also removed from the imperial court, and sent to Lusitania as governor.

The next turning point would be the year 62, for several reasons.

The first would be a change of guard amongst Nero's advisers. Burrus died and Seneca asked Nero for permission to retire from public affairs. Their replacement as praetorian praefect and counselor was Gaius Ofonius Tigellinus. Tigellinus had been exiled in 39 by Caligula on charges of adultery with both Agrippina and Livilla, only to be recalled from exile by Claudius. Ambitious, Tigellinus managed to become a favorite of Nero (and, reputedly, his lover). Along with Poppaea he was considered to hold greater influence with the Augustus than Seneca ever could. One theory suggests that Poppaea attempted, in the four years prior (58-62), to separate Nero from his counselors and friends; in this case, what happened to Burrus and Seneca may not have been casual.

The second significant event of the year was the divorce of the Emperor. Nero was now twenty-five years old, had reigned for eight years, and had yet to produce an heir. When Poppaea became pregnant, Nero finally decided to marry his mistress, but his marriage to Octavia had to be dissolved before doing so. At first he resorted to accusing her of adultery. However, Nero had already gained a reputation for this offense while Octavia was reputed to be an example of virtue. Some testimony was needed against her, but torturing one of her slaves only produced the famous declaration of Pythias reporting the genitalia of Octavia to be cleaner than the mouth of Tigellinus. Nero proceeded to declare the divorce on grounds of infertility, leaving him free to marry Poppaea and wait for her to give birth. However, the sudden death of Octavia on June 9, 62 resulted in incidents of public protest. One of the earliest effects of Tigellinus' advancement was the introduction of a series of treason laws; numerous capital sentences were carried out. During the same year, Nero executed two of his few remaining relatives:

Gaius Rubellius Plautus - his mother Claudia Julia was granddaughter to Tiberius and Vipsania Agrippina through their son Julius Caesar Drusus. She was also granddaughter to Drusus and Antonia Minor through their daughter Livilla.


Faustus Cornelius Sulla Felix - grandson to Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus and Antonia Major through their daughter Domitia Lepida. He was also maternal half-brother to Messalina. He had married Claudia Antonia, only daughter of Claudius and Aelia Paetina.
[edit]
Disturbed peace and major rebellions
In 61 AD a major rebellion broke out in the new province of Britannia, centered upon the native tribal leader Boudica, Queen of the Iceni, who had been flogged and whose daughters had been raped by the Romans. The rebellion was eventually crushed, but the military and civilian casualties and the total destruction of three cities were a heavy toll to pay. The fault of Nero in this rebellion is debatable but there was certainly an impact (both positive and negative) upon the prestige of his regime.

[edit]
Great Fire of Rome
On the night July 18 to July 19, 64 the Great fire of Rome erupted. The fire started in densely populated areas like the Suburra, in which had been built the insulae, wooden dwellings, built on three or four floors. Nero was reportedly vacationing in his native Anzio but had to return in haste. The fire burned for a week. Rumor circulated that Nero had played his lyre and sang, on top of Quirinal Hill, while the city burned. (Tacitus, Ann. xv; Suetonius, Nero xxxvii; Dio Cassius, R.H. lxii.) Over the years, this turned to a legend that Nero had fiddled as Rome burned, an impossible act as the fiddle had not yet been invented. The same accounts depict him opening his palaces to provide shelter for the homeless and arranging for food supplies to be delivered in order to prevent starvation among the survivors. However, Nero lost his chances at redeeming his reputation when he immediately produced plans of rebuilding Rome in a monumental –and less inflammable – style.

The confused population searched for a scapegoat and soon rumors held Nero responsible. The motivation attributed to him was intending to immortalize his name by renaming Rome to "Neropolis". Nero had to engage in scapegoating of his own and chose for his target a small Eastern sect called Christians. He ordered known Christians to be thrown to the lions in arenas, while others were crucified in large numbers.

Gaius Cornelius Tacitus, a Roman historian, has preserved a record of this affair. We quote the following from his Annals (xv.44):

"And so, to get rid of this rumor, Nero set up [i.e., falsely accused] as the culprits and punished with the utmost refinement of cruelty a class hated for their abominations, who are commonly called Christians. Nero’s scapegoats (the Christians) were the perfect choice because it temporarily relieved pressure of the various rumors going around Rome. Christus, from whom their name is derived, was executed at the hands of the procurator Pontius Pilate in the reign of Tiberius. Checked for a moment, this pernicious superstition again broke out, not only in Iudaea, the source of the evil, but even in Rome... Accordingly, arrest was first made of those who confessed; then, on their evidence, an immense multitude was convicted, not so much on the charge of arson as because of [their] hatred for the human race. Besides being put to death they were made to serve as objects of amusement; they were clothed in the hides of beasts and torn to death by dogs; others were crucified, others set on fire to serve to illuminate the night when daylight failed. Nero had thrown open his grounds for the display, and was putting on a show in the circus, where he mingled with the people in the dress of charioteer or drove about in his chariot. All this gave rise to a feeling of pity, even towards men whose guilt merited the most exemplary punishment; for it was felt that they were being destroyed not for the public good but to gratify the cruelty of an individual."
(See Tacitus on Jesus for a fuller discussion of this passage.)

It is entirely unknown who or what was the cause of the fire. Although our ancient sources (and scholars) favor Nero as the arsonist, it is worth pointing out that fires were common in ancient Rome. His famous Domus Aurea ("Golden House") was part of his rebuilding plan.

[edit]
Nero the artist and the widower

Nero coin, ca. 66. Ara Pacis on the reverse.In 65 Nero was involved in another scandal, considered more serious by the people of that era than it would be now. It was considered shameful for a Roman emperor to appear as a public entertainer, acting, singing, and playing his lyre.

Hated by many citizens, with an increasing list of political enemies, Nero started to appreciate his loneliness, when in 65 he discovered the Pisonian conspiracy (named after Gaius Calpurnius Piso, who intended to take his place) and the involvement of old friends like Seneca in the plot. Conspirators were forced into suicide.

In addition, Nero ordered that Gnaeus Domitius Corbulo, a popular and valuable general, commit suicide because of the mere suspicion of new threats. This decision moved military commanders, locally and in the provinces, to start planning a revolution. Also at about this time, according to tradition, Nero personally ordered the crucifixion of Saint Peter and, later, the beheading of Paul of Tarsus.

In 66, though Nero doted on Poppaea, he reportedly kicked her to death while she was pregnant and ill, because she complained that he came home late from the races. Poppaea had previously borne him a daughter, Claudia Augusta, who died of illness after four months. Nero still lacked an heir.

The emperor left for Greece in 67, where he amused his hosts with other artistic performances, while in Rome Nymphidius (a colleague of Tigellinus, taking the place of one of the Pisonian conspirators) was collecting the support of praetorians and Senators.

[edit]
Suicide
Back in Rome after the tournée, Nero found quite a cold atmosphere; Gaius Julius Vindex, the governor of Gallia Lugdunensis, revolted, and this brought Nero to a paranoid hunt for eventual threats; in this state of mind he ordered the elimination of any patrician with suspect ideas. His (once) faithful servant Galba, governor of Iberia (Portugal and Spain), was one of those dangerous nobles, so he ordered his death. Galba, lacking an alternative choice, declared his loyalty to the Senate and the People of Rome (Senatus Populusque Romanus: SPQR), no longer recognizing Nero's power. Moreover, he started organizing his own campaign for the empire.

As a result, Lucius Clodius Macer, legate of the legion III Augusta in Africa, revolted and stopped sending grain to Rome. Nymphidius corrupted the imperial guard, which turned against Nero on the promise of financial reward by Galba.

The Senate deposed Nero, who committed suicide on June 9, 68. It is said that he uttered these last words before stabbing himself in the neck: "Qualis artifex pereo; What an artist dies in me!" With his death, the Julio-Claudian dynasty came to an end. Chaos ensued in the Year of the four emperors.

[edit]
Depictions of Nero
[edit]
Depictions in later legends
A Jewish legend contained in the Talmud (tractate Gittin 56B) claims that Nero shot four arrows to the four corners of the earth, and they fell in Jerusalem. Thus he realized that the Lord had decided to allow the Temple to be destroyed. He also requested a Jewish religious student to show him the Bible verse most appropriate to that situation, and the young boy read to Nero Ezekiel's prophecy about God's revenge on the nation of Edom (Ezekiel 25) for their destruction of Jerusalem. Nero thus realized that the Lord would punish him for destroying his Temple, so he fled Rome and converted to Judaism, to avoid such retribution. In this telling, his descendant is Rabbi Meir, a prominent supporter of Bar Kokhba's rebellion against Roman rule.

[edit]
Depiction in the New Testament
Some scholars believe that the Number of the Beast, 666, featured in the Book of Revelation is a reference to Nero. Feared and despised for his persecution of the Christians, Nero would be a likely target at the time Revelation was written (Nero was also worshiped, and demanded worship as a god). The letters of Nero's name, when transliterated into Hebrew, add to six hundred sixty-six.

[edit]
Depictions in fiction
Nero's rule is described in the novel Quo Vadis by Henryk Sienkiewicz. In the 1951 movie based on the novel, Nero is played by actor Peter Ustinov.
Nero appears in Robert Graves' books I, Claudius and Claudius The God (and the BBC miniseries adapted from the book), which is a fictional autobiography of the Emperor Claudius.
Anthony Burgess' book The Kingdom of the Wicked covers a similar period including Nero's reign and his relationship with the early Christians.
Actor Jonathon Cake played Nero in the made for TV movie Riverworld (2003).
Nero was depicted in one episode of the "Peabody's Improbable History" segments of the Rocky and Bullwinkle animated series.
In the second-season Doctor Who episode The Romans, aired in 1965, the Doctor (played by William Hartnell) is seen accidentally giving Nero (played by Derek Francis) the idea of intentionally burning Rome in order to provide space for a new palace.
Hans Matheson portrayed Nero in the second episode (Nerone) of the mini-series Imperium (2004).
Image:Http://myspace-834.vo.llnwd.net/00296/43/85/296925834 l.jpg

[edit]
Depictions in Culture
A 1940s comic book title Leading Comics featured an anthropomorphic fox named "Nero Fox," who was shown playing a saxophone instead of a fiddle (as other fictional parodies of Nero often show). Nero Fox later appeared again in the 1980s comic series Captain Carrot and His Amazing Zoo Crew, when several members of the Zoo Crew superhero team were sent back in time to ancient Rome.
Nero Burning ROM is a popular CD-RW burning program; the name is a play on the traditional idea of him burning Rome. One of the icons for the program shows the Colosseum in Rome with flames around it. It should be noted that this is historically inaccurate as the Colosseum was built by the emperors Vespesian, Titus, and Domitian on top of the razed Domus Aurea.
In the fifth book of Lemony Snicket's A Series of Unfortunate Events, the evil school principal is called Nero. He is a harsh and uncompromising despot who forces his students to listen to his violin concerts, and continues to play as the school burns down, a clear allusion to the myth of the fiddle-playing emperor.
In the classic British children's television show, Danger Mouse, the villainous Baron Greenback has a fluffy white pet caterpillar named Nero.
In the 2005 movie " The Exorcism of Emily Rose," The demon that supposedly possesed Nero was one of the six demons within Emily Rose.
[edit]
External links
Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to:
NeroWikimedia Commons has media related to:
Nero[edit]
Primary sources
Life of Nero (Suetonius; English translation and Latin original)
Cassius Dio, Books 61-63
[edit]
Secondary material
http://www.romansonline.com/Persns.asp?IntID=5&Ename=Nero
http://www.roman-emperors.org/nero.htm
http://www.bible-history.com/nero/
http://www.roman-empire.net/emperors/nero.html



Preceded by:
Claudius Roman Emperor
54 AD–68 AD Succeeded by:
Galba
Preceded by:
Claudius Julio-Claudian Dynasty
37 AD–68 AD Succeeded by:
(none)

Nero Claudius Drusus
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.

Nero Claudius Drusus Germanicus, born Decimus Claudius Drusus and variously called Drusus, Drusus I or Drusus the Elder (38 - 9 BC) was the younger son of Livia, wife of Augustus Caesar, and her first husband, Tiberius Claudius Nero, and was thus a patrician Claudian on both sides. However he was born shortly after Livia had divorced him and married Augustus, so rumors suspected Augustus to be the real father, providing his motivation for a sudden marriage to an already pregnant married woman. In any case, part of the terms of Livia's divorce were that her former husband be declared the father of her unborn child, and be given his name. According to Suetonius, he was born with the praenomen Decimus, but it was later changed to Nero. He was raised in Claudius Nero's house with his brother, the future emperor Tiberius, until his father's death. Drusus and Tiberius developed a famously close relationship in this environment that would last the rest of their lives. Tiberius named his eldest son after his brother (in violation of Roman naming standards), and Drusus did likewise.

Drusus married Antonia Minor, the daughter of Mark Antony and Augustus's sister, Octavia, and gained a reputation of being completely faithful to her. Their children were Germanicus, Livilla, the future Emperor Claudius, and at least two others who did not survive infancy. After Drusus' death, Antonia never remarried, though she outlived him by nearly 5 decades.

Augustus bestowed many honors on his step-sons. In 19 BC, Drusus was granted the ability to hold all public offices 5 years before the minimum age. When Tiberius left Italy during his term as praetor in 16 BC, Drusus legislated in his place. He became quaestor the following year, fighting against Rhaetian bandits in the alps. Drusus repelled them, gaining honors, but was unable to smash their forces, and required reinforcement from Tiberius. The brothers easily defeated the local Alpine tribes. In 13 BC, Drusus was sent to govern Gaul to quell riots caused by the actions of a previous administrator. While there, a tribe of Germans entered Gaul and proceeded the attack Roman settlements. Drusus mobilized his legions and beat the invaders back across the Rhine. He penetrated deep into German territory, traveling as far as the North Sea and placing a yearly tribute on the Frisians. As a reward, Drusus was made praetor urbanus for 11 BC.

Drusus did not have it in him to stay in Rome. In the spring of his term, he set out for the German border once more. He pushed once more into the territory of the various German tribes, only stopping at the onset of winter. He was attacked while making his way back to Roman territory, but managed the rout the German force. His troops proclaimed him Imperator and he was granted triumphal ornaments, as well the office of proconsul for the following year. In 10 BC, the Chatti joined with the Sicambri and attacked Drusus' camp, but were easily defeated. Drusus then went to meet Augustus and Tiberius in Lugdunum (at which point Claudius was born), and traveled with them to Rome. He was easily elected Consul for 9 BC, but once more left the city before assuming office. He once again smashed the Chatti, and then began a campagn against the Marcomanni, but was turned back across the Rhine. Drusus died soon after in consequence of a fall from a horse, lingering on for a month after the accident, by which point Tiberius had joined him. Suetonius reports that had refused to return the Rome just before his death. Drusus' body was brought back to the city, and his ashes were deposited in the "Mausoleum of Augustus." He remained extremely popular with the legionaries, who erected a monument in Moguntiacum (modern Mainz) on his behalf. His family was granted the hereditary honorific "Germanicus", which was given to his eldest son before passing to his youngest. Augustus later wrote a biography of him which does not survive.

[edit]
Genetic Evidence that Augustus was the biological father of Drusus
Augustus was infamous for being chronically "sickly" (although he lived to be 77, and records of the symptoms he suffered from match those of Wilson's disease, an autosomal recessive genetic disease).

Augustus only had one known biological child; Julia Caesaris. She gave birth to the five grandchildren (3 boys, 2 girls) of Augustus, whom he adopted as his heirs. The elder two boys died before they came of age, and the third was considered unsuitable (perhaps he was mentally ill). One of these granddaughters of Augustus was Agrippina the Elder.

Tiberius was already 4 when Augustus married Livia, while she supposedly was already pregnant with Drusus. Drusus' son was Germanicus, and Germanicus married Agrippina the Elder. Their son was Caligula.

Caligula, often called "the Mad Emperor", was affected by more severe symptoms that match with Wilson's disease; apart from the intestinal problems and immune system weakness of Augustus, he was mentally unstable and suffered from psychosis.

Because Wilson's disease is recessive autosomal, each of his parents would have to have been a latent carrier for the disease. It is entirely possible that Agrippina inherited the allele for Wilson's disease from her grandfather Augustus, but the only way Caligula could have Wilson's disease is if his father Germanicus was also a carrier. As it is a rare disease, it is unlikely that Germanicus inherited it from his normal-type mother. Thus Germanicus had to have been given the allele by Drusus, and the only way that Drusus could have the allele for Wilson's disease is if he got it from his biological parent: Augustus. This linkage shows that Augustus was Drusus' biological father.

Nero also probably suffered from Wilson's disease, and he was the son of Caligula's sister Agrippina the Younger and Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus. Claudius, brother of Germanicus, probably also suffered symptoms of Wilson's disease, lending further proof to the genetic mapping. (Compare this pedigree to that of, say, the presence of the hemophilia gene in the monarchs of Europe descended from Queen Victoria).


wtf 4:565 Nero Claudius Germanicus Drusus killed in a fall from his horse

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]