== Notes for [[Item:Q90951|Q90951]] ==

* from [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adobogiona '''Wikipedia'''], the free encyclopedia

'''Adobogiona''' (fl. c. 80 BC - c. 50 BC) was a Celtic princess from Anatolia. She was the daughter of king Deiotarus of Galatia and Berenice, Princess of Pergamon, probably a daughter of king Attalus III of Pergamon.

Adobogiona married Brogitarus, King of Galatia, who reigned concurrently with his father-in-law.[1] They were the parents of Amyntas of Galatia, a tetrarch of the Trocmi and king of Galatia.

Adobogiona was honoured by a surviving inscription discovered on the island of Lesbos and a portrait head of her has been discovered at Pergamon.

=References=

# Cicero. De harusp. resp. 13.
* S. Mitchell, Anatolia: Land, Men and Gods in Asia Minor, Vol. I (1956).
* Ton Derks/Nico Roymans, Ethnic Constructs in Antiquity: The Role of Power and Tradition, Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2009, p. 137.
--------------------
=From [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adobogiona Wikipedia]=
Adobogiona (fl. c. 80 BC - c. 50 BC) was a Celtic Galatian princess from Anatolia. She was the daughter of Deiotarus and sister to Brogitarus from the Tolistobogii tribe. Her cousin was the King Deiotarus, a Roman client king of the triumvir Pompey.

Adobogiona married a wealthy patrician citizen from Pergamon called Menodotus. At some point, Adobogiona was rescued from poisoning at a banquet[citation needed] and became a mistress to King Mithridates VI of Pontus. Adobogiona bore Mithridates VI two children: a son called Mithridates I of the Bosporus and a daughter called Adobogiona.[citation needed] She was honoured by a surviving inscription discovered on the island of Lesbos and a portrait head of her has been discovered at Pergamon.
--------------------
'''
=Adobogiona the Elder=
'''

Adobogiona (fl. c. 90-c. 50 BC) was a Galatian princess from Anatolia. She was the daughter of a Celtic noble named Deiotarus and sister to Brogitarus from the Tolistobogii tribe. Her cousin was the tetrarch Deiotarus Philoromaios, a Roman client king of Galatia, who had a daughter of the same name.

Adobogiona married a wealthy patrician citizen from Pergamon called Menodotus. At some point, Adobogiona was rescued from poisoning at a banquet and became a mistress to King Mithridates VI of Pontus. Adobogiona bore Mithridates VI two children: a son called Mithridates of Pergamon and a daughter called Adobogiona the Younger.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adobogiona_the_Elder

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]