== Notes for [[Item:Q90266|Q90266]] ==

* from [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaius_Claudius_Severus '''Wikipedia'''], the free encyclopedia

'''Gaius Claudius Severus''' was a Roman senator who lived in the second half of the 1st century AD and the first half of the 2nd century AD in the Roman Empire. He originated from a family of Pontian Greek descent. Severus was born and raised in Pompeiopolis, a city in the Roman province of Galatia.

Severus was a magistrate in the reign of the Roman Emperor Trajan 98-117. Trajan had successfully annexed Arabia Petraea in 105-106, made the region a Roman province, and Severus became its first governor. Severus remained in the office from 106 until 116. During his tenure a road, Via Nova Traiana, was paved from Aqaba via Petra to Bozrah.

The road was completed in 111 at the earliest. According to two surviving letters sent to an Egyptian soldier and the an assistant secretary to Severus called Apollonarius, one to his father and another to his mother, one of the letters bear the date March 26, 107, mentions that the construction work for the road was already in progress then. These letters discuss the construction period and how the road was constructed. Severus in 112 served as a suffect consul. Severus married an unnamed Roman woman and had a son called Gnaeus Claudius Severus Arabianus.

=Sources=

* Garzetti, Albino (1974). From Tiberius to the Antonines: a history of the Roman Empire AD 14-192.[page needed]
* Bowman, Alan K.; Garnsey, Peter; Rathbone, Dominic (2000). The High Empire, A.D. 70-192. The Cambridge ancient history 11 (2nd ed.).[page needed]
* Gnaeus Claudius Severus Arabianus article from German Wikipedia
--------------------
'''
=Gaius Claudius Severus=
'''

Gaius Claudius Severus was a Roman senator who lived in the second half of the 1st century AD and the first half of the 2nd century AD in the Roman Empire. He originated from a family of Pontian Greek descent. Severus was born and raised in Pompeiopolis, a city in the Roman province of Galatia.

Severus was a magistrate in the reign of the Roman Emperor Trajan 98-117. Trajan had successfully annexed Arabia Petraea in 105-106, made the region a Roman province, and Severus became its first governor. Severus remained in the office from 106 until 116. During his tenure a road, Via Nova Traiana, was paved from Aqaba via Petra to Bozrah.

The road was completed in 111 at the earliest. According to two surviving letters sent to an Egyptian soldier and an assistant secretary to Severus called Apollonarius, one to his father and another to his mother, one of the letters bear the date March 26, 107, mentions that the construction work for the road was already in progress then. These letters discuss the construction period and how the road was constructed. Severus in 112 served as a suffect consul. Severus married an unnamed Roman woman and had a son called Gnaeus Claudius Severus Arabianus.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaius_Claudius_Severus

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]