== Notes for [[Item:Q114432|Q114432]] ==

Count of La Cerdanya (927-965) and Besalú (957-965), son of Miró II de Cerdanya and Ava. At the time of the death of his father in 927, it seems that Sunifred and his brothers, Guifré, Oliba and Miró, were minors. Countess Ava thus took responsibility for the counties. A joint possession was established in his father's will, entrusting regency to Ava. The governing functions carried out personally by the countess continued until 938, when it seems that her eldest son, Sunifred, began to assist her. Ava withdrew from governing tasks in about 941. The years immediately following the death of Miró the Younger were especially difficult for the heirs, with the betrayal of loyal subjects and internal rebellions. Count Sunyer I of Barcelona appears to have wished to exercise his function as regent and began operating around Besalú, where he had properties. After 941, the older sons of Miró and Ava began to fully exercise their governing functions in their inherited counties. Sunifred, the first-born, directly administered the original territorial nucleus; La Cerdanya, El Conflent and El Berguedà, while Guifré, the second son, undertook the rule of the lands of Besalú, El Vallespir and El Ripollès, always accepting subordination to his older brother. Sunifred did in fact often involve himself in the affairs of Besalú. In 944, he and Count Gausfred I d'Empúries agreed to allow Prior Tassi, from the monastery of Sant Pere de Rodes, to send monks to the court of Louis IV of France. The monks petitioned the king to grant a precept ratifying the independence of the monastery, thus nullifying the ancient argument between Banyoles and Sant Policarp de Rasès on the ownership of the location. As head of the dynasty of La Cerdanya, Sunifred II defended El Ripollès, especially the territorial dominion of Sant Joan de les Abadesses, against the designs of Count Sunyer I of Barcelona. Sunyer's expansionist ambition for El Ripollès has been associated with an expedition mounted by his son, Count Ermengol I of Osona, against La Cerdanya. According to annalist sources, Ermengol was then killed at Baltarga (935/943), probably at the hands of Sunifred's men. There may even be a relation between these hostilities and the betrayal of a viscount by the name of Unifred, as recorded in later documentation. Sunifred founded Sant Pere de Camprodon with his brother Guifré II of Besalú, who, acting in name of Sunifred and his brothers Oliba and Miró, met with King Louis IV in February 952. The king gave him a precept of immunity, of confirmation of possessions and of free election of the abbot to Camprodon, as well as a private precept assigning the brothers properties from the regions of El Conflent and El Ripollès, confiscated from the treasonous Viscount Unifred. When in 957, his brother Guifré II died during a revolt of Besalú magnates, Sunifred descended from La Cerdanya with his own army, subdued the rebels, and without waiting for royal intervention, confiscated their possessions. From that moment until his death, he governed the whole of the territories that had been previously united by his father, although he was occasionally assisted by his brother Oliba. In 959, he and Oliba granted the possessions confiscated from the traitor, Unifred, to a certain Viscount Isarn. A pious man and attentive to the Church, he was one of the leaders of the expeditions to Rome that would give greater ecclesiastical independence to the Catalan counties. In December 951, he went to Rome with Bishop Guisad of Urgell; Abbot Arnulf of Ripoll and probable abbot of La Grassa; Prior Tassi of Rodes; Sal·la, the founder of Sant Benet de Bages; and possibly the monk, Sunyer of Cuixà. Without his own bishopric, he encouraged activity in the monasteries of his dominions; he especially fostered the construction of the monastery of Cuixà, to which he made many territorial donations. In 965, he placed Garí, from the Cluny monastery, at Cuixà as abbot. There is no evidence that he ever married. Upon his death, the control of his counties went to his brothers, Oliba and Miró.
--------------------
Conde de Cerdaña y Besalú, nacido hacia 925 y muerto en noviembre de 965.

Hijo de Miró II de Cerdaña y de doña Ava, heredó, junto con sus hermanos, los territorios de Cerdaña y Besalú, a la muerte de su padre en 927. Parece ser que en esta fecha Sunifredo y sus hermanos Wifredo, Oliba y Miróeran aún menores, por lo que se hizo cargo de la regencia doña Ava, que gobernó los condados en solitario hasta 938. En los primeros años de su regencia tuvo que enfrentarse a traiciones y rebeliones internas, que se resolvieron gracias a la intervención del conde Sunyer I de Barcelona, titular de diversos territorios en Besalú que, eventualmente, asumió las tareas de regencia. En 938 Sunifredo comenzó a participar en el gobierno junto con doña Ava, que abandonó totalmente sus funciones en 941. La última mención de doña Ava en los documentos es una donación a Sant Miquel de Cuixá en la que tanto ella como sus hijos se titulan condes. Desde aquel año Sunifredo tomó el control directo de la Cerdaña, Conflent y el Berguedá, mientras que su hermano Wifredo devino titular de Besalú, el Vallespir y el Ripollés, sin embargo la posición de éste siempre estuvo supeditada a la del primogénito, Sunifredo, que con frecuencia intervino en los asuntos internos de Besalú. El conde de Cerdaña se vio obligado a defender el Ripollés, especialmente los territorios de Sant Joan de les Abadesses contra las ambiciones de Sunyer I de Barcelona y su hijo Armengol I, conde de Osona, que organizó una expedición contra la Cerdaña. Según las fuentes, Armengol fue asesinado por los hombres de Sunifredo en Baltarga (943).

En 944 Sunifredo y el conde Gausfredo II de Ampurias permitieron al prior Tassi, del monasterio de Sant Pere de Rodes, enviar monjes a la corte de Luis IV de Francia, para que éste ratificara la independencia del monasterio y terminasen las disputas sobre su posesión por parte de Banyoles y Sant Policarp de Rasés. El conde participó junto con sus hermanos en la fundación del monasterio de Sant Pere de Camprodon y en 952 viajó con ellos a la corte para solicitar de Luis IV un precepto de confirmación de su posesión y de la libre elección de su abad y la adjudicación de los bienes de un tal vizconde Sunifredo, acusado de traición, que comprendían territorios en el Conflent y el Ripollés, tras lo cual prestaron homenaje al monarca francés. En diciembre de 951 viajó a Roma junto con los más importantes eclesiásticos de Cataluña, entre los que se encontraban el obispo Guisad de Urgel, el abad Arnulf de Ripoll, Sala, abad de la Grassa y un monje, de nombre Sunyer, así Sunifredo II conseguía una amplia independencia eclesiástica para los condados catalanes.

Cuando en 957 Wifredo de Besalú fue asesinado en una revuelta encabezada por Adalberto, instigado por Borrell II, conde de Barcelona, Sunifredo II condujo su propio ejército para defender el condado y consiguió vencer a los revoltosos y confiscar sus territorios sin esperar a la intervención regia. Desde aquel momento reunió de nuevo en sus manos los territorios que habían pertenecido a su padre y los gobernó hasta su muerte, siendo asistido en ocasiones por su hermano Oliba. En 959 ambos donaron a un tal vizconde Isarn los territorios que habían pertenecido al traidor Unifredo.

El conde Sunifredo incentivó la labor religiosa en sus condados y favoreció especialmente al monasterio de Cuixá, al que dotó con numerosas donaciones. Según un precepto de Luis IV de 952 el monasterio era una entidad jurídicamente independiente, con la única autoridad superior del rey de Francia; pero Sunifredo, aunque como conde no tenía jurisdicción sobre el monasterio, conservó su derecho de patronato como heredero de Miró el Viejo. Por iniciativa del conde se construyó la nueva basílica de Sant Miquel i Sant Germá, en Cuixá (941). Entre 950 y 957 Sunifredo completó las tierras del monasterio en el Conflent e inició la expansión de la casa en el pagus de Fenollet mediante las donaciones de las iglesias de Santa Creu y Sant Llorenç. En julio de 965 situó a Garí, del monasterio de Lezat, como abad de Cuixá, al conocer las buenas cualidades del joven abad a través de su primo Roger, vizconde de Carcassona. Este nombramiento supuso para Cuixá la adopción de la regla benedictina, lo cual fue promovido por el conde que, al final de sus días, mencionó en su testamento su adhesión a la orden de Cluny. Sunifredo murió sin herederos y probablemente nunca se casó. Le sucedieron al frente de los condados sus hermanos Oliba y Miró.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]