== Notes for [[Item:Q101891|Q101891]] ==

Flint, Shirley Cushing. ''No Mere Shadows: Faces of Widowhood in Early Colonial Mexico''. University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque, New Mexico, 2013, pages 89-106. … '''Chapter Five: “Doña Beatriz de Estrada Chooses Prayer”''' … http://books.google.com/books?id=Ks3ZORm9KlMC&pg=PA14&lpg=PA14&dq=alonso+de+estrada&source=bl&ots=QtXmOGy0uh&sig=TGsWtkIv3AyjMDeWh3dhaLpbLX8&hl=en&sa=X&ei=eHtQVNioHZawyASQ_ILACQ&ved=0CEUQ6AEwBjgK#v=onepage&q=alonso%20de%20estrada&f=false

Beatris was probably 7 years old when she emigrated Spain and arrived In Nueva Espana in 1523. Her parents are: Don Alfonso de Estrada was the natural son of Ferdinand the Catholic and Doña Luisa de Estrada daughter of Don Fernán, Duke of Aragon. Don Fernan was one of the most illustrious greats of Spain who, among many other things, had been ambassador to England. He also arranged Catherine's marriage to Henry VIII.

Although the conversos de la Caballeria found fame and wealth, they created divisions in the family. Bonafos' son Judah became Christian and took the name of Gaspar, but his daughter Reyna remained Jewish. Much to the grief of the Jewish community, Vidal Joseph, a learned man who had translated classic works into Spanish and had written Hebrew poems, also adopted Christianity.

Pedro de la Cavalleria, a secretary of the royal treasury under King Alfonso V of Aragon, Catalonia, Napoles, y de Sicily (1396-1458), forged an affidavit of "pureza de sangre" to deny any Jewish blood (Castro 549).

Mariana de la Cavalleria. a descendant of the de la Cavalleria who became Christians, married Alonso de Estrada, a royal treasurer of the Spanish crown in the 1520s in México.

Alonso de Etrada was a colorful figure who was supposedly the bastard son of King Ferdinand II (1451-1516) of Aragon. Mariana de la Caballeria was a daughter of Juan Gutierrez de la Cavalleria and Mayor Flores de Guevara.

Mariana's grandfather, Mene de la Cavalleria relapsed into Judaism. After he died his bones were burned by the Inquisition.

Eventually, as the rest of Sephardim who left Spain rather than convert to Christianity, the members of the de la Cavalleria family who remained faithful to Judaism scattered throughout Europe and the Ottoman empire.

This family represents a vital link of the important events following the arrival of Spanish Ancestors in Nueva Espana and the development of various territories in what we now know as South Central and North America. the following link is larger view of the family from Spain and arriving in the new world.

About edit | history:

Don Alfonso de Estrada was the natural son of Ferdinand the Catholic and Doña Luisa de Estrada daughter of Don Fernán, Duke of Aragon. Don Fernan was one of the most illustrious greats of Spain who, among many other things, had been ambassador to England. He also arranged Catherine's marriage to Henry VIII.

Ferdinand and Luisa were unmarried teenagers at the time of their sexual exploration. Shortly after Alfonso's birth, Ferdinand at the tender age of seventeen married his cousin, Isabella of Castile. This marriage was a necessity to assure the growth and development of the Kingdoms of Castile and Aragon.

In later years, he recognized his son, Don Alfonso and named him Duke of Aragon.

Alonso de Estrada was born in Ciudad Real, Spain probably between 1470 and 1480 and died in 1530. He was married to Marina Gutiérrez Flores de la Cavalleria. They had two sons and five daughters.

Luis Alfonso Fernándes de Estrada stayed in Ciudad Real and Juan Alonso became fray Juan de la Magdalena.

Luisa, Marina, Ana, Francisca, and Beatris came to New Spain with their parents in 1523.

•Luisa married Captain Jorgue de Alvarado, a conqueror of México and Governor of Guatemala; and a brother of Pedro de Alvarado; their children were Jorgue de Alvarado, Luisa, and Leonor.

•Marina married Luis de Saavreda Guzman; their children were Alonso de Saavreda; Juan who married Regina de la Cadena;

Ana married New Spain Treasurer Juan Alonso de Sosa; their children were Juan Alonso de Sosa, baptized February 4, 1542, married Marina de Guevara. They had several children, a daughter married Diego de Ayala, son of licenciado Diego de Ayala, alcalde de la Audencia de México.

The Ayala's succession is probably the one that produced Leonor de Ayala who married Joseph de Trevño and started a line of Ayalas in Nuevo León. Their children took the Ayala name, rather than the father's name, Treviño.

•Francisca married Alonso Avalalos de Saavreda

•Beatris married Francisco Vasquez de Coronado, the discoverer of the Grand Canyon.

'''==Alonso de Estrada also had a natural son, Bartolome, with Ana Rodriguez Anhaifa. Bartolome became a secular priest.=='''

Estrada is an interesting historical figure because he was probably the only son of a king of Spain who ever lived in México and left a large number of descendants some of whom are now in the US.


. Historian Peggy K. Liss states that Estrada was a natural son of King Ferdinand (Lizz 167).

Also another historian Thomas Hugh in his book the Conquest: Montezuma, Cortés, and the Fall of Old México, states that it was believed that Alonso de Estrada was a natural son of King Ferdinand (Hugh 574).

In New Spain, de Estrada served as royal treasurer, lieutenant governor, and governor. Historian Francisco Fernandez del Castillo states that he learned from a document from the Inquisition (reference cited as Archivo de Inqisición, Tomo 365) that it was common knowledge in Ciudad Real and Almagro that Alonso de Estrada was an illegitimate son of King Ferdinand II of Aragon and Castile (Fernandez del Castillo 399).

There are some historians who doubted that Alonso de Estrada was an illegitimate son of King Ferdinand . Among those historians is Norberto de Castro y Tosi who states states that Alonso was the legitimate son of a low ranking hialgo by the name of Juan de Estrada and unknown wife. The problem with Tosi's hypothesis is that he relies on a testimony provided by Mari Hernandez de Hidalgo, a witness, who did not remember the name of Alonso's mother name.

Among historians who believe that Alonso de Estrada was an illegitimate son of King Ferdinand, Francisco Fernandez del Castillo from the Academia Mexicana de la Historia asserts that Alonso occupied very important position in Spain and later Emperor Charles V named Alonso de Estrada the royal treasurer of New Spain (Fernandez del Castillo 398).

It is not difficult to see that it was a link between appointments to high positions of government in Spain and New Spain and birth into high ranking aristocratic families. For example, Gonzalo de Salazar, Rodrigo de Albornoz, Pedro Almindez Chirinos were all men from powerful Spanish families and also all of them were protégées of Francisco de los Cobos, the powerful personal secretary of Charles V.

•Sources: Indice Geobiografico de Cuarenta Mil Pobladores Españoles de America en el Siglo XVI

•Fernández, Francisco del Castillo, Memorias de la Academia Mexicana de la Historia: Correspondiente de la Real de Madrid, (México October-December 1942) Tomo I

•Liss, Peggy K. México Under Spain, 1521-1556, Society and the Origins of Nationality The University of Chicago Press, 1975. Carranza, Baltasa Dorante de, Sumaria Relación de los Primeros Pobladores de México.

•Thomas, Hugh, Conquest: Montezuma, Cortés, and the Fall of Old México. Simon and Schuster, 1993.

• Jose Antonio Esquibel: "The Paternal Ancestry of Don Alonso de Estrada, Tesorero y Gobernador de Nueva Espana, and the Revised Genealogy of the Sosa Albornoz Family", Genealogical Journal (Vol. IV, 1998) of the Society of Hispanic and Ancestral Research, or SHHAR.

<https://gobernantesdemexico.fandom.com/wiki/Alonso_de_Estrada>

Alonso de Estrada, gobernador pre-virreinal de Nueva España>

Don Alfonso de Estrada era hijo natural de Fernando el Católico y de Doña Luisa de Estrada hija de Don Fernán, Duque de Aragón. Don Fernan fue uno de los más ilustres grandes de España que, entre otras muchas cosas, había sido embajador en Inglaterra. También arregló el matrimonio de Catalina con Enrique VIII.

Ferdinand y Luisa eran adolescentes solteros en el momento de su exploración sexual. Poco después del nacimiento de Alfonso, Fernando a la tierna edad de diecisiete años se casó con su prima, Isabel de Castilla. En años posteriores, reconoció a su hijo, don Alfonso y lo nombró duque de Aragón.

Alonso de Estrada nació en Ciudad Real, España probablemente entre 1470 y 1480 y murió en 1530. Estuvo casado con Marina Gutiérrez Flores de la Cavalleria. Tuvieron dos hijos y cinco hijas. Luis Alfonso Fernándes de Estrada se quedó en Ciudad Real y Juan Alonso se convirtió en el hermano Juan de la Magdalena. Luisa, Marina, Ana, Francisca y Beatris llegaron a Nueva España con sus padres en 1523.

Luisa se casó con el capitán Jorgue de Alvarado, conquistador de México y gobernador de Guatemala; y un hermano de Pedro de Alvarado; sus hijos fueron Jorgue de Alvarado, Luisa y Leonor.

•Marina se casó con Luis de Saavreda Guzmán; sus hijos fueron Alonso de Saavreda; Juan que se casó con Regina de la Cadena;

•Ana se casó con el Tesorero de Nueva España Juan Alonso de Sosa; sus hijos fueron Juan Alonso de Sosa, bautizado el 4 de febrero de 1542, casado con Marina de Guevara. Tuvieron varios hijos, una hija se casó con Diego de Ayala, hijo del licenciado Diego de Ayala, alcalde de la Audencia de México. La sucesión de los Ayala es probablemente la que produjo a Leonor de Ayala quien se casó con José de Trevño y comenzó una línea de Ayalas en Nuevo León. Sus hijos tomaron el nombre de Ayala, en lugar del nombre del padre, Treviño.

•Francisca se casó con Alonso Avalalos de Saavreda •Beatris se casó con Francisco Vásquez de Coronado, el descubridor del Gran Cañón.

Alonso de Estrada también tuvo un hijo natural, Bartolomé, con Ana Rodríguez Anhaifa. Bartolomé se convirtió en un sacerdote secular.

Estrada es una figura histórica interesante porque probablemente fue el único hijo de un rey de España que alguna vez vivió en México y dejó un gran número de descendientes, algunos de los cuales ahora están en los Estados Unidos. La historiadora Peggy K. Liss afirma que Estrada era un hijo natural del rey Fernando (Lizz 167). También otro historiador Thomas Hugh en su libro La conquista: Moctezuma, Cortés y la caída del Viejo México, afirma que se creía que Alonso de Estrada era un hijo natural del rey Fernando (Hugo 574). En la Nueva España, de Estrada sirvió como tesorero real, teniente gobernador y gobernador. El historiador Francisco Fernández del Castillo afirma que aprendió de un documento de la Inquisición (referencia citada como Archivo de Inqisición, Tomo 365) que era de conocimiento común en Ciudad Real y Almagro que Alonso de Estrada era un hijo ilegítimo del rey Fernando II de Aragón y Castilla (Fernández del Castillo 399).

Hay algunos historiadores que dudaban de que Alonso de Estrada fuera un hijo ilegítimo del rey Fernando. Entre esos historiadores se encuentra Norberto de Castro y Tosi quien afirma que Alonso era el hijo legítimo de un hialgo de bajo rango llamado Juan de Estrada y esposa desconocida. El problema con la hipótesis de Tosi es que se basa en un testimonio proporcionado por Mari Hernández de Hidalgo, una testigo, que no recordaba el nombre de la madre de Alonso.

Entre los historiadores que creen que Alonso de Estrada era un hijo ilegítimo del rey Fernando, Francisco Fernández del Castillo de la Academia Mexicana de la Historia afirma que Alonso ocupó una posición muy importante en España y más tarde el emperador Carlos V nombró a Alonso de Estrada tesorero real de la Nueva España (Fernández del Castillo 398). No es difícil ver que era un vínculo entre los nombramientos en altos cargos de gobierno en España y la Nueva España y el nacimiento en familias aristocráticas de alto rango. Por ejemplo, Gonzalo de Salazar, Rodrigo de Albornoz, Pedro Almindez Chirinos eran todos hombres de poderosas familias españolas y también todos eran protegidos de Francisco de los Cobos, el poderoso secretario personal de

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD9B54011EFBBFA9822EF79916C2816
geni:6000000003883047294

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]