== Notes for [[Item:Q98224|Q98224]] ==

Exilarque Néhémie ben Nathan beni David était Exilarque (Exilarque [en hébreu: ראש גלות Rosh Galout, l'araméen: ריש גלותא Reish Galuta allumé »la tête de l'exil», en grec:. Æchmalotarcha], se référant aux dirigeants de la diaspora communauté juive après la déportation de la population de Juda en exil à Babylone après la destruction du royaume de Juda) en Babylonie entre 270 et 313.

Exilarch Nehemiah ben Nathan beni David was Exilarch (Exilarch [Hebrew: ראש גלות Rosh Galut, Aramaic: ריש גלותא Reish Galuta lit. "head of the exile", Greek: Æchmalotarcha], referring to the leaders of the Diaspora Jewish community following the deportation of the population of Judah into Babylonian exile after the destruction of the kingdom of Judah) in Babylonia between 270 and 313.

In 313CE, jews of the Levant were trying to rekindle a unified Hebrew presence in the region. Weary of the incessant trouble-making by Jews, and the flacid capability of Rom to respond, The Sassanid Persians conquered the area in 313 CE and waged a pogrom against the leadership of the mounting insurrection. The Persians killed Nechemya ben Natan and his advisor, Rab Shizbi, (Exilarch and his Gaon) for inciting insurrection. This cycle of "arise, Get noticed, get executed was repeated in rapid succession among Exilarchs and Their clerical advisors. In many respects it was this period of repeated in surrections, to rekindle a Bar Kachba revolt, that so debased Jews of the region that those who survived had assimilated into arabic-speaking culture as well as Persian culture paving the way for the ascenancy of Prophet Muhammad.

The lineage of Nechemya ben Natan comes to us from the text of "Seder Olam Zutta".

See "My Lines"

( http://homepages.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~cousin/html/p106.htm#i12971 )

from Compiler: R. B. Stewart, Evans, GA

( http://homepages.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~cousin/html/index.htm )
--------------------

Nechemiah I,

birth 270,

died 313

Executed, occupation: Exilarch in Bavel, son of Nathan I Ukba and nn to: nn

1) Mar Ukba III Nathan, died 337, occupation: Exilarch in Bavel 313-337 He was Exilarch of the Jews in Babylon about 313-337. Sources:

1. Stuart, R.W. "Royalty for Commoners" line 329. 2. ..., "Encyclopedia Judiaca", Vol.6, pp.1024-1025. 3. ..., "The Jewish Enclyclopedia" Vol.V, pp.288-290. to: nn

2) Jitschak

3) Huna III

--------------------
source: http://www.geni.com/people/%D7%A0%D7%97%D7%9E%D7%99%D7%94-Nechemya-ben-Nathan/6000000000961705216?through=6000000002187920094

Exilarque Néhémie ben Nathan beni David était Exilarque (Exilarque [en hébreu: ראש גלות Rosh Galout, l'araméen: ריש גלותא Reish Galuta allumé »la tête de l'exil», en grec:. Æchmalotarcha], se référant aux dirigeants de la diaspora communauté juive après la déportation de la population de Juda en exil à Babylone après la destruction du royaume de Juda) en Babylonie entre 270 et 313.

Exilarch Nehemiah ben Nathan beni David was Exilarch (Exilarch [Hebrew: ראש גלות Rosh Galut, Aramaic: ריש גלותא Reish Galuta lit. "head of the exile", Greek: Æchmalotarcha], referring to the leaders of the Diaspora Jewish community following the deportation of the population of Judah into Babylonian exile after the destruction of the kingdom of Judah) in Babylonia between 270 and 313.

See "My Lines"

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per03183.htm#0

RESEARCH NOTES:
Exilarch of Jews in Babylon 270-313

He was Exilarch in Baghdad from 270 to 313.

He was Exilarch in Baghdad from 270 to 313.

Exilarch of Babylon

Exilarch of Babylon

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
6702EFB9E76521EFBBF89829A6488A4DA6AF
geni:6000000000961705216

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]