== Notes for [[Item:Q116578|Q116578]] ==

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/County_of_Bigorre

The county was constituted out of the dowry of Faquilène, an Aquitainian princess, for her husband '''Donatus Lupus I, the son of Lupus III of Gascony.''' The original Bigorre was considerable in size, but successive generations, following on Gascon traditions, gave out portions as appanages to younger sons. The county lost Lavedan, Aster, Aure, and Montaner in the first two generations.

----

GASCONY - BEARN, BIGORRE
V5.0 Updated 05 April 2025
http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/GASCONY.htm

LOUP . His name is known only from the patronymic attributed to his son. It is possible that he was the same person as Loup [Duke of Gascony] (died after 819) who is shown above. m ---. The name of Loup's wife is not known.

Loup & his wife had one child:

a) DONAT Loup (-[838/65]). Comte [de Bigorre]. The Vita Hludowici Imperatoris records that Emperor Louis I sent "Elisachar abbatem et Hildebrandum comitem…et Donatum" to suppress the revolt of "Aizone" in the March of Spain [in 827][66]. The Vita Hludowici Imperatoris records that Emperor Louis I sent "Bonifatius comes et Donatus…comes…et Adrebaldus Flaviniacensis monasterii abbas" as missi to Septimania [in 838][67]. The chronology suggests that he was a different person from Donat, ancestor of the Condes de Bailo, who is shown above.

m '''FAQUILO, daughter of [MANSIO] & his wife ---.''' " "Dompna Faquilo" donated property to the monastery of Saint-Orens de Lavedan, for the souls of "Mansionis…Donati Lupi comiti…et filiis meis et filias", by charter dated Dec [865], subscribed by "Dattonis Donati comitis, Luponis, Luponis Centuli"[158]. Monlezun names "Faquilène, fille de Mancion qui paraît appartenir à la souche des vicomtes de Lavédan" as the wife of Donat-Loup de Bigorre[159]. Donat Loup & his wife had [four or more] children: …

- COMTES de BIGORRE.


----
===References
# https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Donat_Loup_de_Bigorre Donat Loup is the oldest known count of Bigorre, at the end of the ninth century. … He had married Faquilo[3], daughter of '''Count Mancio''', and who gave birth to: …
## 3. The name has been modernized in Faquilène.
## Christian Settipani, La Noblesse du Midi Carolingien, Oxford, Linacre College, Unit for Prosopographical Research, coll. "Occasional Publications / 5", 2004, 388 p. (ISBN 1-900934-04-3), p. 14 and 16
# https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bigorre
# https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liste_des_comtes_de_Bigorre House of Bigorre. The first certificate for a Count of Bigorre dates back to 945. Raymond I Dat is then mentioned. Before 907: Donat Loup[1], probable great-grandson of Loup Centulle, Count of Vasconie Married to Faquilo, daughter of Mansio In 907: Dat Donat and Loup Donat, two sons of the previous one[1]. Loup Donat is the plausible ancestor of the viscounts of Lavedan.
# http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/GASCONY.htm Cites
##[158] Jaurgain (1898), p. 163, quoting Bibl. Nat. mss., Collection Duchesne (Papiers d’Oïhenart), vol. 114, fo. 96, extrait du cartulaire de Castelloboo (Livre verd de Benac), and Larcher Glanage, Tome I, p. 274.
##[159] Monlezun (1846), Tome I, p. 350, citing "Titres de Lavédan".

1 NAME Mansion De /Gascogne/
2 GIVN Mansion De
2 SURN Gascogne

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]