== Notes for [[Item:Q114176|Q114176]] ==

-https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jimena_Mu%C3%B1oz

-http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/Galicia.htm#JimenaMunozdied1128
3. [JIMENA Muñoz ([1055/65]-Espinareda del Bierzo 1128, after 25 May, [maybe 23 Jul], bur San Andres de Espinareda). The precise parentage of Jimena Muñoz has been the subject of considerable debate over recent years. The common connection with Ulver, where she was recorded, appears conclusive in determining that she was closely related to Munio Muñoz who was also recorded in the same castle (see above). Her birth date, estimated from her having given birth to two children in the early 1080s, suggests that she was his daughter rather than his sister (assuming that Munio´s parents are correctly identified as Munio Rodríguez and Jimena Ordóñez as shown above). The Chronicon Regum Legionensium names "Jimena Muñoz" as the first of two concubines of King Alfonso, and their daughters "Elvira the wife of count Raymond of Toulouse…and Teresa the wife of Count Henry"[880]. The Chronicon de Cardeña names “Ximena Nuñez” as mother of the king´s daughters “la Infant Doña Elvira è la Infant Doña Teresa”[881]. Kerrebrouck states that Jimena Múñoz was King Alfonso VI's second wife, married before the end of 1078 (marriage annulled), but this is chronologically difficult to maintain. King Alfonso's relationship with Jimena lasted long enough to produce two children. The last documentary reference to Queen Inés is dated 22 May 1077, while King Alfonso's marriage to Queen Constance took place in late 1079. This leaves insufficient time for the king to have married and had two legitimate children by Jimena between these two marriages. The reference in Kerrebrouck to the annulment of King Alfonso's alleged marriage to Jimena is presumably based on Pope Gregory VII's letter of 27 Jun 1080 which, among other things, objected to King Alfonso's "marriage" on the grounds of consanguinity. The letter does not name the wife whose marriage was objected to, but Reilly appears correct in concluding that "it can be no other than Queen Constance herself", given the likely date of her marriage and the likely date of birth of her daughter Urraca[882]. Reilly suggests that King Alfonso VI's relationship with Jimena started in [1081/82][883]. "Monnio Moniz, uxor sua Velasquita, Xemena Moniz, Petro Velaz, Sol Sancxiz…" subscribed the charter dated 1 Oct 1085 under which "Gelvira Petriz…cum viro meo…Godino Citiz" donated property in Priaranza to the monastery of San Pedro de Montes[884]. The dating clause of a charter dated 7 Feb 1093, under which "Petro Quizaz" sold property in Salas de los Barrios to the monastery of San Pedro de Montes, names "Scemena Monniz in Ulver"[885]. ["Garcia Monnuiz…cum uxor mea Fronille Annalaz cognomento Sol et Pelayo Monniuz et Auro Villito et Monniuz" donated property in Jagoaza to the monastery of San Pedro de Montes, and "Xemeno Monniuz" sold "mea porcione quam habui inter fratres meos" of the same property, by charter dated 26 Sep [1095][886]. It is possible that "Xemeno Monniuz" in this document is an error for "Xemena Monniuz". However, the dating clause which names "Comes Froyla Didaz imperante in ipsa terra de Iorres" suggests that the property was in a different area from "Ulver" and therefore that the two families were unrelated.] The dating clause of a charter dated 17 Dec 1096, under which "Vellite Ferrudiz et uxor mea Falella" sold property in Salas de los Barrios to the monastery of San Pedro de Montes, names "…Xemena Munniz in Ulver"[887]. The dating clause of a charter dated 21 Mar 1097, under which "Maria" donated property in Rimor to the monastery of San Pedro de Montes, names "Donna Xemena Monniz imperante ipsa terra de Ulver"[888]. "Xemena Munniz" donated property in Salas de los Barrios to the monastery of San Pedro de Montes by charter dated 26 Apr 1101[889]. "Potestas in illa terra donna Xemena" and "Xemena Monnuz imperante terra de Ulver" is named in dating clauses of other charters which record donations to San Pedro de Montes, dated 1099, 29 Jun 1100, 26 Aug [1103], 19 Apr [1104], 19 Jan [1107][890]. The dating clause of charters dated between [1115] and 15 May 1118 name "Johanne Petriz potestate in Ulver", and from 6 Mar 1126 "Ramiro Froilaz"[891], suggesting that the Muñoz family moved from the castle in [1107/15]. "Ximena Munniz" donated property in "Trebalio et Turres" to "nepotis mei…Garcie Fernandiz" by charter dated 18 Apr 1127[892]. Jimena Muñoz donated property in "la villa de Torres, discurrente rivulo Orbico, territorio Astoricensis" to the Order of St John by charter dated 18 Sep 1127[893]. "Jimena Muñiz" donated property "en Villar de Salas en el Bierzo" to Astorga Cathedral by charter dated 25 May 1128[894]. Doña Jimena retired to the Benedictine convent of Esinareda del Bierzo. An inscription in the monastery of Espinareda records the death in 1128 of "Semena Alphonsi vidui regis amica", although Rodríguez González highlights the opinion that the monument is a later forgery[895]. Sandoval records that "Ximena Nuñez" was buried in "San Andres de Espinareda"[896]. The necrology of León Cathedral records the death “X Kal Aug” of “Xemena Moniz”[897].

'''Mistress''': ([1081/82]-) of ALFONSO VI King of Castile and León, son of FERNANDO I "el Magno" King of Castile and León & his wife Sancha de León (Compostela [1037]-Toledo 30 Jun 1109, bur Sahagún, León, San Mancio chapel in the royal monastery of Santos Facundo y Primitivo).]

---------
--------

According to https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alphonse_VI_de_Le%C3%B3n, "peu après la mort de sa première femme [Agnès de Poitiers en 1078, Alphonse VI de León] aurait épousé Ximena de Guzman ou Jimena Muñoz (es) mais le mariage aurait été déclaré invalide pour raison de parenté. Les deux filles issues de cette union sont donc considérées comme illégitimes." TRANS: Not long after the death of his first wife in 1078, Alphonso married Jimena de Guzman/Muñoz, but the marriage was declared invalid because of parentage. The two daughters born of this union were then considered illegitimate.

=<nowiki>-----------------------------</nowiki>=

'''Ximena Moniz''' (1060 - 1128) foi uma senhora da nobreza castelhana. Foi filha de Muniadona Moniz de Bierzo e de Munio Moniz de Bierzo, conde de Bierzo.

Ximena Moniz foi concubina de Afonso VI de Leão e Castela, de quem teve duas filhas:

# Teresa de Leão, condessa de Portugal (1080 -?) casada com Henrique de Borgonha, conde de Portugal,
#.Elvira de Castela (1071 - 1151).

Ximena foi a responsável pela educação das suas filhas, em conjunto com o seu pai. Quando Afonso VI morreu, Ximena retirou-se da vida da corte, habitando até à sua morte com a filha Teresa e falecendo em 1128, com 68 anos.

''in: Wikipédia, a enciclopédia livre. <http://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ximena_Moniz>''

_____________________________________________________________________________

That Teresa was daughter of a Munio Munoz comes originally from the interpretation of some charters in which she appears with a man of this name, reported by:

Quintana Prieto, Augusto. '''Jimena Muñiz''', madre de Doña Teresa de Portugal. Revista Portuguesa de Historia. 12:223-80 (1969).

There are two problems with this interpretation. First, she is said by Bishopp Pelayo to be of a "most noble family", and this Munio Muñoz is rather obscure. More importantly, these don't say she was daughter, she just appears in the same document, so she could have been sister or even more distantly related (and if this Munio Muñoz really is the husband of Muniadona Muñoz, Jimena could he sister of her instead).

Canal Sanchez-Pagin, Jose Maria. Jimena Muñoz, Amiga de Alfonso VI. Anuario de Estudios Medievales. 21:11-40 (1991).

Looks for a family that might be called "most noble" and concludes that Jimena was probably sister of Count Rodrigo Muñoz, who was one of the most prominent nobleman of the first part of the reign of Alfonso VI, and father-in-law of Count Gomez Gonzalez (favorite of Queen Urraca). He then evaluates the possibilities for the parentage of this Count, there being three Munios of appropriate age and status who could be father: Munio Muñoz, Munio Gonzalez and Munio Rodriguez. He excludes Munio Muñoz, because of chronology and the existence of documents that appear to name all of the children, Jimena and Rodrigo not being among them. He excludes Munio Rodriguez because his son Rodrigo is given a biography that seems at odds with Alfonso's count. He then decides on Munio Gonzalez, who he also links to the Lara and the old Counts of Castile. In this he is followed by one of your source's references:

Vajay, Szabolcs de. Structures de Prouvoir et Reseaux de Familles du VIIIe au XIIe Siecles. Genealogica & Heraldica: Actas de 17o Congresso das Ciencias Genealogica e Heraldica. 275-315 (1986).

''in: Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia <http://en.wikipedia.org /wiki/Talk%3ATheresa,_Countess_of_Portugal>''

_____________________________________________________________________________

'''See also:''' ''Ximena MUÑOZ <http://www.barrosbrito.com/1888.html>''

--------------------
Ximena Moniz de Bierzo.

Between Alfonso VI's first and second marriages he formed a liaison with Jimena Muñoz, a "most noble" (nobilissima) concubine "derived from royalty" (real generacion). She appears to have been put aside, given land in Ulver, at the time of Alfonso's remarriage. By her Alfonso VI had two illegitimate daughters, Elvira and Teresa.

Leo: Europäische Stammtafeln, J.A. Stargardt Verlag, Marburg, Schwennicke, Detlev (Ed.), Reference: II 57.
--------------------
Jimena Muñiz (deceased in 1128). Aristocrat Bercian, grandmother of the first king of Portugal, Alfonso Enríquez, lover of King Alfonso VI the Brave, king of Leon (1065-1072, 1072-1109), Galicia (1071-1072, 1072-1109) and Castile (1072 -1109) and mother of two daughters had with the monarch, Teresa and Elvira. Certain sources indicate that it was great great-granddaughter of Bermudo II the Gotoso, king of Leon.

Jimena was the daughter of Count Munio Muñiz and his wife Velasquita. Munio Muñiz was the son of Count Munio Rodríguez and Jimena Ordóñez, who was the daughter of the infant Ordoño, illegitimate son of Bermudo II of Leon.

From 1093 to 1108, Jimena Muñiz served as lieutenant of the Cornatel Castle.

Jimena Muñiz made donations to the Monastery of San Pedro de Montes, the Cathedral of Astorga and the Hospital of San Juan and died in 1128.

Offspring

Fruit of his extramarital affair with Alfonso VI the Brave, king of Castile and Leon, were born two daughters:

Teresa de León (1083 / 1085-1130). Countess of Portugal as part of her nuptial dowry, married Henry of Burgundy. Their son, Alfonso I Enríquez, was the first king of Portugal. Elvira Alfonsez (d. 1079-d April, 1157), married Raimundo IV of Tolosa, Count of Tolosa, and after widowhood with Count Fernando Fernandez de Carrión.

Not Married

Not Married

MISTRESS, NOT WIFE

Ximena Moniz, nobre castelhana, nasceu em 1060. Era filha de Muniadona Moniz e de Munio Moniz, conde de Bierzo e de Astorga.
Perdendo a sua mãe muito cedo, Ximena Moniz e a sua irmã Gontronde Moniz foram educadas pelo seu pai e pelo seu avô materno.
Ximena Moniz foi concubina de Afonso VI de Leão e Castela, de quem teve duas filhas: Teresa de Leão, condessa de Portugal * c. 1080 cc Henrique de Borgonha, conde de Portugal e Elvira de Castela (c.1080).
Ximena foi a responsável pela educação das suas filhas, em conjunto com o seu pai. Quando Afonso VI morreu, Ximena retirou-se da vida da corte, habitando até à sua morte com a filha Teresa e falecendo em 1128, com 68 anos.

Jimena var Alfons VI's konkubine og mor til Theresa, men hun ble straks etter forskutt.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]