== Notes for [[Item:Q91015|Q91015]] ==

He was one of the assassins of Julius Caesar.

http://global.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/98285/Gaius-Cassius-Longinus : "Gaius Cassius Longinus, (died 42 bc, near Philippi, Macedonia [now in Greece]), prime mover in the conspiracy to assassinate Julius Caesar in 44 bc. Little is known of his early life. As a quaestor in 53 bc, Cassius served under Marcus Licinius Crassus and saved the remnants of the Roman army defeated by the Parthians at Carrhae (modern Harran, Turkey). For the next two years he successfully repelled the Parthian attacks on Syria. Cassius became tribune in 49, and the outbreak of the civil war between Caesar and the Optimates in that year saved him from being brought to trial for extortion..."

http://assassinscreed.wikia.com/wiki/Gaius_Julius_Caesar : Gaius Julius Caesar (13 July 100 BCE - 15 March 44 BCE) was a prominent general of the Roman army and a notable politician. He played a key role in transforming the flagging Roman Republic into the seemingly unstoppable Roman Empire. Julius Caesar accrued numerous military victories in his role as the general of the Roman army stationed in Cisalpine Gaul, Transalpine Gaul, and Illyricum, three provinces that Caesar administered as governor. He was successful in conquering the Gallic tribes throughout modern-day France, Germany, and Belgium. Caesar was the great nemesis of the Gallic chieftain Vercingetorix, who he defeated in one of his most famous conquests, the Battle of Alesia. In the midst of a civil war, Caesar declared himself dictator and appointed himself Consul of the Roman Senate. The senators feared Caesar's increasing political and military control of Rome, and Caesar was evidently supported by the Templars, though it is unknown whether or not he was aware of their existence.[1] Consequently, a number of senators decided to eliminate Caesar for the benefit of the Roman people. Caesar's close friend Marcus Junius Brutus led the conspiracy against Caesar alongside Gaius Cassius Longinus;[2] both were secret members of the Assassins.[3] Brutus and Cassius planned to murder Caesar in the Senate on the Ides of March (March 15). Their attempt was successful, and the conspirators stabbed Caesar 23 times. However, his death seemed to bring only more chaos than before. Civil war continued for another 13 years, and in the end Caesar's adopted heir Octavian (later known as Augustus) became the first emperor of the Roman Empire.
Julius Caesar's known murderers were Marcus Junius Brutus, Gaius Cassius Longinus, Servius Sulpcicius Galba, Quintus Ligarias, Lucius Minucius Basilus, Publius Servilius Casca Longus, Gaius Servilius Casca, Decimus Junius Brutus Albinus, Lucius Tillius Cimber, Gaius Trebonius, Lucius Cassius Longinus, Gaius Cassius Parmensis, Caecilius, Bucolianus, Rubrius Ruga, Marcus Spurius, Publius Sextius Naso, Lucius Pontius Aquila, Petronius, Decimus Turullius and Pacuvius Antistius Labeo. The rest of the names are lost to history.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]