== Notes for [[Item:Q106418|Q106418]] ==

* '''Progenitor of Abbasid Caliphate (Dynasty)'''

* Wilaadat (Birth):
* Wafaat (Death):

Source 1: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%60Abd_Allah_ibn_%60Abbas

Source 2: http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/%CA%BFAbd_All%C4%81h_ibn_%CA%BFAbb%C4%81s

Source 3: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abbasid
--------------------
Abd Allah ibn Abbas (Arabic: عبد الله ابن عباس‎) or ′Abd Allah ibn al-′Abbas otherwise called (Ibn Abbas; Al-Habr; Al-Bahr; The Doctor; The Sea)[7] was born c. 619 CE. He was the nephew of the Maymunah bint al-Harith, who later became Muhammad's wife. He was one of Muhammad's cousins and one of the early Qur'an scholars.

During the early struggles for the caliphate, he supported Ali, and was given the job of governor of Basra as a responsibility. He did not stay long and he withdrew to Mecca. During the reign of Muawiyah I, he lived in Hejaz and would travel to Damascus often. After Muawiyah I died, he opposed Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr and fled to at-Ta'if, where he died in around 687 CE.

'Abd Allah ibn Abbas was known for his knowledge of traditions as well as his critical interpretation of the Qur'an. From early on, he gathered information from other companions of Muhammad and gave classes and wrote commentaries.

He was the second son of a wealthy merchant, ‘Abbas ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib, thus he was called Ibn Abbas (the son of Abbas). His mother was Umm al-Fadl Lubaba, who prided herself in being the second woman who converted to Islam, on the same day as her close friend Khadijah bint Khuwaylid, Muhammad's wife.

The father of Ibn Abbas and the father of Muhammad were both sons of Shaiba ibn Hashim, better known as ‘Abdu’l-Muṭṭalib. Shaiba bin Hashim's father was Hashim ibn Abd Manaf, the progenitor of the Banu Hashim clan of the Quraish tribe in Mecca.

Wives and children

By a Yemenite princess named Zahra bint Mishrah, Ibn Abbas had seven children.

Al-Abbas, the first born, who was childless.

Ali ibn Abdullah (died 736), who was the grandfather of the first two Abbasid caliphs, who replaced the Umayyads in 750.

Muhammad, who was childless.

Ubaydullah, who was childless.

Al-Fadl, who was childless.

Saad had two children

Lubaba, who married Ali ibn Abdullah ibn Jaafar and had descendants.

By a concubine, he had another daughter, Asma, who married her cousin Abdullah ibn Ubaydullah ibn Abbas and had two sons

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abd_Allah_ibn_Abbas

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000014586311389

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]