== Notes for [[Item:Q89314|Q89314]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Petronius_Probinus_(consul_341)

=Petronius Probinus=
Petronius Probinus (floruit 341-346) was a politician of the Roman Empire, Roman consul and praefectus urbi of Rome.

[edit] Biography Probinus belonged to the gens Petronia, an influential family that provided several high-ranking officers for the imperial administration between the 4th and the 5th century. He was the son of Petronius Probianus, praefectus urbi of Rome from 329 to 331, while his son Sextus Petronius Probus was Praetorian prefect. Among his nephews there were the consuls of 395, Anicius Probinus and Anicius Hermogenianus Olybrius, the consul of 406 Anicius Probus and the aristocrat Anicia Faltonia Proba.

Probinus was consul in 341 and praefectus urbi of Rome from July 5, 345, to December 26, 346.

--------------------
'''
=Petronius Probinus=
'''

Petronius Probinus (floruit 341-346) was an aristocrat and statesman of the Roman Empire, Roman consul and praefectus urbi of Rome.

'''Biography'''

Probinus belonged to the gens Petronia, an influential patrician family that provided several high-ranking officers for the imperial administration between the 4th and the 5th century.

He was the son of Petronius Probianus, Consul of the Roman Empire in 322 and praefectus urbi of Rome from 329 to 331.

His sister was Faltonia Betitia Proba a Roman Christian poet, the most important and influential poet in Latin language of the Late Antiquity, who was married to Clodius Celsinus Adelphius praefectus urbi of Rome in 351.

Petronius Probinus himself was Consul of the Roman Empire in 341 and praefectus urbi of Rome from July 5, 345, to December 26, 346.

'''Family'''

His wife was according to a historical study by Drinkwater and Elton., "Claudia"/"Clodia", a sister of Clodius Celsinus Adelphus, who in turn was married to the sister of Petronius Probinus.

Their son was Sextus Claudius Petronius Probus Consul of 371 and four times Praetorian prefect.

Among his grandchildren were the consuls of 395, Anicius Probinus and Anicius Hermogenianus Olybrius and the consul of 406 Anicius Probus. The aristocrat Anicia Faltonia Proba was his grand-niece - and his daughter in law.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Petronius_Probinus_(consul_341)

RESEARCH NOTES:
Consul 341, prefect of the city 345-346

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per04529.htm#0

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]