== Notes for [[Item:Q118427|Q118427]] ==

The primary source which confirms his parentage has not yet been identified. Master of the Order of Aviz 1162. Benedictine at Alcántara. He was a friend of Bernard de Clairvaux.

Pedro Afonso. Porque, Pedro de Mariz[3], diz dele, que ele é filho bastardo do Conde D. Henrique de Borgonha, por isso meio irmão de Afonso I, e não filho, e chama-lhe por isso D. Pedro Henriques, diz ainda, que « depois de muitas Cavallarias, que em ajuda de el-Rei seu irmão fez, entrou em a religião de S. Bernardo no mosteiro de Alcobaça, onde morreo e esta sepultado » ; e logo acrescenta, que « delle não dizem mais as historias, senão que na conquista de Santarém mostrara a excellencia da sua pessoa, e o esforço de seu animo ». O próprio Bernardo de Brito nos Elogios dos Reis de Portugal[4] descreve D. Pedro Afonso, como filho bastardo do Conde D. Henrique, e diz também que ele foi cavaleiro em antes de seguir a vida monástica no mosteiro de Alcobaça.

---------


Henrique had [one illegitimate son by an unknown mistress]:

*https://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/PORTUGAL.htm#AffonsoIdied1185A

9. ''' [PEDRO Afonso de Portugal''' . Sousa refers to the Chronica do Conde D. Henrique which records “D. Pedro Affonso” as illegitimate son of Conde Henrique by “huma mulher de qualidade”[50]. However, if this information is correct, the patronymic “Affonso” makes little sense, especially as the use in the Iberian peninsula of “variable” patronymics, adopted from an illustrious ancestor not just the father, is not observed with frequency before the 13th century. Sousa also notes that the same person was Maestre of the Order of Aviz. However, the charter dated 1162, issued by the Cistercians to confirm the rules of the Order of Aviz, in the presence of “regis Aldephonsi”, is subscribed by “...Petrus proles Regis Par Francorum et Magister novæ militiæ...”[51]. The reference to “proles Regis” in this document suggests that Pedro´s father must have been King Afonso I and not Conde Henrique, who never adopted the royal title. Until the emergence of more information, it is assumed that this person never existed and that he has been confused with the illegitimate son of King Afonso who was called Pedro (see below). Sousa quotes an epitaph in Alcobaça which records the death 9 May 1175 of “Domnus Petrus Alphonsus Alcobatiæ monachus Alphonsi regis frater” and adding that his body was transferred to the monastery in 1293[52]. However, the epitaph itself says that it was placed in 1678, and it would not therefore be surprising if the inscription contained errors.''']
'''

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]