== Notes for [[Item:Q2512|Q2512]] ==

Tudhaliya III
<p>From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 [[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]] 
 
 </p>
<p>Jump to: navigation, search</p>
<p>Tudhaliya III was a short-lived king of the Hittite Empire (New Kingdom); He may have been the son and successor of Hattusili II, however he is normally viewed as the son of Tudhaliya II (according to the king count used here). He is never explicitly known to have been king at all. The texts refer to him as "Tudhaliya the child" (or, as an alternate translation, "Tudhaliya the Young(er)". He was killed by a group of officers that included his successor, and quite probably brother, Suppiluliuma I.
<p>There is some difficulty concerning numbering of the Tudhaliyas (and Hattusilis) of the Hittite empire. This Tudhaliya is normally not included in Hittite king lists, and his father will often be seen listed as Tudhaliya III.</p>
<p>Preceded by:</p>
<p>Hattusili II(?) Hittite king Succeeded by:</p>
<p>Suppiluliuma I</p>
<p>[edit]</p>
<p>External links</p>
<p> * Reign of Suppiluliuma I, discussing Tudhaliya</p>

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
6708FF25F27C11EFBBFD9A22EF79916BD935


[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]]
== Merged content ==
== Notes for [[Item:Q2486|Q2486]] ==

{geni:about_me} https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Muwatalli_II
<p>Muwatalli II was a king of the New Kingdom of the Hittite empire (ca. 1295–1272 BC .</p>
<p>He was the eldest son of Mursili II and Queen Gassulawiya, and he had several siblings.</p>
<p>He is best known as the Hittite ruler who fought Ramesses II to a standstill at the Battle of Kadesh around 1274 BC. Aside from the battle with Egypt, he is best known for relocating the Hittite capital to Tarhuntassa and appointing his brother Hattusili as governor in Hattusa.
<p>A copy of a treaty has been recovered between him and Alaksandu, ruler of Wilusa (Troy), one of the Arzawa lands.</p>
<p>Egyptologists suspect that some time prior to Ramesses II's accession to the Egyptian throne, Muwattalli had reached an informal peace treaty or understanding with Seti I over Kadesh to avoid a clash between the two powers over control of Syria. In it, Seti effectively ceded Kadesh to the Hittite king in order to focus on domestic issues in Egypt.
<p>Muwatalli had a wife named Tanu-Ḫepa and at least two children. One was Urhi-Teshup, who became king as Mursili III until his uncle Hattusili III deposed him. Another was Kurunta who became the vassal ruler of Tarhuntassa during the reign of Hattusili III. Another person named Ulmi-Teshup is suggested to be a third son of Muwatalli II but it is quite likely that Ulmi-Teshup and Kurunta are the same person.
<p>Tudhaliya IV and Egyptian Queen Maathorneferure were the nephew and niece of Muwatalli.</p>
<p>Muwatalli's namesake, Muwatalli I, was a pre-Empire king of the early 14th century, the predecessor of Tudhaliya I.</p>


[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]