== Notes for [[Item:Q111730|Q111730]] ==

'''Vital Statistics'''

Three children with Abd Allah ibn Muhammad, Emir of Cordoba: Muhammad ibn Abd Allah who was murdered (and was the father of Abd ar-Rahman III) and two daughters. See below. Internet genealogies give her another son, Zayd. A reliable source is needed for this son.

Onneca Fortúnez or Iñiga Fortúnez[1][2] (c. 848 – after 890)[3] was a Basque[4] princess from the Kingdom of Pamplona, later known as the Kingdom of Navarre. She was the daughter of Fortún Garcés of Pamplona and his wife Oria. At the time of Onneca's birth, which occurred between 848 and 850, the Iberian Peninsula was largely under the domination of the Muslim Umayyad dynasty. Only the northern kingdoms of Asturias and Pamplona remained under Christian rule, perpetuating the Hispano-Roman Visigothic traditions. Onneca was a member of the Íñiguez dynasty, named after her great-grandfather Íñigo Arista, who founded the Kingdom of Pamplona.[5]

'''Information about Onneca's life is sketchy.''' Biographical details about her come from two main sources: the Roda Codex and the accounts of Muslim Andalusian historians, who refer to Onneca by the Arabic name Durr (در), meaning "pearl". Onneca is primarily known for marrying into the Umayyad dynasty. Although matrimonial unions between Christian slave-concubines and Muslim rulers were common, Onneca's case is one of the few examples of a Christian princess marrying into Muslim royalty.[1] Her marriage created family ties between the Christian and Muslim ruling families of the Iberian peninsula, initially leading to close collaboration between the Christian House of Íñiguez and the Muslim Umayyads.[6] The political effects resulting from Onneca's marriages continued to be felt long after her death, which occurred at an unknown date.

... Onneca was presumably still a teenager when she bore Abdullah a son named Muhammad in 864.[3] As Abdullah's wife, Onneca became known as Durr.[8] According to some sources, she converted to Islam.[9][10]

In addition to Muhammad, Onneca bore Abdullah two daughters: al-Baha' and Fatima the Younger.[11]

Fortún Garcés of Pamplona

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Oneca Fortúnez married firstly Abdallah ibn Mohammed, Emir of Córdoba, and secondly her cousin Aznar Sánchez of Larraun, grandson of king García Íñiguez, becoming the mother of the future queens Toda Aznárez, wife of Sancho Garcés, and Sancha Aznárez, wife of king Jimena Garcés.

--------------------

Toda of Navarre

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Toda Aznárez, also Teuda de Larraun or Tota was the daughter of Aznar Sánchez, lord of Larraun, paternal grandson of king García Íñiguez of Pamplona, while her mother Oneca Fortúnez was a daughter of king Fortún Garcés.

Toda and Sancha were also aunts of Caliph Abd-ar-Rahman III, through their mother's first marriage to ‘Abdullah ibn Muhammad.

--------------------
García Íñiguez of Pamplona

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

García Íñiguez had following children:

Fortún Garcés, the future king.

Sancho Garcés, whose only known child, Aznar Sánchez, married a daughter of king Fortún Garcés and by her had queens Toda Aznárez, wife of king Sancho Garcés I, and Sancha Aznárez, wife of king Jimeno Garcés.

Onneca Garcés, wife of Aznar Galíndez II.

Velasquita Garcés, married to Mutarrīf ibn Mūsā ibn Qasi, Wali of Huesca, son of Mūsā ibn Mūsā.

(perhaps) Jimena, wife of Alfonso III of León (assignment of her parentage based on political, chronological and onomastic arguments).

Infanta de Navarra

Na wikipédia (pt), Diogo Fernandes se casa antes de 924 com Onega Lucides, filha de Lucídio Vimaranes (873 -?) filho de Vímara Peres (c. 868-873)
A descendência está de acordo com o citado nesta árvore.

Infanta de Pamplona

Infanta de Navarra

SOURCE NOTES:
www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal11122

Source for the Belascotones, Galindo and Galindez dysnasties:
Collins, Roger, The Basques. Blackwell Publishing, London 1990
Codex de Roda.

No GeneAll, uma geração parece ter sido pulada, e Onega Garcês ou Fortunez é colocada como filha de
Padre: Garcia Iñiguez, rey de Pamplona * c. 0810 - Madre: Urraca Sanchez de Gascoña * c. 0820
E o outro casamento de Oneca, além de com Aznar, é com Diego Fernandez e não com Addallah ibn Muhammed. A referencia citada são as Actas do 17º Congresso Internacional de Ciências Genealógica e Heráldica pg 317-Tab. IV. Buscar por mais referencias a ela e a Aznar para elucidar esse problema na árvore. Havia uma outra entrada para ela, respeitando o que está no GeneAll, mas foi retirda.

Infanta de Pamplona

Name Suffix:<NSFX> Of Pamplona

#Générale##Générale#de Pampelune
s:Auréjac

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]