== Notes for [[Item:Q112788|Q112788]] ==

http://fabpedigree.com/s003/f328400.htm

The PEDIGREE of Sancha Viegas de BAIAO

HM George I's 18-Great Grandmother. HRE Ferdinand I's 12-Great Grandmother. U.S. President [WASHINGTON]'s 20-Great Grandmother. PM Churchill's 24-Great Grandmother. HM Margrethe II's 24-Great Grandmother. Boris Johnson's 26-Great Grandmother. `Osawatomie' Brown's 22-Great Grandmother.
poss. Husbands/Partners: Mem Fernandes (ANTAS ?) de BRAGANCA ; Mem Fernandes ANTAS [alt ped]
Children: Urraca MENDES (de BRAGANCA) ; Nuno Mendez de BRAGANCA ; Fernando Mendes (Senhor) de BRAGANCA ________ ________ _______ _______ _______ _______ _______ _______ _______ _______ _____ _____ _____ / -- Ero FERNANDEZ (Count) of LUGO + ==&=> [ 255 ,g,Y,&] / -- Gondesendo Eriz (Count) of LUGO | \ -- Adosinda (Ausenda) ROMANEZ + ====> [ 255 ,,xY,&] / | OR: Adosinda ROMANEZ [alt ped] + ==&=> [ 255 ,G,&] / -- Soeiro Gondesendes (Conde) de LUGO / \ -- Inderquina Mendes Pala of COIMBRA + ==&=> [ 255 ,,xY,&] / -- Gondesendo Soares (Conde) de LUGO | \ | or: poss. (NN), a German nobele | | | or: poss. Gondesendo Eriz, q.v. (Gondesendo's grandfather) / \ -- Goldegodo / -- Arualdo Gondesendes (Count) of LUGO [alt ped] / | OR: prob. Arualdo Gondesendes de BAIAO + ==&=> [ 255 ,gc,Y,&] / -- Gondesendo Arualdes (2nd Sn.) de BAIAO | \ / -- Gozoindo | \ -- Uso / \ -- Mona de los GODOS / -- Egas Gondesendes (Senor) de BAIAO | \ / -- Ermigio Lovesendes ABUNAZAR de LEON + ==&=> [ 255 ,ag,MD,&] | | / -- Egas `o Bravo' ERMIGUES | | | \ | OR: Egas HERMIGUES + ==&=> [ 255 ,ag,MD,&] || | \ -- Dordia OSOREZ + ==&=> [ 255 ,AgC,tmQD,&] | | / | OR: Vivili TURTESENDES + ====> [ 3] | \ -- Usco VIEGAS | \ / -- prob. Ero Arnaldez de BAIAO + ==&=> [ 255 ,gc,Y,&] | \ -- Gotinha ERIZ (ERIS; ERIX) (1015?? - ?) | \ / -- Gondesendo Eriz (Count) of LUGO + ==&=> [ 255 ,g,Y,&] | \ -- prob. Uzenda (ERIS) | \ | OR: prob. not Adosinda (Ausenda) ROMANEZ + ====> [ 255 ,,xY,&] / \ -- Inderquina Mendes Pala of COIMBRA + ==&=> [ 255 ,,xY,&] - Sancha Viegas de BAIAO \ / -- Nuno \ -- Gotinha Nunes \ | or: poss. Usco VIEGAS, q.v. \ -- Andozinda

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]