== Notes for [[Item:Q105382|Q105382]] ==

44. BEATRIZ4 DE MORALES-LEIVA (RODRIGO3 DE MORALES-TREVINO, JUANA2 DE TREVINO-QUINTANILLA-Y-SALAZAR, PEDRO1 DE SALAZAR)
*was born in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico, and
*died in Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.
*She married CAPTAIN ANDRES GUERRA-CANAMAR-DE-LA-GARZA,
**son of IGNACIO GUERRA-CANAMAR-FERNANDEZ and MARIA DE-LA-GARZA. He was born 11 Dec 1675 in Sagrario Metropolitano, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon,Mexico, and
**died Aft. 07 Apr 1745 in Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.
***Notes for CAPTAIN ANDRES GUERRA-CANAMAR-DE-LA-GARZA: On April 7,in 1745, he signed is last will and testement. Source:Testamentos Coloniales de Monterrey, by Lilia E. Villanueva de Cavazos. Page 133.

Children of BEATRIZ DE MORALES-LEIVA and ANDRES GUERRA-CANAMAR-DE-LA-GARZA are:
*1. i. ANTONIO5 GUERRA-CANAMAR,
**m. (1) ISABEL BOTELLO-DE-MORALES, 25 Apr 1722, Sagrario Metropolitano, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico;
**m. (2) MARIA-INEZ DE-LA-GARZA-VALDEZ, 03 Aug 1744, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico;
***b. 11 Jul 1714, Sagrario Metropolitano, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.
*2. ii. GERONIMA-CLARA GUERRA-CANAMAR-MORALES,
**b. 26 Oct 1701, Sagrario Metropolitano, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico;
**m. JOSEPH-FRANCISCO DE-LA-GARZA-PEREZ, 12 Aug 1731, Sagrario Metro, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico;
***b. Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.
****Marriage Notes for GERONIMA-CLARA GUERRA-CANAMAR-MORALES and JOSEPH-FRANCISCO DE-LA-GARZA-PEREZ: Marriage source:Index to the Marriage Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara by Raul J. Guerra, Jr., Nadine M. Vasquez, Valdomero Vela, Jr. Page 292.
*3. iii. MARIA-FLORENCIA GUERRA-CANAMAR,
**b. 16 Mar 1702/03, Sagrario Metropolitano, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
***Notes for MARIA-FLORENCIA GUERRA-CANAMAR: She lived for five months.

http://www.somosprimos.com/inclan/salazar.htm

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000014432966597

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]