== Notes for [[Item:Q88319|Q88319]] ==

Född i Babylonien
--------------------
•ID: I62228 •Name: Parysatis of Babylon •Given Name: Parysatis •Surname: of Babylon •Sex: F •_UID: 0E9376929D2E184CB8C65B320A5FB7CACD10 •Change Date: 26 Nov 2005 •Death: Y

Father: Artaxerxes I of Persia Mother: Andia of Babylon

Marriage 1 Darius II of Persia •Married: Children 1. Artaxerxes II of Persia 2. Cyrus of Persia http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp%2Dfam&id=I62228
--------------------
Death Notes

Birth: 432 B.C.

Death: 395 B.C.

General Notes

Parysatis (?) ordered the execution of, by gruesome torture, all the men involved in the death of her son Cyrus 0403 B.C..2 She married King of Persia and Egypt Darius II Nothus Achaemenid, son of King of Persia and Egypt Artaxerxes I Longimanus Achaemenid and Cosmartidene , a concubine of Artaxerxes I, 0454 B.C; Half-siblings.3,2 She was the daughter of King of Persia and Egypt Artaxerxes I Longimanus Achaemenid.3,2 She was born 0470 B.C. In circa. She married Hydranes III of Armenia , son of Hydranes II of Armenia .4 Sources: 1. Stuart, R.W. 'Royalty for Commoners', line 414. ; 2. Gershevitch, I. (ed.) 'The Cambridge History of Iran' Vo. 2, pp.349.

Children of Parysatis (?) and King of Persia and Egypt Darius II Nothus Achaemenid:

Satrap of Lydia Cyrus "the Younger" Achaemenid b. 0424 B.C., d. 0403 B.C.

King of Persia and Egypt Artaxerxes II Mnemon Achaemenid+ b. 0453 B.C., d. 0359 B.C.

[S1324] Xenophon, Anabasis Kyrou ("Upcountry March", or "The Expedition of Cyrus") (.: Globusz Publishing, Copyright © 2002), Book I, Chapter I. Hereinafter cited as Xenophon's Anabasis.

[S931] A.H. Clough, editor, Plutarch's Lives (Champaign, IL: Project Gutenberg, October 1996). Hereinafter cited as Plutarch's Lives.

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, Royalty for Commoners: The Complete Lineage of John of Gaunt, Son of Edward III, Kings of England, and Queen Philippa (.: ., 3rd Ed., 1998), 414-85. Hereinafter cited as RfC.

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 414-84.

RESEARCH NOTES:
Queen of Persia from 424 BCE

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per00529.htm#0

GIFT MED BROREN

Parysatis
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.

Parysatis was the illegitimate daughter of Artaxerxes I, Emperor of Persia and Andia of Babylon. She was the half-sister of Xerxes II, Sogdianus and Darius II. She married her half-brother Darius and had two sons, Artaxerxes III and Cyrus the Younger. When her husband died, she supported her younger son Cyrus. When Cyrus was defeated in the Battle of Cunaxa she blamed the starpt Tissapharnes for the death of her son. She later had Tissapharnes assassainated.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]