== Notes for [[Item:Q117877|Q117877]] ==

=Teresa Vazquez De_Acuna=

* Daughter of Vasco Martins da Cunha, "o Seco", 5º senhor de Tábua and Senhorinha Fernandes de Chacim
* Birth: circa 1285, in Tábua, Coimbra, Portugal
* In 1345, She was the noble, mistress of Pedro I.
* [http://www.thepeerage.com/p21205.htm#i212044 '''The Peerage''']
* [https://our-royal-titled-noble-and-commoner-ancestors.com/p888.htm#i26668 '''Our Royal, Titled, Noble, and Commoner Ancestors & Cousins''']

=Married=

* Married: '''Fernan Gomez De_Toledo''' in 1307 in Toledo, New Castile, Spain. Son of Gómez Pérez de Toledo Palomeque, Alcalde de los Donceles and Orabuena Gutiérrez

=Children=

* 1 '''Gomez Perez De Vazquez;'''

* 2 '''Constanza De Toledo Vazquez;'''

* 3 '''Juana De Toledo Vazquez;'''

* 4 '''Vasco De Toledo Vazquez;'''

* 5 '''Martin De Toledo Vazquez;'''

* 6 '''Pedro Suarez De Vazquez;'''

* 7 '''Gutierre Fernandez Vazque;'''

==[http://dbe.rah.es/biografias/62710/teresa-vazquez-de-acuna Teresa Vazquez de Acuña]

Vázquez de Acuña, Teresa . Portugal, fs XIII - Toledo, 1345. Noble, mistress of Pedro I.

Portuguese lady, daughter of Vasco Martínez de Acuña, Lord of Taboa and of Señorina Fernández Chanciño, widow, in the first nuptials, of Rui González de Portocarrero.

She spent her childhood in the neighboring country, being promptly '''married to Fernán Gómez de Toledo,''' Fernando IV's senior waiter and senior notary of the Kingdom of Toledo. With him she moved, before 1298, to live in Toledo, to the manor houses that her husband owned in the parish of San Antolín and which were rehabilitated and expanded by marriage thanks to a considerable donation in cash from the King himself.

During her marriage, she led a life appropriate to her status as a lady of the Toledo high aristocracy, taking care of her family, since she had seven children, but also of property and community assets, due to the continuous absences of her husband in the service of the King, whom he served as a private advisor and ambassador, in addition to performing his courtly offices.

Her husband died in 1331, leaving her in a still young widowhood. His character and training did not go unnoticed at the Court, where the Toledan Martín Fernández de Toledo, Lord of Orgaz, had been appointed, in 1334, tutor of the newborn Infante Pedro, first-born of Alfonso XI, and where they were, as vassals of the King, his eldest sons, who already enjoyed very high status, as evidenced by the fact that they were armed knights of the Order of the Royal Band of Castile in 1332. All this influenced her to be appointed by Alfonso XI as mistress of the Infante Pedro, a position that it occupied until his death, which occurred before the future King's coming of age. Thanks to his ancestry in the Infant's Court, his children and grandchildren were occupying privileged positions, to the point that, in 1350, with an adolescent King of legal age, his son Gutierre Fernández de Toledo was appointed the King's chief guard, and Pedro Suárez Vázquez, chief waiter, while his grandson, Pedro Suárez de Toledo, was chief pastry chef, and Diego Gómez, chief lieutenant. Family power also influenced the arrival of another of his sons, Vasco Fernández de Toledo, to the archdiocese of Toledo.

She led an aristocratic life thanks to the community properties that she had acquired with her husband, which were joined by acquisitions of urban estates and commercial exploitations such as the iron and coal inn, the Calahorra inn, where bread was sold, and other stores in the Alcaicería de Toledo.

His services were even posthumously compensated, in the privileges granted to his descendants by Pedro I.

Although she had to move her residence from Toledo, since her ancestral homes were donated to her eldest son by her husband, when he died she wanted to be buried in the parish of San Antolín, where they were, in the funeral chapel where her husband rested.

Sources and Bibl .: National Historical Archive, Clergy , folders 2978 and 3071, docs. 1 and 10, respectively; Royal Academy of History, Salazar y Castro Collection , C-6, fols. 100-101; C-7, fol. 48; O-6, fol. 92 and M-20, fol. 224.

L. Salazar y Castro, Index of the Glories of the House of Farnese , vol. II, Madrid, Francisco del Hierro, 1716, pp. 588 and 593 (ed. Facs., Ollobarrem (Navarra), Wilsen, 1997); P. López de Ayala, Chronicles of the Kings of Castilla D. Pedro, D. Enrique II, D. Juan I, D. Enrique III , amendments by G. Zurita and corr. and notes by E. Llaguno Amirola, Madrid, Imp. de Don Antonio de Sancha, 1779, year XI, ch. XVII; J. Porres Martín-Cleto, History of the streets of Toledo , vol. III, Toledo, Zocodover, 1982, pp. 1670-1672; P. Molenat, Campagnes et Monts de Tolède du XIIe au XV siècle , Madrid, Casa de Velázquez, 1997, p. 164; B. Martínez Cabiró, "Doña Inés de Ayala", in Toletum ,Bulletin of the Royal Academy of Fine Arts and Historical Sciences of Toledo (2002), pp. 112-113.

Pilar Morollón Hernández

=Family=

Teresa Vasques da Cunha father, Martin Valdez was the son of Vasco Lourenço Da Cunha (1210 -?), 2nd Lord of Morgado de Tábua And d. Teresa Pires portel (c. 1210 – 1291) daughter Of D. Pedro Pires De Portel Or d. Pedro Pires Fernandes De Portel or still d. Pedro Pires de Portugal and D. Froile Rodrigues de Pereira.

* Married '''Joana Rodrigues de Nomamas;''' (1240 -?) Daughter of D. Rodrigo Martins de Nomamas and Beatriz Anes Redondo, of whom they had:

* Mahan Malek (1260 -?), 5th Lord Of the Morgado de Tábua Married To Signorinha Fernandes De Chacim, Daughter Of Ferno Gonçalves Chancino;
* Rui Martins De Nomamas [3] (1305-?) Married to Signorinha Rodrigues de Bifardel or Signorinha Portocarreiro Bifardel, daughter of Rui Gonçalves bifardel[4]

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]