== Notes for [[Item:Q111429|Q111429]] ==

===Vermudo I “el Diácono” de Asturias
* Born: Abt 750
* Died: 797
* Father: Fruela DE ASTURIAS (Est 710-Abt 765)
* Mother: unknown
* Spouse: (Adosinda/Imilo)

Children:
# Ramíro I DE ASTURIAS+
# Cristina DE ASTURIAS
# García DE ASTURIAS



----

Bermudo I d'Asturies [1]

[* c.750 - † c.797]

Hijo de Fruela Pérez (hermano de Alfonso I 'el católico'), nieto del duque Pedro de Cantabria y hermano del rey Aurelio, Bermudo I, llamado 'el diácono' por su condición anterior a su entronamiento, fue rey de Asturias entre 788 o 789 y 791.

Sucesor de Mauregato tras la muerte de éste, hacia 788. Es electo rey en perjuicio del hijo de su primo Fruela I, el futuro Alfonso II 'el casto' (quien fuera depuesto por su predecesor), traspasando las leyes góticas que inhabilitaban el poder real a quienes hubieran recibido la tonsura eclesiástica, esto, ya que Bermudo profesaba en órdenes religiosas en ese momento.

Durante su reinado, Hisham I efectuó dos aceifas contra los cristianos que devastaron la región. La primera remontó el río Ebro y se adentró en Álava y al-Ailá, devastando la zona. La segunda saqueó el interior de Galicia. Cuando este último ejército volvía hacia Córdoba, Bermudo I trató de cortarle el paso cerca de Villafranca del Bierzo, a orillas del río Burbia (791), pero fue derrotado espantosamente. Ante esta situación decidió abdicar en favor se su pariente Alfonso II.

Regresa a su estado clerical, viviendo como diácono en el palacio real de Oviedo hasta su muerte, la que sucede en una fecha cercana o posterior al año 797. Pasó a la historia como un rey generoso, magnánimo e ilustrado.

MATRIMONIO Y DESCENDIENTES

Se dice que aún siendo diácono casó con Ozenda Nunilona [3], de quien se separa en 791 para retomar su vida religiosa. Con ella tuvo cuatro hijos:

1. Ramiro, futuro Rey asturiano;

2. García;

3. Cristina; y

4. Thisiena.

---

NOTAS

[1] Basada en el artículo de 'Wikipedia, la enciclopedia libre', editada y ampliada.

[2] Existen versiones que hacen a Bermudo I 'el diácono', de Asturias, hijo de Vimarano, infante del reino de Asturias, a su vez segundo hijo de Alfonso I 'el católico' de Asturias. Vimarano habría sido asesinado por su hermano Fruela, porque le estaba ganando las simpatías de muchos y podría impedirle su propia ascensión al trono. Quizás como forma de reparar el daño, Fruela habría tomado a Bermudo y lo hace criar "como un hijo". Esta versión es tomada como 'legendaria'. Estudios contemporáneos afirman que la hipótesis presentada en la biografía aquí tratada es más verosímil.

[3] Mayormente conocida como <Numila>, aparece en las crónicas de Rodrigo de Toledo y de Lucas de Tuy como <Imilo> o <Nunilo>. Para efectos de esta biografía, se utiliza el nombre que aparece en su epitafio, donde es nombrada como Ozenda (Ursinda). Era hija de Flavio Ataúlfo, magnate gallego nieto del rey godo Witiza.

--------------------

--------------------

http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bermudo_I

Bermudo I (o Vermudo I) de Asturias, llamado el Diácono, fue rey de Asturias del 789 al 791. Era hijo de Fruela Pérez (un hermano de Alfonso I el Católico), nieto del duque Pedro de Cantabria y hermano del rey Aurelio.

Durante su reinado el reino sufrió incursiones musulmanas en Álava y Galicia. Tras ser derrotado varias veces por tropas andalusíes de Hisham I en la batalla del río Burbia, en El Bierzo, abdicó y regresó a su antiguo estado clerical (791). Murió en una fecha cercana o posterior al año 797.

Se casó con Numila, quien en las crónicas de Rodrigo de Toledo y Lucas de Tuy es llamada Imilo o Nunilo, pero que en su epitafio es nombrada Ozenda (Ursinda). Era hija de Flavio Ataúlfo, magnate gallego nieto del rey godo Witiza. Su hijo fue Ramiro. Éste, más adelante, obtendría también la corona (842) tras el reinado anterior de Alfonso II, que fue quien sucedió a Bermudo I.

Pasó a la historia como un rey generoso, magnánimo e ilustrado.

--------------------

Bermudo I (also Vermudo or Veremund) was the king of Asturias from 788 or 789 to 791. His nickname, the Deacon, was supposedly given because of his having been a deacon before becoming king. He was a son of Fruela, brother of King Alfonso I, and brother of King Aurelius.

The rest of his reign saw Moorish raids into Álava and Galicia. He was defeated badly at Bierzo and abdicated the throne in 791, returning to his frock. Nevertheless, he was considered a generous and illustrious man in his time.

--------------------

Rey de Asturias, 789-791. Durante su reinado el reino sufrió incursiones musulmanas en Álava y Galicia. Tras ser derrotado varias veces por tropas andalusíes de Hisham I en El Bierzo, abdicó y regresó a su antiguo estado clerical (791). Pasó a la historia como un rey generoso, magnánimo e ilustrado.

FUENTES:

-http://www.abcgenealogia.com/Godos00.html

-http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bermudo_I_de_Asturias
--------------------
Bermudo I (also Vermudo or Veremund), called the Deacon or the Monk, was the King of Asturias from 788 or 789 until his abdication in 791. He was a son of Fruela, brother of Alfonso I, and a brother of Aurelius. The nature of the end of his reign ushered in a new period in Asturian-Arab relations.

Bermudo was elected by the palatine officials (the nobility of the royal palace) to replace Mauregatus, who had died of natural causes in 788. Since Mauregatus had ascended the throne in a coup d'état with regional support in 783 and the succession of Bermudo proceeded without incident, it is probable that Mauregatus had procured a change in the ranks of the palatine nobility and that Bermudo was thus put forward as the candidate to, like Mauregatus, prevent the succession of Alfonso II, the son and heir of Fruela I. Though the Chronicle of Alfonso III in both its extant versions makes Bermudo out to be a deacon at his succession, this fact would only reinforce the notion that his election was a determined move to oppose Alfonso.

In any case, he did not reign long. He was forced to defend against an Arab-Berber invasion of Álava and Galicia and was defeated in battle in Burbia, probably the Bierzo, in 791. Though the closest Christian sources do not name his opponents, the battle can be linked with the first major engagement of a series of aggressive campaigns launched against the Asturian kingdom in the 790s. The Muslim commander at Burbia is named in Ibn al-Athir as Yūsuf ibn Bukht and the battle is likewise recorded in al-Maqqarī. Bermudo abdicated his throne after his defeat, though whether volitionally (as the Chronicle of Alfonso III states, "because he was [or remembered he was] a deacon") or forced is unknown. Historically in Spain under the Visigoths, a king of proven military inadequacy was often forced to abdicate. Nevertheless, he was considered a generous and illustrious man in his time, "merciful and pious" in the words of the Chronicle of Albelda.

Bermudo was succeeded by Alfonso II and he left behind a son, who later reigned as Ramiro I, by an anonymous wife. He reportedly lived for a long time after his abdication, perhaps as a monk, and on good terms with his successor.
--------------------
Ramiro I (c.790–850) became King of Asturias in 842 and reigned until his death. Son of Bermudo I, he succeeded Alfonso II.

First, he had to deal with the usurper Nepocian, defeating him at the Battle of the Bridge of Cornellana, by the river Narcea. Ramiro then removed the system of election which allowed his family to be displaced by a faction of nobles.

During his turbulent reign, the chronicles relate that he had to fend off attacks from both the Moors and the Vikings. Supposedly, he defeated the former in the legendary Battle of Clavijo. At this battle, Saint James the Greater, the Moor-Slayer, appeared above a white horse, giving rise to his cult in Spain.

In 846, the Christian population of León fled before a Moorish attack, and it was not reoccupied until 856, under Ordono I.

The art and architecture of his reign forms the Ramirense phase of Asturian art. His court was the centre of great splendour, of which the palace and church of Santa María del Naranco and San Miguel de Lillo are testimony.

Ramiro died at Liño and was succeeded by his son, the aforementioned Ordoño.
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bermudo_I_of_Asturias
--------------------
Bermudo I of Asturias

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Bermudo I (also Vermudo or Veremund) was the king of Asturias from 788 or 789 to 791. His nickname, the Deacon, was supposedly given because of his having been a deacon before becoming king. He was a son of Fruela, brother of King Alfonso I, and brother of King Aurelius.

The rest of his reign saw Moorish raids into Álava and Galicia. He was defeated badly at Bierzo and abdicated the throne in 791, returning to his frock. Nevertheless, he was considered a generous and illustrious man in his time.
--------------------
Bermudo I (also Vermudo or Veremund) was the king of Asturias from 788 or 789 to 791. His nickname, the Deacon, was supposedly given because of his having been a deacon before becoming king. He was a son of Fruela, brother of King Alfonso I, and brother of King Aurelius.

The rest of his reign saw Moorish raids into Álava and Galicia. He was defeated badly at Bierzo and abdicated the throne in 791, returning to his frock. Nevertheless, he was considered a generous and illustrious man in his time.
--------------------
8º REI DAS ASTÚRIAS, Espanha
--------------------
Froila das Asturias (? - c. 842) (Ger. 37)

> - Bermudo das Asturias

Bermudo das Asturias casou com Nunilo de Coimbra (c. 777 - ?) (Ger. 36)

> - Ramiro I de Leão, rei das Asturias (c. 791 - 850)

in: Reino de Leão e das Astúrias <http://familiamelobanha.no.sapo.pt/Reino%20de%20Leao%20e%20das%20Asturias.htm>

______________________________________________________________________________

=Bermudo, príncipe de Leon=

* c. 0750 + 0842

==Padres==

>Padre: Froila de Leon * c. 0760

>Madre: N

==Matrimonios==

>c. 0790
>Ursinda Muniadona de Coimbra * c. 0750

==Hijos==

* Ramiro I, rey de León * c. 0770 Paterna de Castilla
* Garcia, rey de Asturias
* Cristina de Asturias
* Tisiena Duquesa de Suevia

==Titulos y Señorios==

* Infantes de León

''in: GeneAll.pt <http://www.geneall.net/H/per_page.php?id=8176>''

______________________________________________________________________________

'''Bermudo I ou Vermudo das Asturias ou Veremund''' (? - 797) foi Rei das Astúrias de 788 a 791. A sua alcunha, o Diácono, deve-se ao facto de ser diácono antes e depois de ter subido ao trono.

Durante o seu reinado de três anos sofreu varios ataques muçulmanos em Álava e na Galiza. Após uma dura derrota causada pelas tropas atacantes que provinham das hostes andaluezes de Hisham I al-Ándalus em Bierzo, abdicou do trono, regressando ao seu antigo estado clerical em 791.

É considerado pelos autores como um rei generoso, magnânimo e iluminado, para a época.

Foi filho de Fruela da Cantábria (725 - 768) e de Munia Lopez 730 -?), filha de Froila Petri de Leão e duque da Cantábria (700 - 757). Foi casado com Numila, que nas crónicas de Rodrigo de Toledo e de Lucas de Tui é chamada Imilo e de Nunilo. No seu epitáfio é nomeada como Ozenda (Ursinda), filha de Flavio Ataúlfo, Rico homem da Galiza, neto de do rei dos godos Witiza, de quem teve:

# Ramiro I das Astúrias (790 - 850) casado com Urraca Paterna de Castela filha de Diego Rodríguez Conde de Castela
. ''in: Wikipédia, a enciclopédia livre <http://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bermudo_I_das_Ast%C3%BArias>''

______________________________________________________________________________

Veja também:
* ANTECEDENTES HISTÓRICOS. Raízes <http://www.barbosa.acthus.com/antecedentes.html>
--------------------
Fue elegido rey por los nobles para reemplazar en el trono al rey Mauregato de Asturias. Durante su reinado el reino sufrió incursiones musulmanas en Álava y Galicia. Tras ser derrotado varias veces por tropas andalusíes de Hisham I en la batalla del río Burbia, en El Bierzo, abdicó y regresó a su antiguo estado clerical, en el año 791. Tras su abdicación vivió en la corte de su sucesor, Alfonso II el Casto

Falleció en el año 797, y pasó a la historia como un rey generoso, magnánimo e ilustrado.

Mi numero 28 bisabuelito, nuestra fantastica historia continua.
Amalia Maria Rafaela Urioste Prudencio de Murillo G.

--------------------
Bermudo “el Diácono” sucedió a Mauregato. Reinó de 789 a 791. Pese a tener un hijo, promovió el regreso al trono del exiliado Alfonso, “Bermudo I reinó tres años, a lo largo de los cuales fue clemente y piadoso. Durante su reinado tuvo lugar una batalla en Burbia. Abdicó después voluntariamente
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bermudo_I_of_Asturias

----


----
===[http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/ASTURIAS,%20LEON.htm#PedroDuqueCantabria Project MedLands, ASTURIAS LEON]

VERMUDO, son of FRUELA & his wife --- ([750]-797, bur Oviedo[143]). The Sebastiani Chronicon records that "Veremundus, subrinus Adefonsi majoris, filius…Froilani fratris sui" succeeded as king on the death of "Maurecato"[144]. The Chronicle of Alfonso III records that "Vermudo the son of Fruela" was elected king after the death of Mauregato, and ruled for three years when "he voluntarily gave up his rule because he was a deacon" and installed "his nephew Alfonso as his successor and lived with him most lovingly for many years" before dying "a natural death…in the era 829 (791)"[145], although this date appears to refer to Vermudo's abdication not his death. He was elected in 788 to succeed King Maugerato as VERMUDO I “el Diácono” King of Asturias. With the accession in 788 of Hisham I Emir of Córdoba, who according to Arab sources was "passionate about the holy war", Muslim attacks on the Christians intensified. The Emir sent two armies into battle in 791[146]. King Vermudo was defeated by the Muslims on the banks of the River Burbia[147] and abdicated in 791 in favour of Alfonso II, becoming a deacon. The Sebastiani Chronicon records that "Veremundus" was deposed and became a deacon, and that "filiis parvulis Ranimiro et Garcia" were also expelled[148].

m [OZENDA [Adosinda/Imilo], daughter of --- (-[bur Oviedo]). Confusion exists about King Vermudo´s wife, who is named only in later sources. Flórez cites the epitaph of the monastery of San Juan de Corias which records the transfer of the remains of "Ozenda" with her husband Vermudo from Ciella to Corias, suggesting that "Ozenda" was an abbreviated form of "Adosinda"[149]. Barrau-Dihigo points out that the inscription is from a later date, if not falsified[150]. Lucas de Tuy names "Nunilo Regina Oueti" as wife of King Vermudo I and mother of his two sons "Ramiro et Garsia", when recording that she was buried with her husband[151]. The name “Nunilo...Oueti” suggests confusion with the wife of King Fruela I, who is named in the Sebastiani Chronicon "Munia Oveti" (see above)[152]. The 13th century work by Rodrigo de Toledo names the wife of King Vermudo as "Imilo" when referring to her burial with her husband at Oviedo[153].]

King Vermudo I & his wife had [three] children:
*1. RAMIRO ([790]-1 Feb 850, bur Oviedo). The Sebastiani Chronicon records that "Veremundus" was deposed and became a deacon, and that "filiis parvulis Ranimiro et Garcia" were also expelled[154].
*2. [CRISTINA . She is named in the inscription of San Juan de Corias which names her supposed parents, although as noted above Barrau-Dihigo points out that this is from a later date, if not falsified[183].]
*3. GARCÍA (-after [842/44]). The Sebastiani Chronicon records that "Veremundus" was deposed and became a deacon, and that "filiis parvulis Ranimiro et Garcia" were also expelled[184]. “Ranemirus Rex et…coniuncta Urraca Regina et filio nostro Rege Ordonio et fratre meo Rege Garsia” donated property to the church of Santiago by charter “VIII Kal Jun” dated to 844[185]. Barrau-Dihigo dismisses as fictive this alleged son García[186], presumably because he considers that this charter is spurious.

The kingdoms of Leon and Asturias was ruled by Bermudo I from 788 to 791, who was called the Deacon.

Rey de Asturias (789-791)
Hermano de Aurelio, sobrino de Alfonso I. Todavía esta vez fue desestimado el hijo de Fruela, traspasando los nobles las leyes góticas que inhabilitaban el poder real a quienes hubieran recibido la tonsura eclesiástica, de ahí su sobrenombre. Era Bermudo hombre generoso y magnánimo, a la vez que ilustrado. Conocedor de las cualidades de Alfonso, el hijo de Fruela, le trajo a la corte para ponerle al frente de los ejércitos y ser su protector. Durante su reinado, Hisham I efectuó dos aceifas contra los cristianos, que devastaron la región y le derrotaron a orillas del río Burbia (791). Tras el fracaso abdicó en favor de su sobrino Alfonso II.

(Þ ? -  797) Rey de Asturias (789-791). Hermano de Aurelio, sobrino de Alfonso I. Todavía esta vez fue desestimado el hijo de Fruela, traspasando los nobles las leyes góticas que inhabilitaban el poder real a quienes hubieran recibido la tonsura eclesiástica, de ahí su sobrenombre. Era Bermudo hombre generoso y magnánimo, a la vez que ilustrado. Conocedor de las cualidades de Alfonso, el hijo de Fruela, le trajo a la corte para ponerle al frente de los ejércitos y ser su protector. Durante su reinado, Hisham I efectuó dos aceifas contra los cristianos, que devastaron la región y le derrotaron a orillas del río Burbia (791). Tras el fracaso abdicó en favor de su sobrino Alfonso II.

Rey de Asturias (789-791)
Hermano de Aurelio, sobrino de Alfonso I. Todavía esta vez fue desestimado el hijo de Fruela, traspasando los nobles las leyes góticas que inhabilitaban el poder real a quienes hubieran recibido la tonsura eclesiástica, de ahí su sobrenombre. Era Bermudo hombre generoso y magnánimo, a la vez que ilustrado. Conocedor de las cualidades de Alfonso, el hijo de Fruela, le trajo a la corte para ponerle al frente de los ejércitos y ser su protector. Durante su reinado, Hisham I efectuó dos aceifas contra los cristianos, que devastaron la región y le derrotaron a orillas del río Burbia (791). Tras el fracaso abdicó en favor de su sobrino Alfonso II.

RESEARCH NOTES:
Deacon of Asturias, King of Asturias (788 - ?). Abdicated.

Also known as Vermundo, and Vernaranis, Killed by Fruela The Cruel.
1: Collins, Roger. Visigothic Spain, 409-711.
Blackwell publishing 2004.
2: King, P.D., King Chindasuinth and the first territorial law code of the Visigothic kingdon.
Edward James-Oxford-Clarendon Press 1980, PP. 131-157.

He ruled from 788 to 791.

[Wikipedia, "Bermudo I of Asturias", retrieved 5 Oct 07]
Bermudo I (also Vermudo or Veremund) was the king of Asturias from 788 or 789 to 791. His nickname, the Deacon, was supposedly given because of his having been a deacon before becoming king. He was a son of Fruela, brother of King Alfonso I, and brother of King Aurelius.

The rest of his reign saw Moorish raids into Álava and Galicia. He was defeated badly at Bierzo and abdicated the throne in 791, returning to his frock. Nevertheless, he was considered a generous and illustrious man in his time.

Bermudo I "El Diácono" (789 - 791) Uno de los cuatro monarcas llamados los Reyes Holgazanes. En esta época la capital del Reino se trasladó a Pravia (774). Bermudo I, que estaba dedicado a las tareas de la Iglesia cuando fue elegido Rey, tras sufrir una tremenda derrota contra los musulmanes a orillas del río Burbia, cerca de la actual Villafranca del Bierzo, abdicó del trono en Alfonso II, hijo de Fruela I, y vivió tranquilamente en Palacio, dedicado a sus tareas clericales, hasta su muerte en 798.
2Gayo, Manoel José da Costa Felgueiras (Main Author) , Nobiliário de Famílias de Portugal, Impressão diplomática do original manuscrito existente na Santa Casa de Misericórdia de Barcellos, Portugal. , No.1181776/Tomo 25/Tit.Ribeiros/Pag.78/Parag.1/N3., Microfilmes No.s 1181775 a 1181777. Meirelles, Agostinho de Azevedo (Added Author). Affonso, Domingos de Araújo (Added Author). Editado em 1938 por Oficinas Gráficas da PAX, Braga-Portugal. Microfilme do CHF(Centro de História da Família) da Igreja de Jesus Cristo dos Santos dos Últimos Dias. Filmado pela Sociedade Genealógica de Utah, 1986.

His nickname, the Deacon, was supposedly given because of his having been a deacon before becoming king. He was a son of Fruela, brother of King Alfonso I, and brother of King Aurelius.
The rest of his reign saw Moorish raids into Álava and Galicia. He was defeated badly at Bierzo and abdicated the throne in 791, returning to his frock. Nevertheless, he was considered a generous and illustrious man in his time.

Name Prefix:<NPFX> King Name Suffix:<NSFX> I, Of Asturias "The Deacon"

Name Prefix:<NPFX> King Name Suffix:<NSFX> I, Of Asturias "The Deacon"

Bermudo ?Diakonen? var konge av Asturia og Leon 788 - 791.
Han skal være sønn til Fruela av Cantabria og etterkommer til den vestgotiske konge
Recared I ?den Katolske? som døde i 601.
Bermudo levde i kloster da stormennene 788-790 valgte ham til konge i Leon, men han
nedla regjeringen allerede i 791.
Han var gift med Nunilona av Navarra.
Bermudo døde 14. september, lenge etter 791.
Den muhammedanske stormflod som til slutt ble stanset ved de ulendte fjellmassene i
Lilleasia og Konstantinopels murer i nord, fikk fritt utløp mot vest, gjennom de østromerske
besittelser i Egypt og resten av Nord-Afrika. Karthago ble herjet og ødelagt enda en gang og
ikke lenge etter århundreskiftet år 700, gikk grensene for kaliffens rike så langt borte som ved
Herkulesstøttene. Den romerske kultur i Nord-Afrika ble fullstendig utryddet og landets
urbefolkning, som var beslektet med egypterne, ble omvendt til islam. Det som ikke hadde
lykkes for fønikere eller romere, nemlig å assimilere dette folkeelement i sitt eget folk, greidde
araberne. Både fønikere og romere hadde måttet nøye seg med å kolonisere enkelte byer og
noen andre steder ved kysten, mens innlandet stort sett fortsatte å være på berbernes hender.
Og begge de store kolonimaktene ble etter hvert feid vekk derfra av andre folk.
Ved å assimilere berberne, skaffet araberne seg et nytt tilskudd av menneskemateriell
som fikk stor betydning for deres videre fremgang. Uten denne kraftreserven ville
muhammedanerne sikkert aldri ha greidd å gå over stredet ved Herkulesstøttene. Men nå
kunne de snart oversvømme Syd-Europa også. Det nye erobringstoget er ikke så meget et
resultat av arabernes egen ekspansjonslyst, som av nødvendigheten av å sysselsette de
berbiske hordene som nettopp var gått over til islam. For det som hadde fristet berberne til å
stille seg under islams fane var håpet om krigstog og utbytte. Og det var i grunnen mer for å
plyndre enn for å erobre at berberen Tarik i spissen for 7000 mann år 711 satte over det
stredet som danner skille mellom to verdensdeler til landet ved den klippeodden som bærer
hans navn, Gibraltar eller ?Djebel-al-Tarik?, som betyr Tariks fjell.
På Pyreneerhalvøya var vestgoterne i tidens løp blitt sammensmeltet med den romerske
befolkning og var blitt en romersk nasjonalitet, den spanske, som snakket et latinsk
datterspråk i likhet med italienere og franskmenn. Men nå var det indre splittelse i
vestgoternes rike. Kongene var brikker i hendene på maktlystne stormenn og den intoleranse
som hersket i det spanske presteskap gjorde tilværelsen uutholdelig for alle tenkende
mennesker. De mange jødene var i en fullstendig fortvilet situasjon, utsatt for en
samvittighetsløs utryddelseskamp fra fanatiske kristne. Derfor hilste både de og den
undertrykte bondebefolkning araberne og berberne som befriere. Det vestgotiske rike falt som
en overmoden frukt for det første vindkast og i det avgjørende slaget ble hæren deres nesten
tilintetgjort av Tariks tropper. Den siste vestgotiske kongen er antagelig falt i slaget eller
omkommet under flukten fra slagmarken. I alle tilfelle er han forsvunnet ut av historien fra den
dagen. Siden var det en forholdsvis lett sak for araberne å underlegge seg halvøya, og nesten
overalt fikk de hjelp av forrædere.
Det vestgotiske aristokrati ble utryddet, bortsett fra noen få som flyktet til Asturias fjell
og grunnla et lite rike. Den jorden som hadde tilhørt de drepte aristokratene ble delt ut til
berbiske og arabiske krigere, de såkalte maurerne.
Det var vel ingen som tenkte seg akkurat da at fremtiden tross alt hørte vestgoterne til.
Men hva alle visste, var at dette folk allerede hadde satt uutslettelige merker etter seg i den
spanske folkekarakter. Navnet ?got? ble fortsatt brukt som betegnelse på en spansk kristen
og helt inn i det nittende århundre ble det ved spanske domstoler sitert paragrafer fra
vestgoternes lov.
Leonslekten var konger av Asturia, Leon og Galicia fra 739 til 1037. Etter maurernes
erobring av visigoternes rike i Spania i 711 opprettet de kristne spanierne kongeriket Asturia i
fjellene i nord. Etterhvert ble rikets tyngdepunkt flyttet sørover til Leon, og Castilla frigjorde seg.
Etter at slekten var dødd ut ble riket igjen slått sammen med Castilla til kongeriket Castilla-Leon
under Navarraslekten.

-- MERGED NOTE ------------

Wikidata: https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q379783 | Geni: https://www.geni.com/people/6000000000033480178

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]