== Notes for [[Item:Q87315|Q87315]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Octavia_Minor

http://hu.wikipedia.org/wiki/Octavia

http://www.livius.org/person/octavia-minor/

--------------------

Older sister of the Emperor Augustus, Octavia was one of the most prominent women in Roman history, respected and admired for her loyalty, nobility and humanity and for maintaining traditional Roman feminine virtues.

--------------------

16870305536220235. Octavia Thurina Minor ROMAN EMPIRE,1601,1746 daughter of Senator-Praetor & Governor of Macedonia Caius Octavius IV ROMAN EMPIRE and Atia Balbus ROMAN EMPIRE, was born in 69 B.C. in Rome, , Lazio, Italy and died in 11 B.C. in Rome, , Lazio, Italy at age 58.

General Notes:

Octavia Thurina Minor: ( 69 - 11 BC.) The daughter of her father's second marriage to Atia Balbus Minor, the niece of the Roman Dictator Julius Caesar and full blood sister of Caesar Augustus. She was born in Nola, Italy.

Octavia Minor is one of the most prominent women in Roman history. She was respected and admired for the loyalty, nobility, humanity and maintaining her traditional feminine Roman virtues. This beautiful and remarkable woman lived at a time, where many succumbed to treachery and intrigue.

Much of her childhood, she spent travelling with her parents. Before 54 BC, her step-father, arranged for her to marry Gaius Claudius Marcellus. Marcellus was a man of consular rank, a member of the influential Claudian family and was a man worthy of her.

They had three children: Claudia Marcella Major, Claudia Marcella Minor and Marcus Claudius Marcellus. All three were born in Italy. Marcellus died in May 40 BC.

By a Senatorial decree, Octavia married Mark Antony, in a political alliance, in October 40 BC. Between 40-36 BC, Octavia lived with him in his Athenian mansion. She raised her children by Marcellus; Antony's two sons and their two daughters: Julia Antonia Major and Julia Antonia Minor, who were born there. She had travelled with him to various provinces.

After 36 BC, Octavia returned to Rome with the children. On several occassions she acted as a political adviser and negotiator between her husband and brother.

Despite Antony's rejection, divorce in 32 BC and suicide in 30 BC, Octavia was the sole caretaker of the children. She became guardian to Cleopatra Selene, Ptolemy Philadelphus and Iullus Antonius, her ex-husband's remaining children. Octavia never remarried.

Augustus had adopted her son Marcus as his heir, but died of illness in 23 BC. She never recovered from his death and retired from public life. Her final years were spent hiding in the dark and dressing in mourning.

She had woven clothes for her brother. Augustus built two monuments for his public works program, the Colonnades of Octavia and the Paragon of Virtue in her honor. She was one of the first Roman women to have coins minted in her honor.

She died in 11 BC, sometime after her niece Julia Caesaris married Tiberius. Her beloved brother gave her the highest posthumous honours, built the Gate of Octavia in her memory, declared her as a goddess and built temples for her. 3470

Octavia married Claudius Marcellus ROMAN EMPIRE 1601 in October 40 B.C. in Rome, Italy.3470 Claudius was born in Rome, Italy.

Octavia next married Ruler Of Rome Mark Anthony III ROMAN EMPIRE in Rome, , Lazio, Italy. Mark was born in 83 B.C. in Rome, Italy, died in 30 B.C. in Alexandria, Egypt at age 53, and was buried in , , Rome, Italy. The cause of his death was Suicide.

http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.com/~mgholler/Caden/a54.htm#i547458858
--------------------
Octavia Thurina Minor: ( 69 - 11 BC.) The daughter of her father's second marriage to Atia Balbus Minor, the niece of the Roman Dictator Julius Caesar and full blood sister of Caesar Augustus. She was born in Nola, Italy. Octavia Minor is one of the most prominent women in Roman history. She was respected and admired for the loyalty, nobility, humanity and maintaining her traditional feminine Roman virtues. This beautiful and remarkable woman lived at a time, where many succumbed to treachery and intrigue. Much of her childhood, she spent travelling with her parents. Before 54 BC, her step-father, arranged for her to marry Gaius Claudius Marcellus. Marcellus was a man of consular rank, a member of the influential Claudian family and was a man worthy of her. They had three children: Claudia Marcella Major, Claudia Marcella Minor and Marcus Claudius Marcellus. All three were born in Italy. Marcellus died in May 40 BC. By a Senatorial decree, Octavia married Mark Antony, in a political alliance, in October 40 BC. Between 40-36 BC, Octavia lived with him in his Athenian mansion. She raised her children by Marcellus; Antony's two sons and their two daughters: Julia Antonia Major and Julia Antonia Minor, who were born there. She had travelled with him to various provinces. After 36 BC, Octavia returned to Rome with the children. On several occassions she acted as a political adviser and negotiator between her husband and brother. Despite Antony's rejection, divorce in 32 BC and suicide in 30 BC, Octavia was the sole caretaker of the children. She became guardian to Cleopatra Selene, Ptolemy Philadelphus and Iullus Antonius, her ex-husband's remaining children. Octavia never remarried. Augustus had adopted her son Marcus as his heir, but died of illness in 23 BC. She never recovered from his death and retired from public life. Her final years were spent hiding in the dark and dressing in mourning. She had woven clothes for her brother. Augustus built two monuments for his public works program, the Colonnades of Octavia and the Paragon of Virtue in her honor. She was one of the first Roman women to have coins minted in her honor. She died in 11 BC, sometime after her niece Julia Caesaris married Tiberius. Her beloved brother gave her the highest posthumous honours, built the Gate of Octavia in her memory, declared her as a goddess and built temples for her. Octavia married Claudius Marcellus ROMAN EMPIRE 1601 in October 40 B.C. in Rome, Italy.3470 Claudius was born in Rome, Italy. Octavia next married Ruler Of Rome Mark Anthony III ROMAN EMPIRE in Rome, , Lazio, Italy. Mark was born in 83 B.C. in Rome, Italy, died in 30 B.C. in Alexandria, Egypt at age 53, and was buried in Rome, Italy. The cause of his death was Suicide.
--------------------
'''
=Octavia the Younger=
'''

Octavia the Younger (69-11 BC), also known as Octavia Minor or simply Octavia, was the sister of the first Roman Emperor, Augustus (known also as Octavian), half-sister of Octavia the Elder, and fourth wife of Mark Antony. She was also the great-grandmother of the Emperor Caligula and Empress Agrippina the Younger, maternal grandmother of the Emperor Claudius, and paternal great-grandmother and maternal great-great grandmother of the Emperor Nero.

One of the most prominent women in Roman history, Octavia was respected and admired by contemporaries for her loyalty, nobility and humanity, and for maintaining traditional Roman feminine virtues.

'''Life'''
----

''Childhood''

Full sister to Augustus, Octavia was the only daughter born of Gaius Octavius' second marriage to Atia Balba Caesonia, niece of Julius Caesar. Octavia was born in Nola, Italy; her father, a Roman governor and senator, died in 59 BC from natural causes. Her mother later remarried, to the consul Lucius Marcius Philippus. Octavia spent much of her childhood travelling with her parents. Marcius was in charge of educating Octavia and her brother Augustus.

''First marriage''

Before 54 BC her stepfather arranged for her to marry Gaius Claudius Marcellus Minor. Marcellus was a man of consular rank, a man who was considered worthy of her and was consul in 50 BC. He was also a member of the influential Claudian family and descended from Marcus Claudius Marcellus, a famous general in the Second Punic War. In 54 BC, her great uncle Caesar is said to have been anxious for her to divorce her husband so that she could marry Pompey who had just lost his wife Julia (Julius Caesar's daughter, and thus Octavia's cousin once removed). The couple did not want to get a divorce so instead[3] Pompey declined the proposal and married Cornelia Metella instead. So Octavia's husband continued to oppose Julius Caesar including in the crucial year of his consulship 50 BC. Civil war broke out when Caesar in Gaul invaded Italy in 49 BC.

Marcellus, a friend of Cicero, was an initial opponent of Julius Caesar when Caesar invaded Italy, but did not take up arms against his wife's great uncle at the Battle of Pharsalus, and was eventually pardoned by him. In 47 BC he was able to intercede with Caesar for his cousin and namesake, also a former consul, then living in exile. Presumably, Octavia continued to live with her husband from the time of their marriage (she would have been about 15 when they married) to her husband's death when she was about 29. They had three children: Claudia Marcella Major, Claudia Marcella Minor and Marcus Claudius Marcellus. All three were born in Italy. Her husband Marcellus died in May 40 BC.

''Second marriage''

By a Senatorial decree, Octavia married Mark Antony in October 40 BC, as his fourth wife (his third wife Fulvia having died shortly before). This marriage had to be approved by the Senate, as she was pregnant with her first husband's child, and was a politically motivated attempt to cement the uneasy alliance between her brother Octavian and Mark Antony; however, Octavia does appear to have been a loyal and faithful wife to Antony. Between 40 and 36 BC, she travelled with Antony to various provinces and lived with him in his Athenian mansion. There she raised her children by Marcellus as well as Antony's two sons; the two daughters of her marriage to Antony, Antonia Major and Antonia Minor, were born there.

''Breakdown''

The alliance was severely tested by Antony's abandonment of Octavia and their children in favor of his former lover Queen Cleopatra VII of Egypt (Antony and Cleopatra had met in 41 BC, an interaction that resulted in Cleopatra bearing twins, a boy and a girl). After 36 BC, Octavia returned to Rome with the daughters of her second marriage. On several occasions she acted as a political advisor and negotiator between her husband and brother. Mark Antony divorced Octavia in 32 BC, after she had supplied him with men and troops, in 35 BC, to be used in his eastern campaigns. Following Antony's rejection of her, their divorce, and his eventual suicide in 30 BC, Octavia became sole caretaker of their children as well as guardian of Antony's children from his unions with both Fulvia and Cleopatra:

* Iullus Antonius (Fulvia),
* Alexander Helios (Cleopatra),
* Cleopatra Selene II (Cleopatra),
* Ptolemy Philadelphus (Cleopatra)

Octavia did not marry a third time.

''Life after Antony''

Augustus adored, but never adopted, her son Marcellus. When Marcellus died of illness in 23 BC unexpectedly, Augustus was thunderstruck, Octavia disconsolate almost beyond recovery. The major source that Octavia never recovered is Seneca (Cons. ad Marciam), but Seneca may wish to show off his rhetorical skill with hyperbole, rather than adhere to fact. Some facts dispute Seneca's version, for Octavia publicly opened the Library of Marcellus, dedicated in his memory, while her brother completed the Marcellus's theatre in his honor. Undoubtedly Octavia attended both ceremonies.

Aelius Donatus, in his Life of Vergil, states that Virgil

''recited three whole books [of his Aeneid] for Augustus: the second, fourth, and sixth--this last out of his well-known affection for Octavia, who (being present at the recitation) is said to have fainted at the lines about her son, "… You shall be Marcellus" [Aen. 6.884]. Revived only with difficulty, she sent Vergil ten-thousand sesterces for each of the verses."''

She never fully recovered from the death of her son and retired from public life, except on important occasions. She attended the Ara Pacis ceremony to welcome her brother's return in 13 from the provinces. She was also consulted in regard to, and in some versions advised, that Julia marry Agrippa after her mourning for Marcellus ended. Agrippa had to divorce Octavia's daughter Claudia Marcella (Major) in order to marry Julia, so Augustus wanted Octavia's endorsement very much.

''Death''

Octavia died of natural causes. Suetonius says she died in Augustus' 54th year, thus 10 BC with Roman inclusive counting. Her funeral was a public one, with her sons-in-law (Drusus, Ahenobarbus, Iullus Antony, and possibly Paullus Aemillius Lepidus) carrying her to the grave in the Mausoleum of Augustus. Drusus delivered one funeral oration from the rostra; Augustus the other and gave her the highest posthumous honors (e.g. building the Gate of Octavia and Porticus Octaviae in her memory). Augustus also had the Roman senate declare his sister to be a goddess. Augustus declined some other honors decreed to her by the senate, for reasons unknown. She was one of the first Roman women to have coins minted bearing her image; only Antony's previous wife Fulvia pre-empted her.

'''Issue'''
----

''Children with Marcellus''

Octavia and her first husband had one son and two daughters born late in their marriage:
# Marcellus
# Claudia Marcella Major
# Claudia Marcella Minor

''Children with Mark Antony''

Octavia and Mark Antony had two daughters by their marriage (her second, his fourth), and both were the ancestors of later Roman emperors.
# Antonia Major: also known as Julia Antonia Major, grandmother to Emperor Nero.
# Antonia Minor: also known as Julia Antonia Minor, mother to Emperor Claudius, grandmother to Emperor Caligula, and great-grandmother to Emperor Nero.

'''Fictional representations'''
----

A highly fictionalized version of Octavia's early life is depicted in the 2005 television series Rome, in which Octavia of the Julii (Kerry Condon) commits incest with her brother Gaius Octavian, has a lesbian affair with Servilia of the Junii (the series' version of Servilia Caepionis) and a romantic relationship with Marcus Agrippa (based on the historical Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa).

Octavia's later life, around the time of the death of Marcellus, is depicted in the 1976 television adaptation of Robert Graves's novel I, Claudius. The role was played by Angela Morant, and should not be confused with her great-granddaughter Claudia Octavia (also referred to as "Octavia" in the series), Claudius' daughter and wife of the future emperor Nero, who was played by Cheryl Johnson.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Octavia_the_Younger

Octavia stands out as a virtuous woman in a time when every restraint wasrelaxed. No evil deeds about her were ever even hinted by anybody. Aftershe was abandoned by Mark Antony, Octavia bore her rejection silently,lived quietly in Antony's house at Rome, and brought up faithfully hischildren by Fulvia and the two daughters that she herself had given him.Later, Octavia, after the death of Antony and Cleopatra, reared thechildren of Antony and Cleopatra as if they were her own.

See Notes in Birth tab

OR "OCTAVIA AUGUSTA"; CA. 64 BC-CA. 11 BC

Octavia Minor
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Octavia Minor (69 - 11 BC), also known as Octavia the Younger or simply Octavia, was the sister of the first Roman Emperor, Augustus, and half sister of Octavia Thurina Major. She was one of the most prominent women in Roman history[citation needed], respected and admired by contemporaries for her loyalty, nobility and humanity and for maintaining traditional Roman feminine virtues. Octavia lived at a time when many succumbed to treachery and intrigue.

Contents [hide]
1 Life
1.1 Childhood
1.2 First marriage
1.3 Second marriage
1.4 Breakdown
1.5 Life after Antony
1.6 Death
2 Issue
2.1 Octavia's Children with Marcellus
2.2 Octavia's Children with Mark Antony
3 In popular culture
4 Sources
4.1 Octavia's life and virtues
4.2 Discussion of Octavia
4.3 Octavia's family and descendants
5 External links



[edit] Life

[edit] Childhood
Octavia was the only daughter of her father Gaius Octavius's second marriage to Julius Caesar’s niece Atia Balba Caesonia, and so she was full sister of Augustus. She was born in Nola, Italy. Her father, a Roman Governor and Senator died in 59 BC from natural causes. Her mother later remarried, to the consul Lucius Marcius Philippus. Much of her childhood she spent travelling with her parents.


[edit] First marriage
Before 54 BC her step-father arranged for her to marry Gaius Claudius Marcellus Minor. Marcellus was a man of consular rank, a man who was worthy of her and was consul in 50 BC. Gaius was a member of the influential Claudian family and descended from Marcus Claudius Marcellus, a famous general in the Second Punic War.

In 54 BC, her great-uncle Caesar is said to have been anxious for her to divorce her husband so that she could marry Pompey who had just lost his wife Julia (Julius Caesar's daughter, and thus Octavia's cousin once removed). However, Pompey apparently declined the proposal and Octavia's husband continued to oppose Julius Caesar including in the crucial year of his consulship 50 BC.

Marcellus, a friend of Marcus Tullius Cicero, was an initial opponent of Julius Caesar when he invaded Italy, but did not take up arms against his wife's great-uncle at the Battle of Pharsalus, and was eventually pardoned by him. In 47 BC he was able to intercede with Caesar for his cousin and namesake, also a former consul, then living in exile. Presumably, Octavia continued to live with her husband from the time of their marriage (she would have been about 15 when they married) to her husband's death when she was about 29.

They had three children: Claudia Marcella Major, Claudia Marcella Minor and Marcus Claudius Marcellus. All three were born in Italy. Marcellus died in May 40 BC.


[edit] Second marriage
By a Senatorial decree, Octavia married Mark Antony, in October 40 BC, as his fourth wife (his third wife Fulvia having died shortly before). This marriage had to be approved by the Senate as she was pregnant with her first husband's child and was a political marriage to cement the uneasy alliance between her brother Octavian and Mark Antony - however, Octavia appears to have been a loyal and faithful wife.

Between 40 BC–36 BC, Octavia lived with him in his Athenian mansion. She raised her children by Marcellus; Antony's two sons and their two daughters: Julia Antonia Major and Julia Antonia Minor, who were born there. She travelled with him to various provinces.


[edit] Breakdown
The alliance was severely tested by her second husband abandoning her and their children for his former lover Queen Cleopatra VII of Egypt (they had already met in 41 BC and had twins). Mark Antony divorced her circa 32 BC, after she had supplied him with men and troops in 35 BC (to be used in his eastern campaigns). After Antony's death, she lived quietly, raising her five children (three by her first marriage, and two by her second marriage) and Antony's children by other wives.

After 36 BC, Octavia returned to Rome with the children. On several occasions she acted as a political adviser and negotiator between her husband and brother.

With Antony's rejection, divorce and eventual suicide in 30 BC, Octavia became the sole caretaker of the children. She became guardian to Iullus Antonius, Alexander Helios, Cleopatra Selene and Ptolemy Philadelphus, her ex-husband's remaining children. Octavia never remarried.


[edit] Life after Antony
Augustus had adopted her son Marcus as his heir, but Marcus died of illness in 23 BC. Octavia had opened the Library of Marcellus in his memory, while her brother built a theatre in Rome in his honor. She never recovered from his death (breaking down in tears at a reading by Virgil of a passage from Aeneid Book VI about him) and retired from public life. Her final years were spent hiding in the dark and dressing in mourning.


[edit] Death
She died in 11 BC, sometime after her niece Julia the Elder married Tiberius. Her funeral in 11 BC was a public one with her sons-in-law carrying her to the grave. While her brother Augustus delivered the funeral oration and gave her the highest posthumous honors (e.g. building the Gate of Octavia and Porticus Octaviae in her memory, declaring her a goddess and built temples for her), he also declined many of the honors decreed to her by the senate, for reasons unknown. She was one of the first Roman women to have coins minted in her image.


[edit] Issue

[edit] Octavia's Children with Marcellus
Octavia and her first husband had one son and two daughters born late in their marriage:

1. Marcellus
2. Claudia Marcella Major
3. Claudia Marcella Minor

[edit] Octavia's Children with Mark Antony
Octavia and Mark Antony had two daughters by their marriage (her second, his fourth), ancestors of many later emperors.

4. Antonia Major
5. Antonia Minor

[edit] In popular culture
There have been at least two depictions of her life in popular fiction.

A highly fictionalized version of her early life is shown in the 2005 television series Rome by the character of Octavia of the Julii, played by Kerry Condon. One of the most striking differences is the completely fictional version of her early married life. In Rome, Octavia is married to a fictional husband, who bears no resemblance to Marcellus, who she divorces, and who is killed on the orders of Atia circa 50 BC.
Her later life, around the time of the death of Marcus, is depicted in the acclaimed 1976 television adaptation of Robert Graves's novel I, Claudius. The role was played by Angela Morant, and should not be confused with Claudia Octavia (referred to as 'Octavia' also in the show), Claudius' daughter and wife of the future emperor Nero; she was played by Cheryl Johnson.

[edit] Sources

[edit] Octavia's life and virtues
Details on Octavia pt 1 "Octavian was much attached to his sister, and she possessed all the charms, accomplishments and virtues likely to fascinate the affections and secure a lasting influence over the mind of a husband. Her beauty was universally allowed to be superior to that of Cleopatra and her virtue was such as to excite even admiration in an age of growing licentiousness and corruption."
Details on Octavia pt 2
Nuttall Encyclopedia profile says merely that she was "distinguished for her beauty and her virtue"

[edit] Discussion of Octavia
Octavia's birth and life discussed briefly
Octavia's marriage discussed briefly

[edit] Octavia's family and descendants
Marcellus, Octavia's only son who died aged 20
Julia, Octavia's daughter-in-law and niece
Octavia's first husband, at the end of the page
Octavia's descendants include the Roman emperors Caligula, Claudius, and Nero.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Octavia Thurina Minor: ( 69 - 11 BC.) The only daughter of her father's second marriage to Atia Balba Caesonia, the niece of the Roman Dictator Julius Caesar and full blood sister of Caesar Augustus. She was born in Nola, Italy.

Octavia Thurina Minor is one of the most prominent women in Roman history. She was respected and admired for her loyalty, nobility and humanity and for maintaining traditional Roman feminine virtues. This beautiful and remarkable woman lived at a time when many succumbed to treachery and intrigue.

Much of her childhood she spent travelling with her parents. Before 54 BC her step-father arranged for her to marry Gaius Claudius Marcellus. Marcellus was a man of consular rank, a member of the influential Claudian family and was a man worthy of her.

They had three children: Claudia Marcella Major, Claudia Marcella Minor and Marcus Claudius Marcellus. All three were born in Italy. Marcellus died in May 40 BC.

By a Senatorial decree, Octavia married Mark Antony, in a political alliance, in October 40 BC. Between 40 BC–36 BC, Octavia lived with him in his Athenian mansion. She raised her children by Marcellus; Antony's two sons and their two daughters: Julia Antonia Major and Julia Antonia Minor, who were born there. She had travelled with him to various provinces.

After 36 BC, Octavia returned to Rome with the children. On several occasions she acted as a political adviser and negotiator between her husband and brother.

With Antony's rejection, divorce in 32 BC and suicide in 30 BC, Octavia became the sole caretaker of the children. She became guardian to Iullus Antonius, Cleopatra Selene and Ptolemy Philadelphus, her ex-husband's remaining children. Octavia never remarried.

Augustus had adopted her son Marcus as his heir, but Marcus died of illness in 23 BC. Octavia had opened the Library of Marcellus in his memory, while her brother built a threatre in Rome in his honor. She never recovered from his death and retired from public life. Her final years were spent hiding in the dark and dressing in mourning.

She had woven clothes for her brother. Augustus built two monuments for his public works program, the Colonnades of Octavia and the Paragon of Virtue in her honor. She was one of the first Roman women to have coins minted in her image.

She died in 11 BC, sometime after her niece Julia Caesaris married Tiberius. Her beloved brother gave her the highest posthumous honours, built the Gate of Octavia in her memory, declared her as a goddess and built temples for her.

There have been at least two dipictions of her life in popular fiction.

A highly fictionalized version of her early life is shown in the 2005 television series Rome by the character of Octavia of the Julii, played by Kerry Condon.

Her later life, around the time of the time of the death of Marcus, is depicted in the acclaimed 1976 television adaptation of Robert Graves's novels I, Claudius. The role was played by Angela Morant, and should not be confused with Claudia Octavia (referred to as 'Octavia' also in the show), Claudius' daughter and wife of the future emperor Nero; she was played by Cheryl Johnson.


wtf 4:565

[4629] d 10 BC

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]