== Notes for [[Item:Q111728|Q111728]] ==

----

===Biography

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garc%C3%ADa_Iniguez_of_Pamplona
The children of García Íñiguez I (d 882) and his wife (Urraca) were:
* Fortún Garcés, king of Pamplona from 870 until 905 and married to Auria.
* Onneca Garcés, married to Count Aznar Galíndez II of Aragon.[9]
* '''Sancho Garcés''', father of
**'''Aznar Sánchez de Larraun''' — the second husband of his cousin Onneca Fortúnez —
**and probably of '''Velazquita''', who married Mutarrif ibn Musa, of the Banu Qasi.[a]


Notes

a. Chronicler Ibn Hayyan says Velasquita was daughter of king García Íñiguez, but al-Udri names her father as Sancho, lord of Pamplona.[10] The latter has been preferred by historians.[9][11] This reference to Sancho as 'lord', along with a reference by Ibn Khaldun to a Sancho, 'governor of Pamplona and chief of the Basques' in 865, and an 867 charter that names 'king' Sancho as son-in-law of Galindo Aznárez I of Aragón, led Antonio Ubieto Arteta to propose that it was Sancho Garcés who ruled in Pamplona in the mid-to-late 860s, during at least part of the period that his brother, Fortún Garcés, was held captive in Córdoba.[12]


----

https://dbe.rah.es/biografias/10259/garcia-iniguez

> From a wife of unknown name, García Íñiguez, in addition to his aforementioned firstborn Fortún, to the aforementioned Onneca, married to Aznar Galindo II of Aragon, as well as another son, Sancho Garcés, father in turn of Aznar Sánchez de Larráun, second husband of another Onneca, the daughter of Fortún Garcés also mentioned. Such are the precise and surely truthful family data collected a century later in the so-called Roda Genealogies inserted in the Rotense Codex (Library of the Royal Academy of History, 68).

----


https://genealogics.org/getperson.php?personID=I00106653&tree=LEO

Sancho was the second son of Garcia I Iñiguez, king of Pamplona, and his wife Uracca. He was likely the _Sancium regem_ named as son-in-law _(generum meum)_ by Galindo I Aznár, conde de Aragón, in 867. He is also probably the Sancho, lord of Pamplona and head of the Basques, who defeated Muzaffar ibn Muza ibn Di al-Nun at some date between 865 and 875 (during his brother's captivity), as reported by the chronicler Ibn Khaldun. Chronicler Al-Udri names Velasquita, wife of Mutarrif ibn Musa ibn Qasi, as daughter of sahib Sancho, although Ibn Hayyan reports her as daughter of Garcia Iñiguez. Sancho's son Aznár Sánchez married a daughter of his uncle king Fortún Garcés and had a son Sancho and two future queens Toda Aznárez, wife of Sancho I Garcés, king of Navarre, and Sancha Aznárez, wife of Sancho's brother, king Jimeno Garcés.

It is not recorded when Sancho died.

----



http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/NAVARRE.htm#AssonaIniguez

Íñigo "Arista" & his wife ONECA had four children:

*1. GARCÍA Iñíguez ([810]-killed by Arabs [Lumberri] 882[57], bur Leire Monastery). The Codex de Roda names "Garsea Enneconis et domna Assona…et domna ---" m [firstly] URRACA, daughter of ---. García I & his [first] wife had [four] children:
**b) '''SANCHO García''' . The Codex de Roda names "Fortunio Garseanis et Sanzio Garseanis et domna Onneca" as the children of "Garsea Enneconis" and his unnamed wife[68]. m ---. The name of Sancho's wife is not known. Sancho García & his wife had [two] children: …
** i) AZNAR Sánchez de Larraún . The Codex de Roda names "Asnari Sanziones qui et Larron" as son of "Sanzio Garseanis"[69]. m (880) [as her second husband,] his first cousin, ONECA [Íñiga] Fortún de Pamplona, [repudiated wife of ABD ALLAH later ABD ALLAH I Emir of Córdoba], …
** ii) [VELASQUITA Sánchez. Al-Udri records that "Mutarrif ibn Musa" married "Faliskita, hija de Sanyo, señor de Pamplona" and that he brought her to Huesca (which suggests that the marriage should be dated to [870/71] when Mutarif took control of Huesca) and had children by her[76]. The date of her marriage is consistent with Velasquita having been the daughter of Sancho, son of García I Iñíguez [King] of Pamplona, but this is not confirmed beyond all doubt by the passage in Al-Udri. m ([871/72]) as his [---] wife, MUTARIF ibn Musa, son of MUSA Ibn Musa & his wife --- (-crucified Córdoba 6 Sep 873).]
----

===References
* https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garc%C3%ADa_Iniguez_de_Pamplona cites
**Cañada Juste, Alberto (1980). «Los Banu Qasi (714-924)». Príncipe de Viana (58-59): 5-96. ISSN 0032-8472.
** Lévi-Provençal, Évariste (1953). «Du nouveau sur le royaume de Pampelune au IXe siècle». Bulletin Hispanique (en francés) (Université de Bordeaux) 55 (1): 5-22. ISSN 0007-4640.
** Martínez Díez, Gonzalo (2007). Sancho III el Mayor Rey de Pamplona, Rex Ibericus. Madrid: Marcial Pons Historia. ISBN 978-84-96467-47-7.
** Salazar y Acha, Jaime de (2006). «Urraca. Un nombre egregio en la onomástica altomedieval». En la España medieval (1): 29-48. ISSN 0214-3038.
* https://genealogics.org/getperson.php?personID=I00106653&tree=LEO cites
** Europäische Stammtafeln, J.A. Stargardt Verlag, Marburg, Schwennicke, Detlev (Ed.). 2:53
* https://dbe.rah.es/biografias/10259/garcia-iniguez

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]