== Notes for [[Item:Q105336|Q105336]] ==

35. MICAELA4 GUERRA-CANAMAR-MORALES (LEONOR3 DE MORALES, JUANA2 DE TREVINO-QUINTANILLA-Y-SALAZAR, PEDRO1 DE SALAZAR)
*was born in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
*She married SERGEANT MAJOR NICOLAS GUAJARDO,
**son of LORENZO MARTINEZ-GUAJARDO-NAVARRO and YLDEFONSA FLORES-DE-VALDEZ-SALAZAR. He was born in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
***Notes for SERGEANT MAJOR NICOLAS GUAJARDO: Source: Origen de los Fundadores de Texas, Nuevo Mexico, Coagulia y Nuevo Leon, Saltillo Tomo II by Guillermo Garmendia Leal. Page 104.

Children of MICAELA GUERRA-CANAMAR-MORALES and NICOLAS GUAJARDO are:
*1. i. NICOLAS5 GUAJARDO-GUERRA.
*2. ii. JOSEPH GUAJARDO-GUERRA.
*3. iii. ANA-MARIA GUAJARDO-GUERRA,
**m. (1) JUAN FERNANDEZ;
**m. (2) JUAN DE NORIEGA, 19 Feb 1725/26, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico;
***b. Durango, Mexico.
****Marriage Notes for ANA-MARIA GUAJARDO-GUERRA and JUAN DE NORIEGA: Index to the Marriage Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara by Raul J. Guerra, Jr., Nadine M. Vasquez, Baldomero Vela, Jr. Page 244. [54-5].
*4. iv. JUAN GUAJARDO-GUERRA,
*b. Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico;
*m. (1) PETRONILA BADELLO;
*m. (2) MARIA-ROSA FLORES-DE-VALDEZ;
**b. Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
*5. v. ANTONIO GUAJARDO-GUERRA.
*6. vi. SERGEANT MAJOR PEDRO-MARIA MARTINEZ-GUAJARDO,
**b. 1677;
**d. 02 Jan 1719/20, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico;
**m. MARIA BAEZ-DE-TREVINO, 06 Oct 1697, Sagrario Metropolitano, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico6;
***b. 1680;
***d. 07 May 1759, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.
****Notes for MARIA BAEZ-DE-TREVINO: A,K,A, Maria de Amaya y Trevino.
****Marriage Notes for PEDRO-MARIA MARTINEZ-GUAJARDO and MARIA BAEZ-DE-TREVINO: Index to the Marriage Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara by Raul J. Guerra, Jr., Nadine M. Vasquez, Baldomero Vela, Jr. Page 189. [44-7].
*7. vii. RAMONA-ALDONZA MARTINEZ-GUAJARDO-GUERRA,
**b. 1687;
**m. JOSEPH-ANTONIO DE ECA-Y-MUZQUIZ-Y-URRUTIA;
***b. Abt. 1685, Monclova, Coahulia, Mexico;
***d. 1738, San Juan Bautista, Coahuila, Mexico.
****Notes for JOSEPH-ANTONIO DE ECA-Y-MUZQUIZ-Y-URRUTIA: In 1708 - 1712, he served as Governor of Coahuila. Source:The Handbook on Texas Online.

http://www.somosprimos.com/inclan/salazar.htm
--------------------
=== GEDCOM Note ===
_CRE DATE 30 SEP 2016 TIME 13:28:00

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000014429746809

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]