== Notes for [[Item:Q87124|Q87124]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Faustus_Cornelius_Sulla_(senator)
--------------------
'''
=Faustus Cornelius Sulla=
'''

Faustus Cornelius Sulla (before 86-46 BC) was a Roman senator. Faustus was the only surviving son of the Dictator of Rome Lucius Cornelius Sulla and his fourth wife Caecilia Metella, and thus a member of one of the most ancient patrician families, the Cornelii. After his father's death in 78 BC, he and his twin sister Fausta were brought up by his guardian, his father's friend Lucullus.

Faustus married Pompeia, daughter of Pompey the Great. Faustus accompanied Pompey on his Asian campaigns, and was the first to climb over the walls of the Temple of Jerusalem when it was stormed by Pompey in 63 BC. After his return to Rome, he gave gladiatorial games to celebrate his father in 60 BC. At an unknown time before 57 BC, Faustus Sulla became augur. As moneyer in 56 BC, he issued coinage in honor of his father and his father-in-law. As owner of the central slopes of Mount Falernus, his name became synonymous with the most esteemed wine in ancient Rome, Faustian Falernian.

Faustus Sulla was Quaestor in 54 BC. The senate commissioned him to rebuild the Curia Hostilia in 52 BC which had been burned down after the riots which followed the murder of Clodius. After that the Curia was known as the Curia Cornelia.

His career as an advocate was cut short, however, by the Civil War between Pompey and Julius Caesar. He, as Lucullus' ward and Pompey's son-in-law, sided with the former. Faustus was at the Battle of Pharsalus in 48 BC, joining the leaders of his party in Africa subsequently. After the Battle of Thapsus, he tried to escape to Mauretania, but was caught and killed by Publius Sittius, a supporter of Caesar, in 46 BC.

With Pompeia he had at least two children: Faustus Cornelius Sulla the Younger (later became suffect consul) and Cornelia Sulla (married a Lucius Scribonius Libo, who was praetor in 80 BC). From one of whom is presumably descended Faustus Cornelius Sulla, suffect consul in 31 AD.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Faustus_Cornelius_Sulla_(senator)

Faustus Cornelius Sulla (senator)
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Faustus Cornelius Sulla (78 BC-47 BC) was a Roman senator. Faustus was eldest surviving son of the Dictator of Rome Lucius Cornelius Sulla, born in Arrentium (another source states he was born in Greece where his mother had fled between 86 and 81 BC). He was known simply as Faustus, the only Roman to be called that since Faustus Valerius in the time of Numa Pompilius.

Faustus Cornelius Sulla was the head of the branch of the Patrician family Cornelius cognimated Sulla, a family consisting only of himself, and his cousin Publius Cornelius Sulla, adherent to Faustus' nephew by marriage Julius Caesar. As a member of one of the most ancient patrician families, the Cornelii, and the son of the great dictator, promising things were prophesied for the young Sulla, doubly so as, after his father's death, he was brought up by his guardian, his father's friend Lucullus.

Faustus married Pompeia Magna, daughter of the notable Pompey. They had three children. His career as an advocate was cut short, however, by the civil war between Pompey and Caesar. He, as Lucullus' ward and Pompey's son-in-law, sided with the former and was killed in a minor skirmish with Caesarian troops in 47 BC.


[edit] Children
by Pompeia Magna
Faustus (II) Cornelius Sulla
Lucius Cornelius Sulla Felix Ahenobarbus
Cornelia Sulla married Lucius Scribonius Libo
By a Peasant woman
Gnaeus Ulpius

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]