== Notes for [[Item:Q111522|Q111522]] ==

=Ermessenda, reina consorte de Asturias=


* '''Ermesinda, Also called Ormisenda and Ermisend'''
* Daughter of Pelayo, rey de Asturias and Gaudiosa Ferrández. According To the Albeldense Chronicle, she was the Daughter of King Don Pelayo and his wife, Queen Gaudiosa, And sister of King Favila of Asturias - https://www.geni.com/photo/view/6000000000424707718?album_type=photos_of_me&photo_id=6000000090071249837
* Birth: circa 694 in Tineo, Asturias, Asturias, Spain
* Place of Burial - In the sepulchre, which is supposed to contain the remains of King Alfonso I the Catholic and those of his wife, Queen Ermesinda, and is placed in the Holy cave Of Covadonga, Asturias, was recorded the following epitaph: - http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ermesinda

=Married=

* The Result of his marriage to King Alfonso I The Catholicson of The Duke Pedro of Cantabria, three children were born:

=King Alfonso I & his wife ERMESINDA had three children:=

* a)''' FRUELA''' ([740]-murdered Cangas de Onís 768). The Chronicle of Alfonso III records that "his son Fruela" succeeded his father as king "in the era 795 (757)" [82] . He succeeded his father in 757 as FRUELA I King of Asturias. The Chronicle of Alfonso III states that he "won many victories", including against the Cordobans at Pontubio in Galicia, that he conquered the Basque country, and "overcame the peoples of Galicia who were rebelling against him and violently laid waste the entire province"[83]. He imposed the celibacy of priests in Galicia. Ibn al-Athir records that Fruela I King of Asturias took control of “Lugo, Portucale, Salamanca, Zamora, Ávila, Segovia y Castilla”[84]. The Chronicle of Alfonso III records that King Fruela was killed by his own men after ruling "eleven years, three months, era 806 (768)"[85]. The Chronicon Albeldense records that “Froila filius eius [Adefonsi]” was killed “in Canicas… æra 806”[86]. The Chronicon Compostellani records that “Froila” reigned 11 years, five months and 20 days[87]. The Sebastiani Chronicon records that "Froila… cum uxore sua Munia Oveti" was buried in 768[88]. m MUNIA Ovéquiz, daughter of OVECO --- & his wife --- [de Asturias] ([745/50]-[768]). The Chronicle of Alfonso III states that Fruela "overcame the rebellious Basques and took for himself a wife from their territory named Munia"[89] . The Sebastiani Chronicon records that "Froila… cum uxore sua Munia Oveti" were buried in 768[90]. Her geographical origin is confirmed more precisely by the Chronicle of Alfonso III which records that [her son] Alfonso, after he was displaced by Maugerato, fled to Álava where he was received by his mother's relatives [91] . King Fruela I & his wife had [three] children: i) ALFONSO ([765]-Oviedo 20 Mar 842, bur Oviedo). The Historia Silense records that "Froyla… [et] uxorem… Monniam" had "filium… Adefonsum"[92]. The Chronicle of Alfonso III records that "Alfonso the son of Fruela and grandson of the older Alfonso governed the palace" during the reign of Silo[93] . The same source states that his aunt Adosinda engineered his election to succeed on the death of her husband King Silo, but that Alfonso was displaced by Maugerato and fled to Álava where he was received by his mother's relatives [94] . He finally succeeded in 791, on the abdication of King Vermudo I[95], as ALFONSO II "el Casto" King of Asturias, anointed 14 Sep 791. The Sebastiani Chronicon records that "subrinum suum Adefonsum", who had been exiled by Maugerato, succeeded when King Vermudo I was deposed[96] . King Alfonso II transferred the royal residence to Oviedo, maybe as early as 791[97]. Intense attacks by the Muslims continued, the region of Álava was sacked in 791 and Oviedo threatened, although King Alfonso's forces succeeding in routing the attackers at Llamas de Mouro[98] . The Annales Laurissenses Continuatio records that "Hadefonsi regis Gallæciæ et Asturiæ" sent "Frola" [not yet traced, maybe a relative] as legate to Charles I King of the Franks in 798 [99]. King Alfonso was deposed in Sep 801 and placed in the monastery of Ablaña, but restored as king in Sep 802[100]. King Alfonso II defeated the Muslims in the valley of Pisuerga in 805 and at Lodos, near Oviedo in 816, reinforcing the impenetrability felt by the new nation. A truce was negotiated with the Muslims in 823, which lasted 15 years[101]. King Alfonso started constructing a series of fortified villages and castles in the mountains above the upper Ebro to guard against Muslim attacks, which ultimately gave the name to the area of Castile[102] . The discovery between 818 and 842 of a tomb attributed to St James the Apostle, at the place later known as Santiago de Compostela, created a focus for the new nation. The Chronicle of Alfonso III records that King Alfonso died "after ruling for fifty-two years" and was buried at Oviedo[103]. The Sebastiani Chronicon records that "Adefonsum" was buried in "ecclesia S. Mariæ" which he had founded[104]. The Chronicon Compostellani records that “Adefonsus” reigned 52 years, five months and 13 days[105]. ii) [daughter . The primary source which confirms her parentage and marriage has not yet been identified, although the Chronicon Albeldense names “Nepotianus cognatus regis Adefonsi” as successor of King Alfonso [106] . Her existence is therefore presumably speculative, on the assumption that “cognatus” in that source indicates brother-in-law (certainly one of the possible translations, although this meaning appears only to have become generally established in Latin language sources in later centuries). m NEPOCIANO, son of ---. The Chronicle of Alfonso III records that "Nepotianus, count of the palace, rebelled and seized power" after the death of King Alfonso I, but was defeated at the River Narcea by King Ramiro I who had been elected to succeed. The same source records that he fled the battlefield, was captured in the province of Primorias "by the two counts Scipio and Sonna", blinded, and confined to a monastery for the rest of his life[107] .] iii) [ROMÁN . Barrau-Dihigo asserts that Román, alleged son of King Fruela and supposed ancestor of the Traba family, was an entirely fictitious invention[108]. He is, for example, named in the Nobiliario of Pedro Conde de Barcelos "Conde D. Roman hermano del Rey D. Alonso el Casto" as father of "D. Iuana Romanes" who married "Conde D. Mendo" [109].]
* b) '''VIMERANO'''(-murdered [767]). The Chronicle of Alfonso III states that King Fruela "killed his brother… Vimerano with his own hands", the event being dated from the passage stating that the king was killed "not long after"[110].
* c)''' ADOSINDA (-bur Pravia San Juan)''' - The Chronicle of Alfonso III records the marriage of "Adosinda, daughter of Alfonso" and Silo "after Aurelio's death", commenting that they "had no son" [111] . After her husband died, Adosinda engineered the election of her nephew Alfonso as king, but he was deposed by her half-brother Maugerato who forced Adosinda to become a nun at San Juan Bautista de Pravia[112] . The Sebastiani Chronicon records that "Silo… cum uxore sua Regina Adosinda" was buried "in ecclesia S. Joannis Apostoli et Evang. in Pravia"[113]. m (773) SILO, son of --- (-783, bur Pravia San Juan). He succeeded on his marriage in 773 as SILO King of Asturias. The Chronicon Albeldense records that “Silo” maintained peace “cum Spania ob causam matris”[114], which suggests that his mother may have been Muslim. “Domnus Silo” donated “locum... Lucis” to found a monastery by charter dated 23 Aug 775, confirmed by “Ranimirus, Adefonsus, Hordoneus”, witnessed by “Nepotianus”[115] . He transferred the royal residence from Cangas de Onís to Pravia, on the Nalón mountain [116] . The Chronicle of Alfonso III records that he suppressed a rebellion in Galicia[117]. The Chronicle of Alfonso III states that Silo died "after the ninth year of his rule… as a result of a natural death, in the era 821 (783)"[118]. The Chronicon Compostellani records that “Silo” reigned 9 years, one month and one day[119]. The Sebastiani Chronicon records that "Silo… cum uxore sua Regina Adosinda" was buried "in ecclesia S. Joannis Apostoli et Evang. in Pravia"[120]. Silo & his wife had one child: i) ADELGASTER (-after 17 Jan 780). “Addelgaster filius Silonis Regis… cum coniuge mea Brunildi” founded the monastery of Santa María de Obona by charter dated 17 Jan 780, the dating clause stating “regnante principe nostro Silone cum uxore sua Odisinda”[121] . If the dating relating to Adosinda´s family is accurate as shown above, Adelgaster must have been a young adult at the date of this charter, unless he was born from an earlier otherwise unrecorded marriage of his father. m BRUNILDE, daughter of --- (-after 17 Jan 780). “Addelgaster filius Silonis Regis… cum coniuge mea Brunildi” founded the monastery of Santa María de Obona by charter dated 17 Jan 780[122]. - http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/ASTURIAS,%20LEON.htm#AlfonsoIdied757

——

PELAYO ([685/90]-Cangas de Onís 737[29], bur Santa Eulalia). "Pelagium, filium quondam Fafilani ducis ex semine regio" according to the Chronicle of Alfonso III[30]. The Chronicon Albeldense names “Pelagius filius Veremundi, nepos Ruderici regis Toletani”, adding that he was the first to enter “in Asturibus montibus sub rupe in antrum de Auseba”[31]. Barrau-Dihigo comments that this passage forms part of a list of genealogical information which appears to be of dubious value[32]. According to the Chronicle of Alfonso III, Pelayo was sword-bearer for Kings Witiza and Rodrigo[33], when presumably he must at least have been an adolescent or young adult. According to the Chronicon Albeldense, Pelayo was expelled from Toledo “a Vitizane rege”, adding that he entered Asturias after the Moorish invasion, started the rebellion “regnante Juzeph in Cordoba”, and captured “Monuza” in León and “Oppa episcopus”[34]. The Chronicle of Alfonso III records that he fled to Asturias after the Moorish invasion "oppressed by the dominion of the Ishmaelites", although on arrival he made contact with the Muslim prefect of Gijón who sent Pelayo as his envoy to Córdoba[35]. He was elected in [718] as PELAYO King of Asturias, based in the Picos de Europa district of eastern Asturias. The Chronicle of Alfonso III records that his supporters' first clear victory against the Muslims took place at Covadonga in 722[36], although as discussed further in the Introduction the historical importance of the battle on the ground is unclear. The kingdom's first capital was at Cangas de Onís, later moved to Oviedo. The Akhbar al-Majmua records that "Okba ben Al-Hachaeh" [Uqba bin al-Hajaj al-Saluli, governor of Muslim Spain from [728]], conquered territory as far as Narbonne and subjugated Galicia, Álava and Pamplona, with the exception of "la sierra, en la cual se había refugiado con 300 hombres un rey llamado Belay" whom the Muslims continually harried until their number was reduced to "30 hombres, que no tenían 10 mujeres"[37]. The Chronicon Albeldense records that Pelayo died “in locum Canicas æra 775”[38]. The Sebastiani Chronicon records that "Pelagius…cum uxore sua Gaudiosa regina" was buried "territorio Cangas in ecclesia Sanctæ Eulaliæ de Velapnio"[39]. The Chronicon Compostellani records that “Pelagius” reigned five years in Asturias[40]. m ([after 713]) GAUDIOSA, daughter of --- (-bur Santa Eulalia). The Sebastiani Chronicon records that "Pelagius…cum uxore sua Gaudiosa regina" was buried "territorio Cangas in ecclesia Sanctæ Eulaliæ de Velapnio"[41]. Her origin is unknown but her name suggests a Roman family background. It is assumed that King Pelayo married after arriving in Asturias, judging by the likely birth dates of his children as shown below.

=Pelayo & his wife had two children:=

* a) '''FÁFILA''' ([715/20]-mid-Jun 739, bur Santa Cruz). The Chronicle of Alfonso III names "Favila, Pelayo's son" when recording that he succeeded his father, commenting that he "constructed…a basilica in honour of the Holy Cross" and lived only a short time[42]. His birth date range is estimated on the assumption that he was a young adult when elected to succeed his father as king. He succeeded his father in 737 as FÁFILA King of Asturias. The Chronicle of Alfonso III states that "he is reported to have been killed by a bear during a moment of levity"[43]. The Chronicon Albeldense states that “Fasila filius eius [Pelayo]” reigned for two years and was killed by a bear[44]. The Chronicon Compostellani records that “Fafila” reigned two years and six months[45]. Ibn-Khaldun records that, after the death of "roi Pélage, fils de Fafila", "son fils Fafila" succeeded and reigned two years[46]. The Sebastiani Chronicon records that "Fafila…cum uxore sua Regina Froleba" was buried "territorio Cangas in ecclesia Sanctæ Crucis"[47]. m FROILIUBA, daughter of --- (-bur Santa Cruz). The Sebastiani Chronicon records that "Fafila…cum uxore sua Regina Froleba" was buried "territorio Cangas in ecclesia Sanctæ Crucis"[48]. Her name suggests Visigothic origin, recalling the Visigoth names Fruela and Liuba. King Fáfila's wife is named in the commemorative inscription of the foundation of the church of Santa Cruz[49].
* b) '''ERMESENDA''' [720/25]-, bur Santa María). The Chronicon Albeldense records that “Bermisindam, Pelagii filiam” married “Adefonsus…Petri, Cantabriæ ducis filius” who succeeded King Fáfila[50]. The Chronicle of Alfonso III names "the daughter of Pelayo Ermesinda" when recording her marriage to "Alfonso the son of Peter"[51]. Her birth date range is estimated from the birth of her first known child in [740]. Her marriage date is deduced from the Chronicle of Alfonso III recording that Alfonso "enjoyed many victories alongside his father-in-law"[52]. The Sebastiani Chronicon records that "Adefonsus…cum uxore sua Regina Ermesinda" was buried "in territorio Cangas in Monasterio S. Mariæ"[53]. '''m (before 737) ALFONSO [Duque de Cantabria], son of PEDRO [Duque de Cantabria] & his wife --- (-757, bur Santa María)'''. He was elected in 739 to succeed his brother-in-law as ALFONSO I “el Católico” King of Asturias. - http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/ASTURIAS,%20LEON.htm

——

Ermesinda, también llamada en otros documentos Ormisenda y hasta Ermisenda. Hija de don Pelayo y hermana de Favila, transmitió sus derechos al poder regio en Asturias a su marido Alfonso I, hijo del duque Pedro de Cantabria.

Había nacido entre los años 720 y 730, probablemente en la región de Oviedo, acontecimiento no documentado, al igual que la mayoría de los sucesos, hechos y personajes de la época contemporáneos del turbión que supuso, por una parte la invasión musulmana y la descomposición del visigodo, y, por otro lado, lo apartado de la región y el sumo desconocimiento que se tiene de la familia de don Pelayo, huida de la corte toledana hacia el norte peninsular, caso de ser veraz la idea que se tiene de que éste fuese un dignatario en la capitalidad del reino visigodo.

Según la Crónica Albeldense, era hija de don Pelayo y de Gaudiosa y casó con el que, a la postre, sería sucesor de su padre: Alfonso I, hijo de Pedro, último duque de Cantabria, cuando en 739, al morir su hermano Favila o Fáfila, el esposo vino a ocupar el trono de Asturias, entre 739 y 757. De su matrimonio nacieron dos hijos Fruela I, futuro rey, Vimarano y una hija, Adosinda.

--------------------

FUENTES:

-http://www.abcgenealogia.com/Asturias00.html
--------------------
Hermesinda Peláez

b. circa 720

Father Pelayo Iº, rey de Asturias b. circa 690, d. circa 737

Mother Gaudiosa (?) b. circa 695

Hermesinda Peláez was "hija de Pelayo."1 She was born circa 720. She was the daughter of Pelayo Iº, rey de Asturias and Gaudiosa (?). Hermesinda Peláez married Alfonso Iº Pérez "el Católico", rey de Asturias, son of Pedro, duque de Cantabria, circa 739.2,1

Family

Alfonso Iº Pérez "el Católico", rey de Asturias b. circa 693, d. 757

--------------------
Princesa da Astúrias
--------------------
Ermesinda, também referenciada nalguns documentos como Ormisenda e inclusivé Ermisenda.

Terá nascido provavelmente na região de Oviedo, facto que não se encontra documentado, da mesma forma que a maioria dos sucessos, feitos e personagens contemporâneos do turbilhão daquela época, por um lado a invasão muçulmana e colapso do Reino Visigodo de Toledo, e, por outro, o confinamento àquela regiáo das Astúrias e respectivo desconhecimento sobre a linhagem de D. Pelágio, e respectiva fuga da corte toledana em direcção ao Norte peninsular, caso este seja, efectivamente, um dignatário na capitalidade do reino visigodo.

--------------------

En mi nuevo libro LA SORPRENDENTE GENEALOGÍA DE MIS TATARABUELOS, encontrarán a este y muchos otros de sus ancestros con un resumen biográfico de cada uno. El libro está disponible en: amazon.com barnesandnoble.com palibrio.com. Les será de mucha utilidad y diversión. Ramón Rionda

In my new book LA SORPRENDENTE GENEALOGÍA DE MIS TATARABUELOS, you will find this and many other of your ancestors, with a biography summary of each of them. The book is now available at: amazon.com barnesandnoble.com palibrio.com. Check it up, it’s worth it. Ramón Rionda

=Sources=

* Albeldense Chronicle Chronicle of the 9TH Century - https://es.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crónica_albeldense

1: Collins, Roger. Visigothic Spain, 409-711.
Blackwell publishing 2004.
2: King, P.D., King Chindasuinth and the first territorial law code of the Visigothic kingdon.
Edward James-Oxford-Clarendon Press 1980, PP. 131-157.

Rootsweb Feldman
URL: http://worldconnect.genealogy.rootsweb.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=:3044567&id=I01078
# ID: I01078
# Name: Alphonse Ier Le Catholique DE CANTABRE 1 2 3 4 5
# Sex: M
# Birth: ABT 695 1 2 3 4 5
# Death: 757 1 2 3 4 5
# Change Date: 15 JAN 2004 5
# Change Date: 16 SEP 2001 2 3 4 5
# Note:

[Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED]

2 SOUR S332582
3 DATA
4 TEXT Date of Import: 14 Jan 2004


[daveanthes.FTW]

#Générale# Roi de Léon de 739 à 757.[Spare.FTW]

Father: Duke Of Cantabria PEDRO b: 650
Mother: Princess Of Asturias HERMESINDA b: 680

Marriage 1 Ermessinde DES ASTURIES b: ABT 710

Children

1. Has No Children Bermude Ier Le Diacre DES ASTURIES b: 730
2. Has Children Fruela DE CANTABRE*** b: ABT 735


Sources:

1. Title: daveanthes.FTW
Note: ABBR daveanthes.FTW
Note: Source Media Type: Other
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Book
Text: Date of Import: 14 Jan 2004
2. Title: daveanthes.FTW
Note: ABBR daveanthes.FTW
Note: Source Media Type: Other
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Book
Text: Date of Import: Jan 13, 2004
3. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Jan 18, 2004
4. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: 21 Jan 2004
5. Title: Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Feb 6, 2004

Rootsweb Feldman
URL: http://worldconnect.genealogy.rootsweb.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=:3044567&id=I01081
# ID: I01081
# Name: Duke Of Cantabria PEDRO 1 2 3 4 5
# Sex: M
# Birth: 650 1 2 3 4 5
# Change Date: 15 JAN 2004 5
# Change Date: 25 DEC 2001 2 3 4 5
# Note:

[Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED]

2 SOUR S332582
3 DATA
4 TEXT Date of Import: 14 Jan 2004


[daveanthes.FTW]

#Générale# Duc de Cantabrique en 700.

DATE 5 MAY 2000


NSFX ; Visigothic leader descended from the ings of Toledo, Leovigildo and Ricaredo
TYPE Book
AUTH ESS
PERI Europaische Stammtafeln
EDTR Schwennicke, Detlev
TEXT ii:1984:49-50
TYPE Book
AUTH Stuart, Roderick W.
PERI Royalty for Commoners
EDTN 3d
PUBL Genealogical Publishing co., Inc, Baltimore, MD (1998)
ISB 0-8063-1561-X
TEXT 276-43
DATE 29 MAY 2000[Spare.FTW]

Father: King Of The Visigoths ERVIK b: 610
Mother: Princess Of The Visigoths LIUBIGOTONA b: 615

Marriage 1 Princess Of Asturias HERMESINDA b: 680

Children

1. Has Children Alphonse Ier Le Catholique DE CANTABRE b: ABT 695
2. Has Children Duke Of Cantabria FRUELA I b: 720


Sources:

1. Title: daveanthes.FTW
Note: ABBR daveanthes.FTW
Note: Source Media Type: Other
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Book
Text: Date of Import: 14 Jan 2004
2. Title: daveanthes.FTW
Note: ABBR daveanthes.FTW
Note: Source Media Type: Other
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Book
Text: Date of Import: Jan 13, 2004
3. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Jan 18, 2004
4. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: 21 Jan 2004
5. Title: Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Feb 6, 2004

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]