== Notes for [[Item:Q91345|Q91345]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cleopatra_V_of_Egypt

Cleopatra V of Egypt

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Cleopatra V Tryphaena of Egypt (Greek: Κλεοπάτρα, born c. 95 BC, died c. 69/68 BC or c. 57 BC) was a Ptolemaic Queen of Egypt. She is the only surely attested wife of Ptolemy XII.

Descent and marriage

Cleopatra V may have been an illegitimate daughter of Ptolemy IX.[1] She is first mentioned in 79 BC in two papyri. In that year she married Ptolemy XII, king of Egypt. Ptolemy XII was also an illegitimate child of Ptolemy IX, but it is unclear if he and Cleopatra V were full siblings or if they had different mothers. They received divine worship as theoí Philopátores kai Philádelphoi (father-, brother- and sisterloving gods).[2] In another theory she is likely to be a daughter of Ptolemy X Alexander because Cleopatra VII reveals her grandfather as Ptolemy X Alexander and that Strato confirms her sister Berenice's mother as Cleopatra V. In this case her mother could have been Berenice III

--------------------

ID: I62181

Name: Cleopatra V Tryphaena of Egypt

Given Name: Cleopatra V Tryphaena

Surname: of Egypt

Sex: F

_UID: 04BFEB12425FCB4781A041EF675DCA6ABC19

Change Date: 26 Nov 2005

Death: Y

Father: Ptolemy IX Soter II of Egypt

Mother: Cleopatra IV of Egypt

Marriage 1 Ptolemy XIII of Egypt

Married:

Children

CLEOPATRA @@ VII OF EGYPT b: 69 BC

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I62181
--------------------
Cleopatra V Trifena, reina corregente de la dinastía Ptolemaica de Egipto de 58 a 57 a. C. Se casó con su hermano Ptolomeo XII, siendo la madre de Cleopatra VII, y posiblemente de Cleopatra VI y Berenice IV.
--------------------
'''
=Cleopatra V of Egypt=
'''

Cleopatra V Tryphaena of Egypt (Greek: Κλεοπάτρα Τρύφαινα, born c. 95 BC, died c. 69/68 BC or c. 57 BC) was a Ptolemaic Queen of Egypt. She is the only surely attested wife of Ptolemy XII.

'''Descent and marriage'''

Cleopatra may have been an illegitimate daughter of Ptolemy IX or the daughter of Ptolemy X Alexander I by his wives - Cleopatra Selene I or Berenice III. In some sources Cleopatra Tryphaena, wife of Ptolemy XII, is referred to as Cleopatra VI.

She is first mentioned in 79 BC in two papyri. In that year she married Ptolemy XII, king of Egypt. Ptolemy XII was an illegitimate child of Ptolemy IX, but it is unclear if he and Cleopatra Tryphaena were full siblings or not. They received divine worship as theoí Philopátores kai Philádelphoi (father-, brother- and sister-loving gods).

'''Death and identity'''

It is unclear how long Cleopatra V lived, and with which mentions of Cleopatra Tryphaena in the historical record she should be identified, as the numbering used to distinguish the Ptolemies is a modern invention. Cleopatra Tryphaena V vanished around the time Cleopatra VII was born (69 BC): her name begins to disappear from monuments and papyri, and there is an inscription of Ptolemy XII from 68 BC that does not mention her but would be expected to do so had she still been alive. There is some indication that she may have died in 69 or 68 BC — she may have died in childbirth or was murdered. Should she really have died that early, then the Cleopatra Tryphaena who is mentioned — after the expulsion of Ptolemy XII — as co-ruler of Egypt (together with Berenice IV) in 58 and 57 BC, and died around 57 BC, must be her daughter, numbered by some historians as Cleopatra VI Tryphaena. This is also supported by Porphyry.

On the other hand, there is a dedication on the Temple of Edfu from 57 BC that inscribes Cleopatra Tryphaena's name alongside Ptolemy XII's, which would have meant the king's wife rather than daughter and would be unlikely had Ptolemy XII's wife really died already twelve years earlier. Thus most modern historians consider Cleopatra V to be identical with the purported Cleopatra VI Tryphaena, and have her living to c. 57 BC. This would comport with the account by Strabo,[9] who reports Ptolemy XII to have had only three daughters; we can reliably identify Berenice IV, Cleopatra VII, and Arsinoe IV as the king's daughters, so that there would not be left any room for a Cleopatra VI.

The historian Werner Huß believes that Ptolemy XII repudiated his wife Cleopatra V in 69 BC and married a noble Egyptian woman from the high priest family of Memphis. This presumed second wife of the Egyptian king could have been the mother of Cleopatra VII and this daughter's younger siblings, while Berenice IV was the daughter of Cleopatra V because Strabo only calls the oldest daughter of Ptolemy XII a legitimate child. If this theory is true then Cleopatra V assumed power together with her daughter Berenice IV after the expulsion of Ptolemy XII (58 BC) and died before the end of the next year, as her name again disappears from the documents after 57 BC.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cleopatra_V_of_Egypt
--------------------
'''
=Cleopatra VI of Egypt=
'''

Cleopatra VI Tryphaena (Greek: Κλεοπάτρα Τρύφαινα) was an Egyptian Ptolemaic queen. She may be identical with Cleopatra V.

There were at least two, perhaps three Ptolemaic women called Cleopatra Tryphaena.

'''Tryphaena, daughter of Ptolemy VIII Physcon and Cleopatra III'''

Tryphaena was a sister of Ptolemy IX Lathyros, Ptolemy X Alexander I, Cleopatra IV and Cleopatra Selene I. If this Tryphaena also bore the name Cleopatra, has not been attested. This Tryphaena may have been born in early 140 or 141 BC. She married Antiochus VIII Grypus, king of Syria, in 124 BC, and bore him five sons: Seleucus VI Epiphanes, the twin Antiochus XI Epiphanes and Philip I Philadelphus, Demetrius III Eucaerus, and Antiochus XII Dionysus. The couple also had a daughter called Laodice. Tryphaena was killed in Antioch (Greek: Αντιόχεια), capital of Syria, by Antiochus IX Cyzicenus, as a revenge for his own wife's (Cleopatra IV) death by the orders of her sister Tryphaena (in 111 BC).

'''Cleopatra V Tryphaena, wife of Ptolemy XII Auletes'''

Cleopatra V Tryphaena was a Queen of Egypt until her mysterious disappearance from the records in 69 BC. If, as some scholars believe, her disappearance is attributable to her death, then it must be assumed that she had a daughter also called Cleopatra Tryphaena.

'''Cleopatra Tryphaena, daughter of Cleopatra V and Ptolemy XII Auletes'''

She is called Cleopatra VI Tryphaena by some modern historians and she would have been an older sister of the famous Cleopatra VII. If so, her birth year would correctly be c. 75 BC. Some sources say she died as a child. Others say that when Ptolemy XII fled to Rome to avoid an uprising in Alexandria against him (in 58 BC), she and her sister Berenice IV took control of Ptolemaic Egypt. Strabo, however, states that Ptolemy had three daughters, of whom only the eldest (Berenice) was legitimate. This suggests that the Cleopatra Tryphaena referred to by Porphyry may have been Ptolemy's wife, not his daughter. Many experts now identify Cleopatra VI with Cleopatra V of Egypt, Ptolemy's wife.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cleopatra_VI_of_Egypt

RESEARCH NOTES:
Princess of Egypt

(TRYPHAENA)

(SELENE)

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per01344.htm#0

Cleopatra V of Egypt
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Cleopatra V of Egypt (Greek: ??e?p?t?a) was the mother of Cleopatra VII, by her husband and brother Ptolemy XII of Egypt, and was possibly the mother of Cleopatra VI of Egypt and Berenice IV. She co-ruled Egypt with her daughter Berenice IV for a year before her death, when her daughter reigned alone in Egypt.
[edit]

External links

* Genealogy of Ptolemaic Dynasty

Preceded by:
Ptolemy XII Ptolemaic Queen of Egypt
with Ptolemy XII and Berenice IV Succeeded by:
Berenice IV

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]