== Notes for [[Item:Q106331|Q106331]] ==


Yaḥyā b. Zayd (Arabic: یحیی بن زید) was a grandson of Imam al-Sajjad (a) who fled from Kufa to Khorasan after the martyrdom of his father, Zayd b. 'Ali (a). He mobilized people of Khorasan to start an uprising against the Umayyad government. His uprising failed, just like his father's, and he was martyred in Jowzjan in Afghanistan and was buried there. However, some mausoleums are attributed to him in some Iranian cities such as Gorgan, Sabzevar and Varamin. His remarks show that he did not claim the position of imamate, although there are some doubts about this. Lineage, Teknonym, and Title Yahya's father was Imam al-Sajjad (a)'s son who started an uprising against the Umayyad government and was martyred. His mother was Rayta, the daughter of 'Abd Allah b. Muhammad b. Hanafiyya,[1] a virtuous woman from Banu Hashim.[2]

There is no explicit mention of the year of his birth in sources, but given the year of his martyrdom (125/743) and his age (18 years old), it should be 107/725.[3]

Al-Bayhaqi took Yahya's teknonym to be Abu Talib, and since he was martyred in Jowzjan in Afghanistan,[4] he was also known as "Qatil Jowzjan" (murdered in Jowzjan).

Yahya had long hair and nice beard, and was very tall.[5] He was as courageous, self-confident and combative as his father.[6]

Family tree of Ahl al-Bayt (a)

Wife and Children Yahya married his cousin, Muhibba, the daughter of 'Amr b. 'Ali b. al-Husayn (a).[7] According to many historians and scholars of genealogy, he had no children, because he was killed when he was very young, but Hamd Allah Mustowfi has mentioned a person called "'Abd Allah b. Yahya" as his son who was known as "Talib al-Haqq" (seeker of truth). Ibn Jubayr has also mentioned a girl known as Zaybat bt. Yahya b. Zayd b. Imam al-Sajjad (a).[8] According to some sources, Zaynab bt. Yahya's mausoleum is located in Egypt.[9]

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000018889282534

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]