== Notes for [[Item:Q107370|Q107370]] ==

* '''5th Umayyad Caliph'''

b. circa 646, d. October 705

Father Marwân I ibn al-Hakam al-Qurayshi, 4th Umayyad Caliph1,2 b. 623, d. 685

Mother 'A'isha bint Mu`awiya ben al-Mughira 1 b. circa 630

Of the Umayyad. 'Abd al-Malik ibn Marwân, 5th Umayyad Caliph was named in full: Abdul-Malik bin Marwan bin Al- Hakam Al-Umawi.3 He was born circa 646 at Medina, Arabia.3,2 He was the son of Marwân I ibn al-Hakam al Qurayshi, 4th Umayyad Caliph and 'A'isha bint Mu`awiya ben al-Mughira.1,2 'Abd al-Malik ibn Marwân, 5th Umayyad Caliph was entrusted, at age 16, by his kinsman, the caliph Mu'awiyah, with administrative responsibilities circa 662.2 He succeeded to the caliphate in 685.2 5th Umayyad Caliph at Damascus, Syria, between 685 and 705.3,4,5 He was an intelligent, devout, ascetic and learned man.3 He was able to regain control of the empire after the assassination of Mus`ab and `Abdullah, sons of Al-Zubair during their war with Al-Hajjaj Al-Thaqafi.3 He was a great reformer, established a postal system, Arabicized the divans and minted gold currency.3 He resumed campaigns against the Byzantines in Anatolia in 692, but no permanent conquest ensued. These campaigns were partly designed to keep the Syrian troops fit.2 He conquered Armenia in 693.4 He conquered North Africa in 698.4 He died in October 705 at Damascus, Syria.1,3,5

Family

Children

# al-Walîd I ibn 'Abd al-Malik, Caliph of Damascus+ b. c 6764
# Sulaymân ibn 'Abd al-Malik, Caliph of Damascus b. c 6794
# Yazîd II ibn 'Abd al-Malik, 9th Caliph of Damascus+ b. c 6824,6
# Hishâm ibn 'Abd al-Malik, 10th Umayyad Caliph+ b. 690, d. 7431,6

Citations

[S187] Royal Genealogy Database, online http://www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/public/genealogy/

[S862] Various EB CD 2001, 'Abd al-Malik (Umayyad caliph).

[S469] Al-Islam.com, online http://www.al-islam.com/

[S653] PoH, online http://www.friesian.com/

[S172] Various Encyclopaedea Britannica.

[S1411] Stanley Lane-Pool, The Mohammadan Dynasties, pg. 11.

Source 1: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abd_al-Malik_ibn_Marwan

Source 2: http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abd_al-Malik_%28Umayyaden%29

Built the Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem.
He also demolished the Basilica of Saint John the Baptist and built the Grand Mosque of Damascus in its place. The Grand Mosque hold a shrine of the head of Saint John the Baptist known to Muslims as,
Vahya.

Name Suffix:<NSFX> Caliph Damascus

Name Suffix:<NSFX> Caliph Damascus

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000003153384627

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]