== Notes for [[Item:Q88013|Q88013]] ==

ID: I82288

Name: Arsinoe I of Thrace

Given Name: Arsinoe I

Surname: of Thrace

Sex: F

_UID: 21C01F3CF2110047B18761EE896C6CE04EE5

Change Date: 26 Nov 2005

Death: Y

Marriage 1 Ptolemy II Philadelphus of Egypt

Married:

Children

Berenice Phernophorus of Egypt

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I82288

--------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arsinoe_II_of_Egypt
--------------------
'''
=Arsinoe I=
'''

Arsinoe I (Greek: Αρσινόη Α’, 305 BC-after c. 248 BC was a Greek Princess who was of Macedonian and Thessalian descent. She was the second daughter and youngest child born to King Lysimachus from his first wife, Nicaea of Macedon. Arsinoe I had two older siblings: a brother called Agathocles and a sister called Eurydice.

Her paternal grandfather was Agathocles of Pella a nobleman who was a contemporary to King Philip II of Macedon who reigned 359-336 BC, while her maternal grandfather was the powerful Regent Antipater. Arsinoe I was named in honor of an unnamed grandmother, who may have been the mother of Lysimachus or the mother of Nicaea whose both names of these women are unknown. Little is known of her life prior to her marriage.

Between 289/28 and 281 BC, Arsinoe became the first wife of Ptolemaic Greek Egyptian Pharaoh Ptolemy II Philadelphus, who was also her distant maternal cousin. Arsinoe I married Ptolemy II as part of an alliance between her father and Ptolemy II, against Seleucus I Nicator.

Arsinoe I was, by marriage, Queen of the Ptolemaic Kingdom. Arsinoe I bore Ptolemy II three children; two sons: Ptolemy III Euergetes, Lysimachus of Egypt and a daughter called Berenice. At an unknown date between after 279-274/3 BC, a sister of Ptolemy II called Arsinoe II arrived in Egypt, who was the last wife of Lysimachus and had fled from her half-brother-husband Ptolemy Keraunos. Probably at the instigation of Arsinoe II, charges of conspiring to assassinate Ptolemy II were soon brought against Arsinoe I.

Ptolemy II had convicted Arsinoe I of plotting against him. He ended his marriage to Arsinoe I and divorced her. Ptolemy II had exiled Arsinoe I to Coptos in southern Egypt. It is chronologically plausible that these events were also connected to the banishment of Ptolemy II’s niece, Theoxena of Egypt as Theoxena was sent to the Thebaid, perhaps to Coptos. Afterwards Ptolemy II married his sister Arsinoe II and after the death of Arsinoe II, Ptolemy II’s children with Arsinoe I were officially regarded as the children of Arsinoe II.

Arsinoe I lived in exile for twenty years. During her exile, Arsinoe I lived in great splendour and exercised considerable power, since she was a wife of a former pharaoh. Her first son with Ptolemy II succeeded his father after his death.

A surviving Stele has been found at Coptos which refers to Arsinoe I. The Stele is of Senu-sher, a steward of Arsinoe I and the Stele is assigned to Arsinoe I’s exile. The stele calls Arsinoe I the ‘king’s wife’, but her name is not enclosed in the royal Cartouche, as it is customary for an Egyptian Queen. Another piece of surviving evidence connected to Arsinoe I, is a Phoenician inscription found at Lapithos, Cyprus, which is dated in the 11th or 12th year in the reign of Ptolemy II. The inscription refers to a sacrifice instituted by Yatonba’al on behalf of ‘the legitimate scion and his wife’, hence refers to Arsinoe I. As Arsinoe I was disgraced as a traitor, the fact the person who did the sacrifice on her behalf strongly suggests that the news of her disgrace had not yet reached him.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arsinoe_I

PHILADELPHUS; DEIFIED 272/1 BC

Arsinoe I of Egypt
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Arsinoe I (305/295-?) was queen of Egypt 284/1-ca. 274 BC and first wife of Ptolemy II of Egypt.

Arsinoe I was the daughter of Lysimachus, king of Thrace. She bore Ptolemy II's the three children, including his successor Ptolemy III of Egypt. She married Ptolemy II in 284/1 BC. Around 274 BC, she was convicted of plotting against him and went in exile from Egypt to Coptos, and soon Ptolemy II married his sister Arsinoe II of Egypt.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]