== Notes for [[Item:Q113112|Q113112]] ==

También llamado Pelaio Guterres, Gobernador de Alva; hijo de Guterre Pais, Gobernador de Tierra de Maia. Con lo que sería nieto en vez de hijo de "el Diácono".

Ricohome de Castilla, Señor de Cisneros y muchos estados en Galicia y Asturias, conocido con su hermano como “Infantes de Carrión”. De los varios hijos procedieron los linajes Flores, Girón, Cisneros, Silva y Acuña.

========================
"'''Don Pelayo Pelaez''' Señor del Paramo de la Focella, quien entre otros hijos tuvo à Don Pelayo Gutierrez......„Munio Pelaez , y Ordoño Pelaez, , Pedrð Pelaez, , y '''Pelayo Pelaez''', fueron hijos de Pelayo Froylaz, y de la Condeſa Eslonza".

========================
his father, mother siblings given as:

The PEDIGREE of Pelayo Fruelas `el Diacono' de LEON

Infante de CARRION
Born: ? Died: 1032

HM George I's 21-Great Grandfather. HRE Ferdinand I's 15-Great Grandfather. U.S. President's 23-Great Grandfather. PM Churchill's 27-Great Grandfather. HM Margrethe II's 27-Great Grandfather. Poss. `Osawatomie' Brown's 25-Great Grandfather.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
poss. Wives/Partners: Aldonza Ordonez de ASTURIAS [alt ped] ; Aldonza (Esloncia) ORDONEZ de ASTURIAS
Children: Jimena Pelaez de ASTURIAS ; Pedro Pelayez (Conde de CARRION) de LEON ; Pelayo Pelayez de CISNEROS (de LEON) ; Cristina PELAEZ de LEON ; Teresa PELAEZ de LEON
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Possible Child: Sancha Pelayez de LEON

http://www.fabpedigree.com/s096/f738424.htm
==========================================

The PEDIGREE of Aldonza (Esloncia) ORDONEZ de ASTURIAS

Condesa de las ASTURIAS

HM George I's 20-Great Aunt. HRE Ferdinand I's 15-Great Aunt. HRE Charles VI's 19-Great Aunt. U.S. President's 26-Great Aunt. PM Churchill's 27-Great Aunt. Poss. HM Margrethe II's 24-Great Grandmother. `Osawatomie' Brown's 25-Great Aunt.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Husband/Partner: Pelayo Fruelas `el Diacono' de LEON
Probable Children: Jimena Pelaez de ASTURIAS ; Pedro Pelayez (Conde de CARRION) de LEON ; Pelayo Pelayez de CISNEROS (de LEON) ; Cristina PELAEZ de LEON ; Teresa PELAEZ de LEON ; Sancha Pelayez de LEON
Alternative Mother of Probable Children: poss. Aldonza Ordonez de ASTURIAS [alt ped]

http://www.fabpedigree.com/s049/f075502.htm

======================================
The PEDIGREE of Aldonza Ordonez de ASTURIAS [alt ped]

Condesa de las ASTURIAS

Poss. HM George I's 18-Great Grandmother. Poss. HRE Ferdinand I's 12-Great Grandmother. Poss. HRE Charles VI's 17-Great Grandmother. Poss. U.S. President's 23-Great Grandmother. PM Churchill's 30-Great Aunt. Poss. HM Margrethe II's 24-Great Grandmother. Poss. `Osawatomie' Brown's 25-Great Grandmother.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Husband/Partner: Pelayo Fruelas `el Diacono' de LEON
Possible Children: Jimena Pelaez de ASTURIAS ; Pedro Pelayez (Conde de CARRION) de LEON ; Pelayo Pelayez de CISNEROS (de LEON) ; Cristina PELAEZ de LEON ; Teresa PELAEZ de LEON ; Sancha Pelayez de LEON
Alternative Mother of Possible Children: prob. Aldonza (Esloncia) ORDONEZ de ASTURIAS

http://www.fabpedigree.com/s097/f738424.htm

His wives children listed as -

The PEDIGREE of Pelayo Pelayez de CISNEROS (de LEON)
Born: ? Died: abt. 1111

HM George I's 20-Great Grandfather. HRE Ferdinand I's 14-Great Grandfather. U.S. President's 22-Great Grandfather. PM Churchill's 26-Great Grandfather. HM Margrethe II's 26-Great Grandfather. `Red Baron' Richthofen's 26-Great Grandfather. Poss. `Osawatomie' Brown's 24-Great Grandfather. Poss. Jamie's 28-Great Grandfather.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
poss. Wives/Partners: Mayor GONSALEZ ; Adosinda ERMIGUES
Children: Maria Pelayez de CISNEROS ; Gonsalo PELAYEZ (Senor) de CISNEROS
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Possible Child: Gutierre Pelayez de SILVA
Alternative Father of Possible Child: Pelaio Guterres da SILVA

http://www.fabpedigree.com/s048/f369212.htm
====================================
The PEDIGREE of Mayor GONSALEZ

(Munia Dona)

HM George I's 20-Great Grandmother. HRE Ferdinand I's 14-Great Grandmother. U.S. President's 22-Great Grandmother. PM Churchill's 26-Great Grandmother. HM Margrethe II's 26-Great Grandmother. `Red Baron' Richthofen's 26-Great Grandmother. Poss. `Osawatomie' Brown's 24-Great Grandmother. Poss. Jamie's 28-Great Grandmother.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
poss. Husbands/Partners: Pelayo Pelayez de CISNEROS (de LEON) ; Pelaio Guterres da SILVA
Children: Maria Pelayez de CISNEROS ; Gonsalo PELAYEZ (Senor) de CISNEROS
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Possible Child: Gutierre Pelayez de SILVA
Alternative Mother of Possible Child: Adosinda ERMIGUES

http://www.fabpedigree.com/s081/f953692.htm
===================================
The PEDIGREE of Adosinda ERMIGUES

HM George I's 21-Great Aunt. HRE Ferdinand I's 15-Great Aunt. HRE Charles VI's 20-Great Aunt. U.S. President's 24-Great Aunt. PM Churchill's 26-Great Aunt. Poss. HM Margrethe II's 23-Great Grandmother. `Osawatomie' Brown's 24-Great Aunt. Poss. Jamie's 28-Great Grandmother.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
poss. Husbands/Partners: Pelayo Pelayez de CISNEROS (de LEON) ; Pelaio Guterres da SILVA
Possible Child: Gutierre Pelayez de SILVA
Alternative Mother of Possible Child: Mayor GONSALEZ

http://www.fabpedigree.com/s003/f207568.htm

Governor de Alva
Senor de Cisneros, Galicia, Asturias, Infantes de Carrion.
From various children descend the lineages of Flores, Giron, Cisneros, Silva and Acuna
Sources:
Nobliario das familias de Portugal: Felgueiras Gayo. Carvalhos de Basto, 2nda Edicao Braga 1989.
Pedatura Lusitana 6 Vol. Cristovaoalao de Morais, Caravalhos de Basto 2nda Edicao Braga 1997
Portugal derives its name from the Roman, Potras Cale.
Portugal conquered by the Moors 868.
Victory over the Muslims came at Ourique in 1139.
The battle of Sao Mamede 24 June 1128 between Count of Portugal, Afonso Henriques defeated his mother Countess Teresa and her lover, Fernao Peres de Trava in battle. Fernao de Trava was a Galician nobleman.
Source:
Historia Genealogica de Casa Real Portuguesa,
D. Antonio Caetano de Sousa,
Atlantida Livaria editora, Lda, 2a Edizao Coimbra, 1946

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]