== Notes for [[Item:Q52308|Q52308]] ==

{geni:about_me} AJA/INDUMATI
<p> The third Purushartha, Kama, love and pursuit of pleasure is illustrated by the third King Aja, his marrying Indumati–which is described elaborately from the Svayamvara onwards–their idyllic enjoyment and her sudden death while they were together in the garden and Aja, unable to console himself in the sorrow, giving up his life at the confluence of the Ganga and theSarayu (From the latter part of canto V to end of VIII). The death of Indumati and Aja following her are not made into a tragedy (Karuna) by the poet who says that, giving up his body at the holy waters, Aja gained the world of the gods, joined his beloved Indumati, now more resplendent in her divine form to which she had returned, and again enjoyed her company in the more glorious heavenly garden of Nandana. That is, the separation is not final, but a prelude, so to say, to a more glorious and lasting union, and is thus Karuna-Vipralambha. The great aesthete Abhinavagupta, in his commentary on the Natya Sastra, draws particular attention to the artistry of Kalidasa as seen in the conclusion that the poet gives episode. Bhoja too refers to this same verse and the idea it brings out, in his work of poetics.
<p> The third Purushartha, Kama, love and pursuit of pleasure is illustrated by the third King Aja, his marrying Indumati–which is described elaborately from the Svayamvara onwards–their idyllic enjoyment and her sudden death while they were together in the garden and Aja, unable to console himself in the sorrow, giving up his life at the confluence of the Ganga and theSarayu (From the latter part of canto V to end of VIII). The death of Indumati and Aja following her are not made into a tragedy (Karuna) by the poet who says that, giving up his body at the holy waters, Aja gained the world of the gods, joined his beloved Indumati, now more resplendent in her divine form to which she had returned, and again enjoyed her company in the more glorious heavenly garden of Nandana. That is, the separation is not final, but a prelude, so to say, to a more glorious and lasting union, and is thus Karuna-Vipralambha. The great aesthete Abhinavagupta, in his commentary on the Natya Sastra, draws particular attention to the artistry of Kalidasa as seen in the conclusion that the poet gives episode. Bhoja too refers to this same verse and the idea it brings out, in his work of poetics.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
6707A5D46C4A41EFBBFC9A22EF79916BA488

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]