== Notes for [[Item:Q112438|Q112438]] ==

----

===Origins

< [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garc%C3%ADa_Jiménez_of_Pamplona Wikipedia] > García Jiménez of Pamplona, was (sub- or co-) king of a part of Pamplona in the late 9th century, son of a supposed Jimeno.

The Códice de Roda shows García Jiménez to have married twice, firstly to Oneca, "Rebel of Sangüesa" with whom he had two children:

* Íñigo, called 'king' in the Códice de Roda when reporting his marriage to a granddaughter of Fortún Garcés of Pamplona, but not in his own entry as son of García Jiménez. He perhaps succeeded to his father's sub-kingdom (else the term is being used as an honorific rather than a title).
* '''Sancha''', married as her first husband Íñigo Fortúnez, son of king Fortún Garcés of Pamplona, and subsequently remarried to Galindo Aznárez II, Count of Aragon.


===Family

< [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galindo_Aznárez_II Wikipedia] > Galindo Aznárez II (died 922) was Count of Aragon from 893 to 922. He was the son of Aznar Galíndez II and his wife Onneca Garcés, daughter of King García Íñiguez of Pamplona.

Galindo Aznárez II (died 922) was Count of Aragon from 893 to 922. He was the son of Aznar Galíndez II and his wife Onneca Garcés, daughter of King García Íñiguez of Pamplona.[1].

Galindo was married twice. By his first wife, Acibella,[2] daughter of Count García II Sánchez of Gascony,[3] and his wife Amuna of Périgord, he had three children:
# Toda Galíndez, married to Bernat I, Count of Ribagorza,[4] to whom she brought Sobrarbe.
# Redemptus Galíndez, bishop.[3]
# Mirón Galíndez,[3] who probably died before his father since he did not inherit the county in spite of being a legitimate son

By his second wife, '''Sancha Garcés of Pamplona''', daughter of García Jiménez and Onneca Rebelle of Sangüesa, and half-sister of Sancho I, he had:
# Andregoto Galíndez, who inherited the Aragonese county. She was queen of Pamplona by her marriage with her first cousin García Sanchez, king of Pamplona (925–970).[5]
# Velasquita Galíndez,[3] first married Íñigo López de Estigi y Ciligueta.[6] She could also have been the wife of Count Fortún Jiménez of Aragon (fl. 943–958).[7]


Galindo also sired several illegitimate sons: Guntislo, Sancho, Belasco, Banzo—father of a Galindo[8]—and Aznar.[9]




===References
* < [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garc%C3%ADa_Jiménez_of_Pamplona Wikipedia] > García Jiménez of Pamplona. Retrieved 11 March 2023.
* < [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galindo_Aznárez_II Wikipedia] > Galindo Aznárez II. Retrieved 11 March 2023.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]