== Notes for [[Item:Q53090|Q53090]] ==

Tudhaliya I
<p>From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia</p>
<p>Tudhaliya I (sometimes referred to as Tudhaliya II, or even Tudhaliya I/II) was a king of the Hittite empire (New kingdom) 1430 BC–1400 BC.</p>
<p>Proper numbering of the Hittite rulers who bore the name Tudhaliya is problematical. There was a Hattian era figure who bore the name Tudhaliya who may or may not have ruled as king. Other reconstructions insert a Tudhaliya directly after Muwattalli I, but before the Tudhaliya discussed here.
<p>Some scholars call Tudhaliya I the first king of the New Kingdom, or Empire. Others give this honor to Suppiluliuma I. Tudhaliya may have been the grandson of the Middle Kingdom ruler Huzziya II. He may have been the direct successor of Muwatalli I, having overthrown him. The exact sequence of succession at the beginning of the New Kingdom is uncertain, however, because of the difficulty of placing Hattusili II. Tudhaliya I's reign includes a period of co-regency with Arnuwanda I, his son-in-law and adopted son.
<p>The most famous event of Tudhaliya's reign was his conquest of the land Assuwa. Assuwa is believed to be the origin of Asia. Further, there were many component territories within Assuwa, including the lands Taruisa and Wilusiya, which are now generally accepted to be references to Troy/Ilios, although there is not enough evidence at this time to explain how these two lands came to apply to a single location.
<p>Preceded by:</p>
<p>Muwatalli I(?) Hittite king Succeeded by:</p>
<p>Arnuwanda I</p>
<p>SOURCE NOTES:</p>
<p>http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per00736.htm#0</p>
<p>RESEARCH NOTES:</p>
<p>King of the Hittites 1430-1406 BCE</p>

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]