== Notes for [[Item:Q83123|Q83123]] ==

Al-Khaṭṭāb ibn Nufayl (Arabic: الخطاب بن نفيل) was an Arab chief from the tribe of Quraysh. He lived during the 6th century and was a contemporary of the Islamic prophet Muhammad. His son Umar would later become Muslim, and would come to be regarded by Sunni Muslims as the second "Rightly guided Caliph" (Arabic "Rashidun"). Thus, he was the ancestor of a good number of the companions of the Prophet (Arabic: ṣaḥāba).[1]

Al-Khattab was the son of Nufayl ibn Abd al-Uzza. His father was the chief of Banu Adi clan of Quraysh. After the death of his father, he succeeded him as the chief of Banu Adi.

Al-Khattab had a brother who died young. The name of this bother was Amr ibn Nufayl. Amr had a son named Zayd. He had good relations with his tribesmen and kin. However, his relationship with his nephew Zayd ibn Amr started gradually deteriorating because his nephew had denied the subordinate gods to Allāh and he embraced strict monotheism. This angered many members of Nufayl family and Banu Adi clan.

Zayd's wife Safiya disliked his travels to Syria. Whenever she saw him preparing for a journey, she reported it to al-Khattab, who would reproach Zayd for abandoning their religion. Zayd did not bother to explain himself to al-Khattab, but he rebuked Safiya for trying to humiliate him.[2]: 101, 102  Al-Khattab harassed Zayd so severely that Zayd was forced to leave the city. He spent the last few years of his life in the mountain caves surrounding Mecca. Al-Khattab then instructed the "young irresponsible men of the Quraysh" to ensure that Zayd could never enter the city again. Whenever Zayd tried to enter in secret, al-Khattab's men drove him out again.[2]: 102–103 [3]

One time, his nephew Zayd ibn Amr taunted him for worshiping idols.

He had a son, Umar. His other children included a daughter, Fatimah bint al-Khattab, and a son Zayd ibn al-Khattab. The daughter married the hanif Said ibn Zayd, and later would both become Muslims. However, they hid their new faith from al-Khattab and Umar. Al-Khattab died between 614 and 616.[4][unreliable source?]

In accounts preserved by al-Yahsubi (d. 1149), al-Khattab converted to Islam.[5]

Al-Khattab was the relative of many Companions of Muhammad.

Wife
Hantamah bint Hisham, she belongs to the wealthy clan of Quraysh Banu Makhzum.
Asma bint Wahb, was the second wife of al-Khattab
Children
The children of al-Khattab are:

Umar ibn al-Khattab, he was the elder son of Hantamah and Al-Khattab
Fatimah bint al-Khattab, daughter of Hantamah and Al-Khattab
Zayd ibn al-Khattab, he was the son of Al-Khattab and his second wife Asma bint Wahb.
Daughters and sons-in-law
Sa'id bin Zayd
Zaynab bint Madhun, she married Umar before 605[6]: 56
Umm Kulthum bint Jarwal, she married Umar ibn al-Khattab before 616,[7]: 92
Qurayba bint Abi Umayya, she married Umar before 616.[2]: 510 [7]: 92
Grandchildren
Hafsa bint Umar
Abdullah ibn Umar
Ubaydullah ibn Umar
Zayd ibn Umar
Asim ibn Umar, famous early Muslim scholar.
Abdurrahman ibn Sa'id ibn Zayd, also known as Zayd Abdur Rahman the Elder, was the son of her daughter Fatima.
References
Al Maarif, by Ibn Qutaybah page 77, Chapter "Dhikr Umar" [1]
Muhammad ibn Ishaq. Sirat Rasul Allah. Translated by Guillaume, A. (1955). The Life of Muhammad. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Guillaume, A. (1960). New Light on the Life of Muhammad, p. 27. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
"Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2006-02-26. Retrieved 2006-03-17.
al-Yahsubi, Al-qadi 'Iyad (2013-01-01). Ash - Shifa- Healing through defining The rights of Prophet Muhammad: الشفا بتعريف حقوق المصطفى (ص) [عربي/انكليزي] ترجمة. Dar Al Kotob Al Ilmiyah دار الكتب العلمية. ISBN 978-2-7451-6073-7.
Muhammad ibn Saad. Kitab al-Tabaqat al-Kabir vol. 8. Translated by Bewley, A. (1995). The Women of Madina. London: Ta-Ha Publishers.
Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari. Tarikh al-Rusul wa'l-Muluk. Translated by Fishbein, M. (1997). Volume 8: The Victory of Islam. Albany: State University of New York Press.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]