== Notes for [[Item:Q114659|Q114659]] ==

Count of Pallars (~922-~948), together with his elder brother, Isarn I. He was a son of Ramon I de Pallars i Ribagorça. He married Goldregot, daughter of Miró II de Cerdanya. It was under her influence, although she was also influenced by count Borrell II de Barcelona, that the county of Pallars definitely belonged to the Catalan eastern counties, fact which determined the disappearing of both the Basque and the Romance languages from El Pallars at the end of the 10th century. Catalan substituted these languages. The first three were counts at the same time. At least, from 963 onwards the two first and from 966 onwards, the third one, after some years under the regency of Goldregot.
--------------------
http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/ARAGONESE%20NOBILITY.htm

LOPE, son of RAIMUNDO [I] Conde de Ribagorza & his wife Guiniguentes --- (-after 947). The Codex de Roda names "Uernardo et domno Miro ac domno Lope seu domno Ysarno" as the children of "Regemondo" and his wife[13]. A different version is provided by a Fragmentum historicum in the cartulary of Alaon, according to which “Lupum” was the son of “Borrellus Paliarensis comes”, son of Bernardo [I] Conde de Ribagorza[14]. m GOTRUDA de Cerdanya, illegitimate daughter of MIRÓN [II] Conde de Cerdanya & his mistress Vigilia de Ampurias (-[956/63]). "Gollegod comitissa" donated property "in comitatu Ausona" to Vic by charter dated 18 May 953[15]. The primary source which confirms her parentage has not yet been identified. Lope & his wife had four children:

a) RAIMUNDO [II] (-after 7 Nov 1007). His parentage is indicated by a charter dated 30 Dec 1035 under which "Stephania…cometissa et filio suo Bernardo chomite" donated property to Santa Maria de Gerri, for the souls of "suscensoribus nostrorum vel Ramundo comite filio Goldergoto et Suniario filio Goldergoto, Wilelmo comite filio Ermetruit"[16].

b) BORELL [I] (-before 994). Conde de Pallars. m as her first husband, ERMENTRUDE, daughter of ---. She married secondly as his first wife, her first husband's brother, Sunyer [I] Conde de Pallars. Her name and second marriage are indicated by a charter dated 30 Dec 1035 under which "Stephania…cometissa et filio suo Bernardo chomite" donated property to Santa Maria de Gerri, for the souls of "suscensoribus nostrorum vel… Wilelmo comite filio Ermetruit"[17]. According to Europäische Stammtafeln[18], she was Ermentrude de Rouergue (there called "Ermengarde"), daughter of Raymond [I] Comte de Rouergue & his wife Richarde ---, but the primary source on which this is based has not yet been identified. The primary source which confirms her first marriage has not yet been identified. Borell [I] & his wife had six children:

i) ARMENGOL (-after 1030). The primary source which confirms his parentage has not yet been identified. Conde de Pallars. m ---. The name of Armengol's wife is not known. Armengol & his wife had one child:

(a) RAIMUNDO (-after 1030). The primary source which confirms his parentage has not yet been identified.

ii) GUILLERMO . The primary source which confirms his parentage has not yet been identified.

iii) ISARN . The primary source which confirms his parentage has not yet been identified.

iv) MIRON . The primary source which confirms his parentage has not yet been identified.

v) ABA . The primary source which confirms her parentage has not yet been identified.

vi) ERMENGARDA . The primary source which confirms her parentage has not yet been identified.

c) SUNYER (-1010). A Fragmentum historicum in the cartulary of Alaon names “Sumarius” as the son of “Lupus”[19]. "Suniarius…comes hac marchisus" confirmed earlier donations to the abbey of la Grasse by "avus meus Raimundus comes et patruus meus Ysarnus hac frater illius Atonis episcopus…frater meus Raimundus comes" by charter dated 7 Nov 1007 subscribed by "Raimundus comes, Guillelmus suo fratre"[20]. Conde de Pallars.

- see below.

d) SUNIFREDO .

e) RIQUILDA .

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]