== Notes for [[Item:Q86942|Q86942]] ==

From Wikipedia:

'''[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vespasia_Polla Vespasia Polla]''' (also known as '''Vespasia Pollia''', born c. 15 BC, fl 1st century AD) was the mother of the Roman Emperor Vespasian, grandmother to Emperors to Titus and Domitian. Polla came from a good equestrian family at Nursia. Suetonius (Life of Vespasian, 1.2-3) states that her father was:

>"Vespasius Pollio, thrice military tribune and prefect of the camp, while her brother became a senator with the rank of praetor. There is moreover on the top of a mountain, near the sixth milestone on the road from Nursia to Spoletium [modern Spoleto], a place called Vespasiae, where many monuments of the Vespasii are to be seen, affording strong proof of the renown and antiquity of the house."

She married a tax collector Titus Flavius Sabinus, and survived him. Their children were a daughter Flavia Vespasia who died in her infancy; a younger Sabinus and Vespasian. After her husband died she never remarried.

Sabinus achieved the senatorial rank, but Vespasian put off doing so. Suetonius (Life of Vespasian, 2.2) states that:

>"only his mother could finally induce him to sue for it. She at length drove him to it, but rather by sarcasm than by entreaties or parental authority, since she constantly taunted him with being his brother's footman." ”

== References ==

* Christian Settipani. ''Continuité gentilice et continuité sénatoriale dans les familles sénatoriales romaines à l'époque impériale'', 2000

== Additional Sources ==

* D. C. O'Driscoll, [http://dcodriscoll.pbworks.com/w/page/9955773/Flavius Flavius]

--------------------
'''
=Vespasia Polla=
'''
Vespasia Polla (also known as Vespasia Pollia, born c. 15 BC, fl 1st century AD) was the mother of the Roman emperor Vespasian, and grandmother to the emperors Titus and Domitian. Polla came from an equestrian family at Nursia.

Suetonius identifies her father as the Vespasius Pollio who was a three-time military tribune and a praefectus castrorum. Her brother rose as high as the praetorship. The Vespasii were regarded as an old family of great renown, and Suetonius notes a site called Vespasiae where many of their monuments had been built. This site was located on a mountaintop near the sixth milestone on the road between Nursia and Spoletum (present-day Spoleto).

Vespasia married a tax collector Titus Flavius Sabinus, and survived him. Their daughter Flavia Vespasia died in her infancy. One son was also named Titus Flavius Sabinus, and served as consul in 52. After her husband died she never remarried.

Sabinus achieved the senatorial rank, but Vespasian put off doing so. Suetonius (Life of Vespasian, 2.2) states that:

''only his mother could finally induce him to sue for it. She at length drove him to it, but rather by sarcasm than by entreaties or parental authority, since she constantly taunted him with being his brother's footman.''

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vespasia_Polla

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]