== Notes for [[Item:Q113066|Q113066]] ==

*http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/Galicia.htm#MunioMunozdiedafter1097B

'''MUNIO Muñoz''', son of MUNIO Rodríguez & his first wife Jimena Ordóñez (-after 20 Oct 1086). "Monnium Monnuz et uxor sua Uelasquita Monnuz" sold "in territorio Umania villa...Miraualles", which had belonged to "pater nostro domnum Monnum Ruderiquiz et...mater nostra domna Scemena", to the “Froila Menediz et uxor vestre Maria” by charter dated 13 Mar 1072[871]. Alfonso VI King of Castile granted "illo castello [de Ulver]" to "Munnu Munizi" by charter dated 4 Dec 1080[872]. "Monnio Moniz, uxor sua Velasquita, Xemena Moniz, Petro Velaz, Sol Sancxiz…" subscribed the charter dated 1 Oct 1085 under which "Gelvira Petriz…cum viro meo…Godino Citiz" donated property in Priaranza to the monastery of San Pedro de Montes[873]. “...Monniu Monniuz...” confirmed the charter dated 20 Oct 1086 under which “Cotina Uermutiz” donated “Uilla Abduz in loco...Aratoi mea racione...eredavit de viro meo Petro Monniuz et per meas arras” to Sahagún[874].

'''m''' VELASQUITA Muñoz, daughter of MUNIO --- & his wife --- (-after 1 Oct 1085). "Monnium Monnuz et uxor sua Uelasquita Monnuz" sold "in territorio Umania villa...Miraualles", which had belonged to "pater nostro domnum Monnum Ruderiquiz et...mater nostra domna Scemena", to the “Froila Menediz et uxor vestre Maria” by charter dated 13 Mar 1072[875]. "Monnio Moniz, uxor sua Velasquita, Xemena Moniz, Petro Velaz, Sol Sancxiz…" subscribed the charter dated 1 Oct 1085 under which "Gelvira Petriz…cum viro meo…Godino Citiz" donated property in Priaranza to the monastery of San Pedro de Montes[876].

Munio & his wife had [three] children:

* 1. [PEDRO Muñoz (-[22 Aug 1092/7 Feb 1093]).
* 2. [MUNIO Muñoz (-[17 Jan 1097/21 Mar 1097]). The dating clause of a charter dated 17 Jan 1097, under which "Vermudo Godestez" donated property in Rimor to the monastery of San Pedro de Montes, names "Monnio Monniz imperante ipsa terra de Ulver"[879]. His supposed sister "Xemena Munniz" is named in dating clauses of charters of the same monastery, both before the date of this document and from 21 Mar 1097 (see above).
* 3. [JIMENA Muñoz ([1055/65]-Espinareda del Bierzo 1128, after 25 May, [maybe 23 Jul], bur San Andres de Espinareda). The precise parentage of Jimena Muñoz has been the subject of considerable debate over recent years. … Mistress: ([1081/82]-) of ALFONSO VI King of Castile and León,

-----------

'''Munio Moniz de Bierzo''' (1030 – 1097) conde de Bierzo

Foi filho de Munio Rodriguez de Bierzo, conde de Bierzo e de Ximena Ordoñez (1000 -?), filha de Ordonho Bermudes de Leão (980 - 1042) e de Fronilde Pais de Coimbra (985 - 1058). Foi casado por duas vezes. O primeiro casamento foi com Muniadona Moniz, filha de Munio Moniz conde de Cea, de quem teve:

# Ximena Moniz de Bierzo (c. 1060 - 1128), teve pelo menos dois filhos com o rei Afonso VI de Leão e Castela, rei de Leão e rei de Castela.
# Gontronde Moniz de Touro (1060 -?) casou por duas vezes, a primeira D. Gomes Echigues e a segunda com Soeiro Mendes da Maia, “o Bom”,
# Arias Nunes

O segundo casamento foi com Vasquida.

----

He was the son of Munio Rodrigues. and Jimena Ordonhes, daughter of Ordonho Bermudes and Fronilde Pais. He was married twice. The first marriage was to Muniadona Moniz, daughter of Munio Moniz Count of Cea, from whom she had:

# Ximena Moniz de Bierzo (ca. 1060 - 1128), had two daughters with King Alfonso VI of León and Castile, king of León and king of Castile.
# Gontronde Moniz de Touro (1060 -?) married twice, the first D.Gomes Echigues and the second to Soeiro Mendes da Maia, "o Bom",
# Arias Nunes

The second marriage was with Vasquida.

in: Wikipédia, a enciclopédia livre. <http://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Munio_Moniz_de_Bierzo>

El Conde don Rodrigo Muñoz fue muerto por los Moros en la rota de Sacralias, La chronica general en la tercera parte cap. 21 llama a efte Conde don Rodrigo Nuñez, el que mataron defpues en la lid de Sucruviero, pero yo figo a don Pelayo Obifpo de Oviedo, que es el verdadero original. NOBLEZA DEL ANDALVZIA Por Gonçalo Argote de Molina, Sevilla 1588. De el Linaje de Domingo Muñoz, y de la antiguedad de fu apellido. Cap. XCVI. Págs. 98 y 99

--------------------
Jimena was the daughter of Count Munio Muñiz and his wife Velasquita. Munio Muñiz was the son of Count Munio Rodríguez and Jimena Ordóñez, who was the daughter of the infant Ordoño, illegitimate son of Bermudo II of Leon.

From 1093 to 1108, Jimena Muñiz served as lieutenant of the Cornatel Castle.

Jimena Muñiz made donations to the Monastery of San Pedro de Montes, the Cathedral of Astorga and the Hospital of San Juan and died in 1128.

Munio Moniz de Bierzo (1030 – 1097) conde de Bierzo

Foi filho de Munio Rodriguez de Bierzo, conde de Bierzo e de Ximena Ordoñez (1000 -?), filha de Ordonho Bermudes de Leão (980 - 1042) e de Fronilde Pais de Coimbra (985 - 1058). Foi casado por duas vezes. O primeiro casamento foi com Muniadona Moniz, filha de Munio Moniz conde de Cea, de quem teve:

Ximena Moniz de Bierzo (c. 1060 - 1128), teve pelo menos dois filhos com o rei Afonso VI de Leão e Castela, rei de Leão e rei de Castela. Gontronde Moniz de Touro (1060 -?) casou por duas vezes, a primeira D. Gomes Echigues e a segunda com Soeiro Mendes da Maia, “o Bom”, Arias Nunes O segundo casamento foi com Vasquida.

in: Wikipédia, a enciclopédia livre. <http://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Munio_Moniz_de_Bierzo>

El Conde don Rodrigo Muñoz fue muerto por los Moros en la rota de Sacralias, La chronica general en la tercera parte cap. 21 llama a efte Conde don Rodrigo Nuñez, el que mataron defpues en la lid de Sucruviero, pero yo figo a don Pelayo Obifpo de Oviedo, que es el verdadero original. NOBLEZA DEL ANDALVZIA Por Gonçalo Argote de Molina, Sevilla 1588. De el Linaje de Domingo Muñoz, y de la antiguedad de fu apellido. Cap. XCVI. Págs. 98 y 99



----
* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jimena_Muñoz

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]