== Notes for [[Item:Q88844|Q88844]] ==

Mutakkil-NuskuFrom Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Mutakkil-nusku) Jump to: navigation, search Mutakkil-Nusku, inscribed mmu-ta/tak-kil-dPA.KU, "he whom Nusku endows with confidence," was king of Assyria briefly ca. 1133 BC, during a period of political decline. He reigned sufficiently long to be the recipient of a letter or letters from the Babylonian king, presumed to be Ninurta-nādin-šumi, in which he was lambasted and derided.

[edit] BiographyHe was a younger son of the long-reigning king, Aššur-dān I (ca. 1179 to 1134 BC) and succeeded his brother Ninurta-tukultī-Aššur, whom he ousted in a coup and subsequently went on to fight in a civil war that seems to have pitched the Assyrian heartland against its provinces. He appears on the Khorsabad Kinglist[i 1] which relates that “Mutakkil-Nusku, his (Ninurta-tukultī-Aššur’s) brother, fought against him. He drove him to Karduniaš (Babylonia).” Contemporary evidence suggests that Ninurta-tukultī-Aššur sought sanctuary in the border town of Sišil, where Mutakkil-Nusku’s forces engaged him in battle, the outcome of which is lost.[1]

The fragments of one or perhaps two Middle Assyrian letters exist, from an unnamed Babylonian king, possibly Ninurta-nādin-šumi, to Mutakkil-Nusku, where he is told that "You should act according to your heart (ki libbika).” The texts lambastes him for failing to keep an appointment, or a challenge, in Zaqqa and seems to confirm that Ninurta-tukultī-Aššur had reached exile in Babylonia.[2]

His victory was short-lived as ṭuppišu Mutakkil-Nusku kussâ ukta'il KUR-a e-mid, “(he) held the throne for ṭuppišu (his tablet), then died,” perhaps his inaugural year and part way into his first year only.[3] One interpretation suggests this was while his father still nominally ruled.[4] Apart from a brief economic text concerning 100 sheep of Mutakkil-Nusku, without a royal title, and his appearance in the genealogies of his descendants such as one of his son, Aššur-rēša-iši I,[2] there are no other extant inscriptions.[4 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mutakkil-nusku

Mutakkil-Nusku
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.

Mutakkil-Nusku was King of Assyria briefly in 1133 BC. The son of Ashur-dan I, Mutakkil-Nusku usurped the throne from his brother, Ninurta-tukulti-Ashur, apparently only shortly after their father's death. Mutakkil-Nusku died soon after this act of usurpation, leaving the throne to his son, Ashur-resh-ishi I.

Preceded by:
Ninurta-tukulti-Ashur King of Assyria
1133 BC Succeeded by:
Ashur-resh-ishi I

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]