== Notes for [[Item:Q88796|Q88796]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tiglath-Pileser_II
--------------------
Tiglath-Pileser IIFrom Wikipedia, the free encyclopediaJump to: navigation, search Tiglath-Pileser II (from the Hebraic form[1] of Akkadian Tukultī-apil-Ešarra) was King of Assyria from 967 BCE, when he succeeded his father Ashur-resh-ishi II until his death in 935 BCE, when he was succeeded by his son Ashur-dan II. Little is known about his reign.

[edit] See also Ancient Near East portal Tiglath-Pileser Tiglath-Pileser III [edit] Notes1.^ "Tiglath-pileser", 2Kings 15:29); or "Tilgath-pilneser", 2Chronicles 28:20. [edit] References This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. Preceded by Ashur-resh-ishi II King of Assyria 967–935 BCE Succeeded by Ashur-dan II [show]v ·t ·eAssyrian kings

Early Bronze Age "Kings who lived in tents" ca. 2500 – 2000 BC Tudiya ·Adamu ·Yangi ·Suhlamu ·Harharu ·Mandaru ·Imsu ·Harsu ·Didanu ·Hana ·Zuabu ·Nuabu ·Abazu ·Belu ·Azarah ·Ushpia ·Apiashal

"Kings who were forefathers" ca. 2000 BC Apiashal ·Hale ·Samani ·Hayani ·Ilu-Mer ·Yakmesi ·Yakmeni ·Yazkur-el ·Ila-kabkaba ·Aminu

"Kings whose eponyms are destroyed" ca. 2000 – 1900 BC Sulili ·Kikkia ·Akiya ·Puzur-Ashur I ·Shallim-ahhe ·Ilushuma

Middle Bronze Age Old Assyrian period ca. 1906 – 1380 BC Erishum I ·Ikunum ·Sargon I ·Puzur-Ashur II ·Naram-Suen ·Erishum II ·Shamshi-Adad I ·Ishme-Dagan I ·Mut-Ashkur ·Rimush ·Asinum ·(Seven usurpers: Ashur-dugul ·Ashur-apla-idi ·Nasir-Sin ·Sin-namir ·Ipqi-Ishtar ·Adad-salulu ·Adasi) ·Bel-bani ·Libaya ·Sharma-Adad I ·Iptar-Sin ·Bazaya ·Lullaya ·Shu-Ninua ·Sharma-Adad II ·Erishum III ·Shamshi-Adad II ·Ishme-Dagan II ·Shamshi-Adad III ·Ashur-nirari I ·Puzur-Ashur III ·Enlil-nasir I ·Nur-ili ·Ashur-shaduni ·Ashur-rabi I ·Ashur-nadin-ahhe I ·Enlil-nasir II ·Ashur-nirari II ·Ashur-bel-nisheshu ·Ashur-rim-nisheshu ·Ashur-nadin-ahhe II

Late Bronze Age Middle Assyrian period ca. 1353 – 1180 BC Eriba-Adad I ·Ashur-uballit I ·Enlil-nirari ·Arik-den-ili ·Adad-nirari I ·Shalmaneser I ·Tukulti-Ninurta I ·Ashur-nadin-apli ·Ashur-nirari III ·Enlil-kudurri-usur ·Ninurta-apal-Ekur

Iron Age Middle Assyrian period ca. 1179 – 912 BC Ashur-Dan I ·Ninurta-tukulti-Ashur ·Mutakkil-nusku ·Ashur-resh-ishi I ·Tiglath-Pileser I ·Asharid-apal-Ekur ·Ashur-bel-kala ·Eriba-Adad II ·Shamshi-Adad IV ·Ashur-nasir-pal I ·Shalmaneser II ·Ashur-nirari IV ·Ashur-rabi II ·Ashur-resh-ishi II ·Tiglath-Pileser II ·Ashur-Dan II

Neo-Assyrian Empire ca. 912 – 609 BC Adad-nirari II ·Tukulti-Ninurta II ·Ashur-nasir-pal II ·Shalmaneser III ·Shamshi-Adad V ·Shammu-ramat (regent) ·Adad-nirari III ·Shalmaneser IV ·Ashur-Dan III ·Ashur-nirari V ·Tiglath-Pileser III ·Shalmaneser V ·Sargon II ·Sennacherib ·Esarhaddon ·Ashurbanipal ·Ashur-etil-ilani ·Sin-shumu-lishir ·Sin-shar-ishkun ·Ashur-uballit II

Persondata Name Tiglath-Pileser Ii Alternative names Short description King of Assyria Date of birth Place of birth Date of death Place of death

This Ancient Near East biographical article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v ·t ·e
This Assyrian-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v ·t ·e Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tiglath-Pileser_II&oldid=514633435" View page ratingsRate this page Rate this page Page ratings What's this?Current average ratings. Trustworthy

Objective

Complete

Contains key information, but with gapsWell-written

I am highly knowledgeable about this topic (optional) I have a relevant college/university degreeIt is part of my professionIt is a deep personal passionThe source of my knowledge is not listed here I would like to help improve Wikipedia, send me an e-mail (optional) We will send you a confirmation e-mail. We will not share your e-mail address with outside parties as per our feedback privacy statement.Submit ratings

Saved successfullyYour ratings have not been submitted yetYour ratings have expiredPlease reevaluate this page and submit new ratings. An error has occurred. Please try again later. Thanks! Your ratings have been saved.Do you want to create an account?An account will help you track your edits, get involved in discussions, and be a part of the community.Create an accountorLog inMaybe later Thanks! Your ratings have been saved.Did you know that you can edit this page?Edit this pageMaybe later Categories: 935 BC deathsAssyrian kingsAncient Near East people stubsAssyrian stubsHidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with no article parameterWikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia BritannicaWikiProject Ancient Near East articlesNavigation menuPersonal tools Create accountLog inNamespaces ArticleTalkVariantsViews ReadEditView historyActions Search
Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia InteractionHelp About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact Wikipedia ToolboxWhat links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageRate this page Print/exportCreate a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version LanguagesCatalà Česky Deutsch Español Euskara 한국어 Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Norsk (bokmål)‎ Polski Português Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски 中文 This page was last modified on 26 September 2012 at 11:48.

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. See Terms of Use for details. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

Contact us http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tiglath-Pileser_II

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per04467.htm#0

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Assyria 967-932 BCE

Tiglath-Pileser III, king of Assyria (744-727 BC)

Tiglath-pileser III (Tukulti-apil-Esharra, 'my trust is the son of Esharra') came to the throne of Assyria in 745 BC following a revolt that may have been prompted by the threat of invasion from the north. It is unclear whether he was a member of the royal family, but his actual name was probably Pul when he adopted the throne name of Tukulti-apil-Esharra. This means, 'my support is the son of the god Esharra' and has been simplified by modern scholars to Tiglath-pileser.

The new king extended Assyrian control over much of Syria and, around 736 BC, he invaded Urartu, a powerful and expanding state to the north, leading his army into the heart of the enemy's capital on Lake Van.

The reorganisation of the administration in the region led to the growth of a true Assyrian empire with previously independent states like Damascus, which fell to Assyria in 732 BC, now ruled directly from Kalhu through governors. To the south of Assyria, the kingdom of Babylonia was also now ruled by Tiglath-pileser who had invaded in 729 BC on the pretext of maintaining peace in the region. Tigalth-pileser died in 727 BC and was succeeded by his son Shalmaneser V.

http://www.bible-history.com/archaeology/assyria/Tiglath-Pileser-III.html

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]