== Notes for [[Item:Q91413|Q91413]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ptolemy_IX_of_Egypt

Ptolemy IX Soter II or Lathyros ("grass pea") (Greek: Πτολεμαῖος Σωτήρ Λάθυρος, Ptolemaĩos Sōtḗr Láthuros) was king of Egypt three times, from 116 BC to 110 BC, 109 BC to 107 BC and 88 BC to 81 BC, with intervening periods ruled by his brother, Ptolemy X Alexander.

At first he was chosen by his mother Cleopatra III to be her co-regent (his father Ptolemy VIII wished that she would rule with one of her sons), though she was more forced to choose him by the Alexandrians. He married his sister Cleopatra IV, but his mother pushed her out and replaced her with his younger sister Cleopatra Selene. Later, she claimed that he tried to kill her, and successfully deposed him, putting her favorite son Alexander on the throne as co-regent with her. However, she later grew tired of the now Ptolemy X and deposed him, putting Ptolemy IX back on the throne. She was soon murdered by Ptolemy X, who took the throne again. He was then killed in battle, and Ptolemy IX reigned until his own death.

In Alexandria, Ptolemy IX, replaced the sarcophagus of Alexander the Great with a glass one, and melted the original down in order to strike emergency gold issues of his coinage. The citizens of Alexandria were outraged at this and soon after, Ptolemy IX was killed.

His daughter Berenice III took the throne after his death, and reigned for about a year. She was forced to marry her stepson Alexander, who reigned under the name Ptolemy XI Alexander II and had her killed nineteen days later.

Ptolemy IX's name recalls that of his great Macedonian ancestor, Ptolemy I Soter; note that in older references and in younger ones by the German historian Huss, he may be numbered VIII.

--------------------

ID: I62182

Name: Ptolemy IX Soter II of Egypt

Prefix: Pharoah

Given Name: Ptolemy IX Soter II

Surname: of Egypt

Sex: M

_UID: 708A319DF4AE4B419D7F4BAC89E4987987D6

Change Date: 26 Nov 2005

Death: Y

Father: Ptolemy VIII Euregetes II of Egypt

Mother: Cleopatra III of Egypt

Marriage 1 Cleopatra IV of Egypt

Married:

Children

Cleopatra V Tryphaena of Egypt

Marriage 2 Spouse Unknown

Married:

Children

Ptolemy XIII of Egypt

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I62182

--------------------
Ptolomeo X n antes del 107 ¿? - falleció el 88AC. Gobernó Egipto, al lado de su madre Cleopatra III. El 114 AC fue enviado a gobernar Chipre.
--------------------
'''
=Ptolemy IX Lathyros=
'''

Ptolemy IX Soter II or Lathyros ("grass pea") (Greek: Πτολεμαῖος Σωτήρ Λάθυρος, Ptolemaĩos Sōtḗr Láthuros) was king of Egypt three times, from 116 BC to 110 BC, 109 BC to 107 BC and 88 BC to 81 BC, with intervening periods ruled by his brother, Ptolemy X Alexander. At first he was chosen by his mother Cleopatra III to be her co-regent (his father Ptolemy VIII wished that she would rule with one of her sons), though she was more forced to choose him by the Alexandrians. He married his sister Cleopatra IV, but his mother pushed her out and replaced her with his younger sister Cleopatra Selene. Later, she claimed that he tried to kill her, and successfully deposed him, putting her favorite son Alexander on the throne as co-regent with her. However, she later grew tired of the now Ptolemy X and deposed him, putting Ptolemy IX back on the throne. She was soon murdered by Ptolemy X, who took the throne again. He was then killed in battle, and Ptolemy IX reigned until his own death.

His daughter Berenice III took the throne after his death, and reigned for about a year. She was forced to marry her stepson Alexander, who reigned under the name Ptolemy XI Alexander II and had her killed nineteen days later.

Ptolemy IX's name recalls that of his great Macedonian ancestor, Ptolemy I Soter; in older references and in younger ones by the German historian Huss, he may be numbered VIII.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ptolemy_IX_Lathyros

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per00587.htm#0

RESEARCH NOTES:
Ptolemy IX Soter II King of Egypt 116-81 BCE

OR "ALEXANDER I"

Ptolemy IX Lathyros
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.

Ptolemy IX Soter II or Lathyros ("chickpea") was king of Egypt three times, from 116 BC to 110 BC, 109 BC to 107 BC and 88 BC to 81 BC, with intervening periods ruled by his brother, Ptolemy X Alexander.

At first he was chosen by his mother Cleopatra III to be her co-regent (his father Ptolemy VIII wished that she would rule with one of her sons), though she was more forced to choose him by the Alexandrians. He married his sister Cleopatra IV, but his mother pushed her out and replaced her with his younger sister Cleopatra Selene. Later, she claimed that he tried to kill her, and successfully deposed him, putting her favorite son Alexander on the throne as co-regent with her. However, she later grew tired of the now Ptolemy X and deposed him, putting Ptolemy IX back on the throne. She was soon murdered by Ptolemy X, who took the throne again. He was then killed in battle, and Ptolemy IX reigned until his own death.

His daughter Berenice III took the throne after his death, and reigned for about a year. She was forced to marry her stepson Alexander, who reigned under the name Ptolemy XI and had her killed 19 days later.

Ptolemy IX's name recalls that of his great ancestor, Ptolemy I Soter; note that in older references, he may be numbered VIII.

[edit]
External Link
Ptolemy Soter II at LacusCurtius — (Chapter XI of E. R Bevan's House of Ptolemy, 1923)

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]