== Notes for [[Item:Q87841|Q87841]] ==

ID: I62193

Name: Arsinoe III of Egypt

Given Name: Arsinoe III

Surname: of Egypt

Sex: F

_UID: D2AD07A5EA8E8A4C88AA6D5552EB9F5FA8EB

Change Date: 26 Nov 2005

Death: Y

Marriage 1 Ptolemy IV Philopator of Egypt

Married:

Children

Ptolemy V Epiphanes of Egypt

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I62193

--------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arsinoe_III_of_Egypt

--------------------

Arsinoe III Philopater, Queen of Egypt, was born circa 246 BC, died circa 204 BC.

She married her brother, Ptolemy IV Philopater, King of Egypt.
--------------------
Arsinoe III Hija de Berenice II y Ptolomeo IV. Fue una reina muy educada y de gran encanto. Impotente para detener el declive del reino ptolemaico bajo el gobierno de su marido libertino, la popular reina fue victima de un primer ministro que la echó de la corte , finalmente fue asesinada por los reales.+ hacia el 204 AC.
--------------------
'''
=Arsinoe III of Egypt=
'''

Arsinoe III Philopator (Ancient Greek: Ἀρσινόη ἡ Φιλοπάτωρ, which means "Arsinoe the father-loving", 246 or 245 BC – 204 BC) was Queen of Egypt (220-204 BC). She was a daughter of Ptolemy III and Berenice II.

Between late October and early November 220 BC she was married to her brother, Ptolemy IV. She took active part in the government of the country, at least in the measure that it was tolerated by the all-powerful minister Sosibius. She rode at the head of infantry and cavalry to fight Antiochus the Great at the battle of Raphia in 217 BC. She was the mother of Ptolemy V. In summer, 204 BC she was murdered in a palace coup, shortly after the death of her husband.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arsinoe_III_of_Egypt

SOURCE NOTES:
!INDIVIDUAL GENERAL RESEARCH NOTES:
Queen of Egypt, sister of husband

Arsinoe III (b. c. 235--d. c. 204 BC), daughter of Queen Berenice II and Ptolemy III Euergetes of Egypt, sister and wife of Ptolemy IV Philopator. Powerless to arrest the decline of the Ptolemaic kingdom underher debauched husband's rule, the popular queen was eventually murdered by the royal ministers.
In 217 Arsinoe accompanied her brother to Raphia in Palestine, reputedly encouraging the Egyptian troops before their victorious encounter with the army of the Middle Eastern Seleucid kingdom. Married to Ptolemy after the battle, she gave birth to the future Ptolemy V Epiphanes about 210. Thereafter she was sequestered in the palace, while Ptolemy's depraved male and female favourites ruined both king and government. Although Arsinoe apparently disapproved of the sordid state of the court, she was unable to exert any influence. Ptolemy IV Philopator died in 205, and his ministers, fearing retribution from Arsinoe, arranged her murder about a year later. Neither the king's nor the queen's death was announced until the child Ptolemy had been enthroned. Arsinoehad attained some popularity, and rioting followed the news of her assassination.

Arsinoe III (b. c. 235--d. c. 204 BC), daughter of Queen Berenice II and Ptolemy III Euergetes of Egypt, sister and wife of Ptolemy IV Philopator. Powerless to arrest the decline of the Ptolemaic kingdom underher debauched husband's rule, the popular queen was eventually murdered by the royal ministers.
In 217 Arsinoe accompanied her brother to Raphia in Palestine, reputedly encouraging the Egyptian troops before their victorious encounter with the army of the Middle Eastern Seleucid kingdom. Married to Ptolemy after the battle, she gave birth to the future Ptolemy V Epiphanes about 210. Thereafter she was sequestered in the palace, while Ptolemy's depraved male and female favourites ruined both king and government. Although Arsinoe apparently disapproved of the sordid state of the court, she was unable to exert any influence. Ptolemy IV Philopator died in 205, and his ministers, fearing retribution from Arsinoe, arranged her murder about a year later. Neither the king's nor the queen's death was announced until the child Ptolemy had been enthroned. Arsinoehad attained some popularity, and rioting followed the news of her assassination.

Arsinoe III (b. c. 235--d. c. 204 BC), daughter of Queen Berenice II and Ptolemy III Euergetes of Egypt, sister and wife of Ptolemy IV Philopator. Powerless to arrest the decline of the Ptolemaic kingdom underher debauched husband's rule, the popular queen was eventually murdered by the royal ministers.
In 217 Arsinoe accompanied her brother to Raphia in Palestine, reputedly encouraging the Egyptian troops before their victorious encounter with the army of the Middle Eastern Seleucid kingdom. Married to Ptolemy after the battle, she gave birth to the future Ptolemy V Epiphanes about 210. Thereafter she was sequestered in the palace, while Ptolemy's depraved male and female favourites ruined both king and government. Although Arsinoe apparently disapproved of the sordid state of the court, she was unable to exert any influence. Ptolemy IV Philopator died in 205, and his ministers, fearing retribution from Arsinoe, arranged her murder about a year later. Neither the king's nor the queen's death was announced until the child Ptolemy had been enthroned. Arsinoehad attained some popularity, and rioting followed the news of her assassination.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]