== Notes for [[Item:Q106211|Q106211]] ==

Yahya ibn Abdallah ibn al-Hasan ibn al-Hasan ibn Ali (c. 745/6–803) was an Alid and Zaydi leader who led a rebellion against the Abbasid caliph Harun al-Rashid in Daylam in 792. He was soon obliged to capitulate, but his activity began the spread of Zaydi Islam in the remote mountains of Daylam. After his surrender, he was initially treated with much honour, but Harun remained deeply suspicious of his popularity and intentions, and recalled him to Baghdad, where he spent the remainder of his life in prison. In 802, the Barmakid Ja'far ibn Yahya helped him escape, but he was captured; the event led to the execution of the Barmakids, once Harun's closest companions. Yahya died in prison, probably in 803.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yahya_ibn_Abdallah

--


One of the first migrations of Alawites to Dilam was the movement of Yahya bin Abdullah bin Hassan bin Hassan bin Ali bin Abi Talib, which led to the first Shia uprising in Dilam. [14] Yahya participated in the Fakh Uprising in 169 AH and after the end of the war, he secretly came to Iran with Iranian pilgrims and settled in mountainous and remote areas. [15]There are no signs that his short stay in these mountains before he surrendered to Fazl bin Yahya Barmaki, caused the active influence of Kish Zaidi in this area. In 219 A.H., shortly after Mutasim's caliphate, Muhammad bin Qasim Hosni came to Taleghan in Khorasan with a small group of Zaydis of Kufa and started a rebellion there, which was soon suppressed. (https://fa.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D8%B9%D9%84%D9%88%DB%8C%D8%A7%D9%86_%D8%B7%D8%A8%D8%B1%D8%B3%D8%AA%D8%A7%D9%86)

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:3915556789490116350

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]