== Notes for [[Item:Q88746|Q88746]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shamshi-Adad_V
--------------------
Shamshi-Adad VFrom Wikipedia, the free encyclopediaJump to: navigation, search Shamshi-Adad V

Detail from a stele portraying Shamshi-Adad V in British Museum Title King of Assyria Spouse(s) Shammuramat Children King Adad-nirari III Parents King Shalmaneser III

Shamshi-Adad V was the King of Assyria from 824 to 811 BC. He was named after god Adad, who is also known as Hadad.[1][2]

[edit] FamilyShamshi-Adad was a son and successor of King Shalmaneser III, the husband of Queen Shammuramat (by some identified with the mythical Semiramis), and the father of Adad-nirari III, who succeeded him as king.[3]

He was also a grandfather of Shalmaneser IV.[4][5]

[edit] ReignThe first years of Shamshi-Adad's reign saw a serious struggle for the succession of the aged Shalmaneser.

The revolt was led by Shamshi-Adad's brother Assur-danin-pal, and had broken out already by 826 BC. The rebellious brother, according to Shamshi-Adad's own inscriptions, succeeded in bringing to his side 27 important cities, including Nineveh. The rebellion lasted until 820 BC, weakening the Assyrian empire and its ruler; this weakness continued to reverberate in the kingdom until the reforms of Tiglath-Pileser III.

Later in his reign, Shamshi-Adad campaigned against Southern Mesopotamia, and stipulated a treaty with the Babylonian king Marduk-zakir-shumi I.

In 814 BCE he won a battle of Dur-Papsukkal against the Babylonian king Marduk-balassu-iqbi and few Aramean tribes settled in Babylonia.

Preceded by Shalmaneser III King of Assyria 824–811 BC Succeeded by Adad-nirari III

[edit] Notes1.^ Reilly, Jim (2000) "Contestants for Syrian Domination" in "Chapter 3: Assyrian & Hittite Synchronisms" The Genealogy of Ashakhet; 2.^ Empires and Exploitation: The Neo-Assyrian Empire, P Bedford, WA Perth, 2001 3.^ Encyclopædia Britannica Eleventh Edition 4.^ Georges Roux: Ancient Iraq, Penguin Books, London 1992, ISBN 0-14-012523-X, p. 302. 5.^ Britannica.com Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Shamshi-Adad_V&oldid=516885432" View page ratingsRate this page Rate this page Page ratings What's this?Current average ratings. Trustworthy

Objective

Complete

Well-written

I am highly knowledgeable about this topic (optional) I have a relevant college/university degreeIt is part of my professionIt is a deep personal passionThe source of my knowledge is not listed here I would like to help improve Wikipedia, send me an e-mail (optional) We will send you a confirmation e-mail. We will not share your e-mail address with outside parties as per our feedback privacy statement.Submit ratings

Saved successfullyYour ratings have not been submitted yetYour ratings have expiredPlease reevaluate this page and submit new ratings. An error has occurred. Please try again later. Thanks! Your ratings have been saved.Do you want to create an account?An account will help you track your edits, get involved in discussions, and be a part of the community.Create an accountorLog inMaybe later Thanks! Your ratings have been saved.Did you know that you can edit this page?Edit this pageMaybe later Categories: 811 BC deathsAssyrian kingsHidden categories: Articles with hCardsYear of birth unknownNavigation menuPersonal tools Create accountLog inNamespaces ArticleTalkVariantsViews ReadEditView historyActions Search
Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia InteractionHelp About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact Wikipedia ToolboxWhat links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageRate this page Print/exportCreate a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version LanguagesCatalà Česky Deutsch Español Euskara Français Italiano Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk (bokmål)‎ Polski Português Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Tiếng Việt 中文 This page was last modified on 9 October 2012 at 20:48.

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. See Terms of Use for details. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

Contact us http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shamshi-Adad_V

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per02159.htm#0

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Assyria 824-811 BCE

Shamshi-Adad V
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Shamshi-Adad V was the King of Assyria from 824 to 811 BC. He was the son and successor of Shalmaneser III, the husband of Sammuramat (by some identified with the mythical Semiramis), and the father of Adad-nirari III, who succeeded him as king.

The first years of his reign saw a serious struggle for the succession of the aged Shalmaneser. The revolt was leaded by Shamshi-Adad's brother Assur-danin-pal, and broke out already in 826 BC. The rebellious brother, according to Shamshi-Adad's own inscriptions, succeeded in bringing to his side 27 important cities, including Nineveh. The rebellion lasted until 820 BC, which caused a weakening of the Assyrian empire and of its ruler, which would later show its consequences until the reforms of Tiglath-pileser III.

Later in his reign, Shamshi-Adad campaigned against Southern Mesopotamia, and stipulated a treaty with the Babylonian king Marduk-zakir-shumi II.


Preceded by:
Shalmaneser III King of Assyria
824–811 BC Succeeded by:
Adad-nirari III

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]