== Notes for [[Item:Q1952|Q1952]] ==

{geni:about_me} Brahma (Sanskrit: ब्रह्मा; IAST:Brahmā) is the Hindu god (deva) of creation and one of the Trimurti, the others being Vishnu and Shiva. According to the Brahma Purana, he is the father of Mānu, and from Mānu all Hindus are descended. In the Ramayana and the Mahābhārata, he is often referred to as the progenitor or great grandsire of all human beings. He is not to be confused with the Supreme Cosmic Spirit in Hindu Vedānta philosophy known as Brahman, which is genderless. Brahmā's consort is Sāvitri and Gāyatri. Saraswati sits beside him, the goddess of learning. Brahmā is often identified with Prajapati, a Vedic deity.
<p>http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brahma</p>
<p>http://www.krishnamurthys.com/profvk/VK2/BhagavatamGenealogy.html</p>
<p>--------------------</p>
<p>THE CREATOR OF THE UNIVERSE</p>
<p>--------------------</p>
<p>AT THE TIME OF GANGES DESCEND ON EARTH, WHEN JAHNU SAW HIS HERMITAGE INUNDATED, HE DRANK ALL HER WATER. HE RELEASED THE GANGES ONLY WHEN THE DEVRISHIIS PRAYED HIM. SINCE THEN, GANGES ALSO CAME TO BEKNOW AS JAHNAVI, THE DAUGHTER OF JAHNU
<p>--------------------</p>
<p>King Dushyant</p>
<p>According to the Mahābhārata, Dushyanta is the son of Ilina and Rathantara.[1] Dushyanta is said to have ruled, either directly or through his governors, from Gandhara (present day Kandahar in Afghanistan) to the Vindhyas and beyond, and from Sindhu, (present day Pakistan) to Vanga, (present day Bangladesh).[citation needed] Dushyanta had by his wife Sakuntala an intelligent son named Bharata who became king. Bharata gave his name to the race of which he was the founder. [edit]Love for Shakuntala
<p>Dushyant & Shakuntala The story of Dushyanta's encounter, marriage, separation and reunion with his queen, Shakuntala, has been immortalized in the Mahabharata and in The Recognition of Shakuntala by the great Sanskrit poet Kalidas. Dushyant meets Shakuntala, who is a daughter of Vishvamitra and Menaka, while on an excursion from his kingdom. Depending on the source,[citation needed] Dushyant is either the crown prince, or he is waiting to win back his kingdom from an enemy. Either way, he sees Shakuntala in an ashram [also known as hermitage] this ashram is situated at Kota, Rajasthan in India named as Kanswa a nationally protected monument by government of india (hermitage) of Rishi Kanva and falls in love. He and Shakuntala have a gandharva marriage there. Having to leave after some time, Dushyant gives Shakuntala a royal ring as a sign of their love, promising her that he will come to her. But when Dushyant becomes king, he becomes too absorbed for many years in affairs of state. Shakuntala waits and despairs. One day, sage Durvasa visits the hermitage, but Shakuntala, who is too absorbed in her love for Dushyant, forgets to serve him food. In a fit of anger, sage Durvasa curses her, saying that the person she is thinking about will forget her. A shocked Shakuntala begs for forgiveness and the sage, after recollecting his calm, assures her that the person will remember her again when she shows some proof of their acquaintance. So, Shakuntala sets off to the capital, Hastinapur, to remind Dushyant of their past love. An accident occurs by which a fish consumes the royal ring, leaving Shakuntala with no formidable proof. Dushyanta does not recollect Shakuntala, but his memory and love are rekindled when a sage (not the same who cursed Shakuntala) recovers the ring and brings it to the court. Dushyanta weds Shakuntala, who becomes his queen and mother of his son, Bharata. A different version of the story[citation needed] involves Shakuntala's father, the great and legendary sage Vishwamitra, who is said to have bowed his head to none. Dushyant's forgetting of Shakuntala was a device invented by the other sages, including Vashishta, to make Vishwamitra bow. For the sake of his daughter the great sage is said to have bowed before the great king Dushyant to persuade him to accept his daughter. The sages, delighted, immediately brought the memory of Shakuntala into the mind of Dushyant.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]