== Notes for [[Item:Q118839|Q118839]] ==

CASTAÑEDA - Noble linaje, con muy antiguo solar en el valle de Castañeda (cuyo nombre tomó), en Cantabria. Los autores que han tratado de esta casa y apellido explican sus orígenes de muy distintas maneras, por que las sombras de lo pretérito velan su principio; pero los más autorizados coinciden en señalar como progenitor de su linaje al Conde Gutierre Rodríguez, que floreció a fines del siglo XI y era hijo de Rodrigo Díaz, Duque de Asturias y Conde de Oviedo, y quinto nieto del Rey Don Fruela II de León I. Dicho Conde Gutierre Rodríguez, fue el primer Señor de Castañeda por haber casado con una señora en la que había recaído una antigua y poderosa casa, que tenía en Señorío el valle de Castañeda, y de este matrimonio fue hijo, entre otros: II. El Conde Muño o Nuño Gutiérrez, segundo Señor de Castañeda en sucesión de su madre, Ricohombre del Rey Don Alfonso VI.


http://libro.uca.edu/urraca/urraca7.htm
In the earlier period, one Muño Gutiérrez served as majordomo between July 1109 and September 1110. It is not possible to identify him further.

25. A document of Burgos dated February 28, 1112 mentions him as majordomo, but it is a thirteenth-century copy and the original may have read "merinus." See AHN, Clero, carp. 378, no. 1. For a similar reference in a charter of April 13, 1121, see ch. 5, note 7.

http://libro.uca.edu/urraca/urraca2.htm
...and Muño Gutiérrez, the queen's majordomo.(42)
42. The charter does not survive in the original. AC León, no. 1.002, a very early copy, bears the original confirmation of Alfonso VII datable to March of 1126. See Bernard F. Reilly, "The Chancery of Alfonso VII of León-Castilla: The Period 1116-1135 Reconsidered," Speculum 51 (1976):249 and n. 39. Other, later copies are in AC León, no. 1.003, and Tumbo, fol. 95; published in Manuel Risco, ES, vols. 28-42 (Madrid, 1774-1801), 36:94-96 app., and in Tomás Muñoz y Romero ed., Colección de fueros municipales y cartas pueblas (Madrid, 1847), pp. 99-101. Archbishop Maurice of Braga may have confirmed ac this time, but the copyist was unsure how to place his name, which indicates that he might have confirmed it later.

http://libro.uca.edu/urraca/urraca5.htm
by Muño Gutiérrez as majordomo, who is known to have held that post in 1109 and 1110.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]