== Notes for [[Item:Q112948|Q112948]] ==

https://ca.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elvira_Men%C3%A9ndez_de_Melanda

http://genealogics.org/getperson.php?personID=I00120382&tree=LEO

Elvira Mendes de Melanda (c. 996 - 1022), foi condessa de Portugal e rainha consorte de Leão (1014-1022).

Era natural da Galiza e filha de Tutadona Moniz e do conde Mendo Gonçalves, conde do primeiro condado de Portucale, co-regente de Leão durante a menoridade de Afonso V, seu genro.

Elvira casou-se em 1014 com Afonso V de Leão, donde nasceram:

1) Bermudo III de Leão (c. 1015-1037), rei de Leão;

2) Sancha I de Leão (1013-1067), rainha titular de Leão e rainha consorte de Castela, casada em 1032 com Fernando I de Castela.

----------

Elvira Mendes

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elvira_Mendes

Elvira Mendes, sometimes called Elvira or Geloria Menéndez of Portugal or Galicia, (c. 996 – 20 December 1022), was Queen of León (1008-1022). Daughter of Count Mendo Gonçalves II of the First County of Portugal (House of Vímara Peres) and corregente of León, descendant of the highest nobility of Portugal and Galicia, she married Alfonso V of León (before 1010). She was the mother of King Bermudo III of León.

By her husband, Alfonso V of León, Elvira had two children:

1) Bermudo III of León (c.1015-1037)

2) Sancha of León (c.1020-1067), married Ferdinand I of León

References

The Royal Ancestry Bible, Royal Ancestors of 300 Colonial American Families Vol. 3 (chart 2186) by Michel L. Call ISBN 1-933194-22-7

--------------------

Elvira Mendes, sometimes called Elvira or Geloria Menéndez of Portugal or Galicia, (c. 996 – 20 December 1022), was Queen of León (1008-1022).

Daughter of Count Mendo Gonçalves II of the First County of Portugal (House of Vímara Peres) and corregente of León, descendant of the highest nobility of Portugal and Galicia, she married Alfonso V of León (before 1010). She was the mother of King Bermudo III of León.

[edit] Family

By her husband, Alfonso V of León, Elvira had two children:

1. Bermudo III of León (c.1015-1037)

2. Sancha of León (c.1020-1067), married Ferdinand I of Leon

--------------------
Elvira Mendes, sometimes called Elvira or Geloria Menéndez of Portugal or Galicia, (c. 996 – 20 December 1022), was Queen of León (1008-1022).

Daughter of Count Mendo Gonçalves II of the First County of Portugal (House of Vímara Peres) and corregente of León, descendant of the highest nobility of Portugal and Galicia, she married Alfonso V of León (before 1010). She was the mother of King Bermudo III of León.

By her husband, Alfonso V of León, Elvira had two children:

Bermudo III of León (c.1015-1037)

Sancha of León (c.1020-1067), married Ferdinand I of León
--------------------
Sometimes called 'Geloria Menendez' of Portugal or Galicia.
--------------------
'''Elvira Mendes de Melanda''' (c. 996 - 1022), foi condessa de Portugal e rainha consorte de Leão (1014-1022).

Era natural da Galiza e filha do conde Mendo Gonçalves, conde do primeiro condado de Portucale, e de Tutadona Moniz, o qual foi co-regente de Leão durante a menoridade de Afonso V, seu genro.

Elvira casou-se em 1014 com Afonso V de Leão, donde nasceram:

* Bermudo III de Leão (c. 1015-1037), rei de Leão;
* Sancha I de Leão (1013-1067), rainha titular de Leão e rainha consorte de Castela, casada em 1032 com Fernando I de Castela.

Reina consorte por su matrimonio con el rey Alfonso V de León. Era hija del conde Menendo González y la condesa Mayor. Su padre, hijo del conde Gonzalo Menéndez dux magnus de Portugal, fue, junto con la reina Elvira García, regente y tutor del rey Alfonso V de León con quien Elvira contrajo matrimonio en 1015.

De su matrimonio con el rey Alfonso V nacieron dos hijos: Bermudo III de León (1017-1037). Sucedió a su padre en el trono. Sancha de León (1016-1067). Contrajo matrimonio con el rey Fernando I el Magno, rey de Castilla y León, hijo de Sancho III el Mayor, rey de Pamplona.

Falleció el día 2 de diciembre del año 1022 y recibió sepultura en el Panteón de Reyes de San Isidoro de León. El sepulcro de piedra en el que fue depositado el cadáver de la reina se conserva en la actualidad, y en su cubierta aparece esculpida la siguiente inscripción latina: H. R. REGINA DOMNA GELOIRA UXOR REGIS ADEFONSI FILIA MELENDI COMITIS. OBIIIT III NON. DEC....JACET HAC IN FOSSA GELOIRAE REGINAE PULVIS ET OSSA PROLES MENENDI, ET TUK, QUAE OBIIT IIII. NON. DEC. ERA LX POST M.

--------------------
Birth: unknown, Spain Death: Dec. 20, 1022, Spain

Born around 996 sometimes called Elvira or Geloria Menéndez of Portugal or Galicia was Queen of León (1008–1022).

She was the daughter of Count Menendo González of the First County of Portugal and corregente of León, descendant of the highest nobility of Portugal and Galicia, she married Alfonso V of León (before 1010). She was the mother of King Bermudo III of León.

Family links:
Spouse:
Alfonso V De Leon (____ - 1028)

Children:
Sancha de León (1013 - 1067)*
Bermudo De Leon (1017 - 1037)*

*Calculated relationship

Burial: Basilica Of San Isidoro León Provincia de León Castilla y León, Spain

Created by: Brett Williams Record added: Dec 29, 2012 Find A Grave Memorial# 102785215

852677963. Dronning Elvira MENDOSON av Leon (19165) died in 1052. She was a Dronning in Leon.(19166) Hun ble oppdradd sammenmed kong Alfons V., hun deltok i sin dronningtid i katedralen sammen med Alfons V., biskoppene og rikets herrer i det koncil (1020) som vedtok det bekjente "Fueros de Leon". Med Alfons fikk hun Bermudo III, Sancha og Jimena, som blev mor til Cid Campeador.

SOURCE NOTES:
www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal11021

Regent av Leon 1027 - 1037.
Elvira ble oppdratt sammen med kong Alfons V.
Hun deltok i sin dronningtid i katedralen sammen med Alfons V, biskopene og rikets
herrer i det konsil som i 1020 vedtok det kjente ?Fueros de Leon?. Med Alfons fikk hun
Bermudo III, Sancha og Jimena som ble mor til Cid Campeador.

Name Suffix:<NSFX> Of Galicia

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]