== Notes for [[Item:Q111732|Q111732]] ==

The name of the wife (or wives) of Íñigo is not reported in contemporary records, although sources from centuries later assign her the name of Toda or Onneca.[12] There is also scholarly debate regarding her derivation, some hypothesizing that she was daughter of Velasco, lord of Pamplona (killed 816), and others making her kinswoman of Aznar I Galíndez.[d]

* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C3%8D%C3%B1igo_Arista_of_Pamplona

---

Oneca Velascez de Pamplona1

b. circa 790

Father señor de Pamplona Velasco de Pamplona1 b. circa 760?

Oneca Velascez de Pamplona was born circa 790. She was the daughter of señor de Pamplona Velasco de Pamplona.1 Oneca Velascez de Pamplona married Íñigo Íñíguez "Arista", rey de Pamplona, son of Íñigo Jiménez, noble de Vasconia and N. N. (?), before 810.

Family

Íñigo Íñíguez "Arista", rey de Pamplona b. circa 790, d. 851

Child

García I Íñiguez, rey de Navarra+ b. c 810


Citations

[S1316] Reyes y Reinos Genealogias, online www.homar.org, España - 08.B.

https://www.genealogics.org/getperson.php?personID=I00106659&tree=LEO





----

http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/NAVARRE.htm#AssonaIniguez

[ONECA], daughter of ---. The Libro de Regla of Leire Monastery, compiled in 1076, records that "filius eius…Enneco Xemenones" ruled for 22 years after "Eximinus Enecones", adding that his wife was "Oneca regina"[55]. This source is confused, and contradicted by numerous other primary sources in many of the details which it records. As noted above, it is not certain whether "Enneco Xemenones" is intended to refer to Íñigo "Arista". The wife of Íñigo "Arista" is not named in the Codex de Roda. Another possibility is that the wife of Íñigo was ---, daughter of Lubb ibn Musa. Ibn Hazm records that "Musa ibn Musa" arranged the marriages of "las hijas de su hermano Lubb ibn Musa" with "los hijos de Wanaqo ibn Sanyo, rey de los Vascos"[56]. No other reference to these possible marriages has been found. If they are correct, the chronology suggests that the bridegrooms must have been the sons of Íñigo [I], although it is not known whether they were Ínigo Iñíguez and Fortún Iñíguez or other otherwise unrecorded sons. Married:

ÍÑIGO [II] [ Iñíguez/Jiménez], son of [ IÑIGO --- & his wife ---] or son of [JIMENO & his wife ---] ([788/90]-[851/52]). The sources are contradictory regarding the parentage of Íñigo "Arista". … Whatever the correctness of his parentage, it appears that ÍÑIGO "Arista" [King] of Pamplona, established himself in [820/25], although no primary source has yet been found which confirms that this is correct.

Íñigo "Arista" & his wife had four children:
*1. GARCÍA Iñíguez ([810]-killed by Arabs [Lumberri] 882[57], bur Leire Monastery). The Codex de Roda names "Garsea Enneconis et domna Assona…et domna ---" as the children of "Enneco cognomento Aresta"[58]. He succeeded his father in [852] as GARCÍA I [King] of Pamplona. m [firstly] URRACA, daughter of ---. [m secondly LEODEGUNDIS de Asturias, daughter of [ORDOÑO I King of Asturias & his wife Munia -] García I & his [first] wife had [four] children:
**a) FORTÚN García ([830]-after 905). The Codex de Roda names "Fortunio Garseanis et Sanzio Garseanis et domna Onneca" as the children of "Garsea Enneconis" and his unnamed wife[67]. He succeeded his father in 882 as FORTÚN [King] of Pamplona.
** b) SANCHO García . The Codex de Roda names "Fortunio Garseanis et Sanzio Garseanis et domna Onneca" as the children of "Garsea Enneconis" and his unnamed wife[68]. m ---. The name of Sancho's wife is not known. Sancho García & his wife had [two] children …
** c) ONECA García. The Codex de Roda names "Fortunio Garseanis et Sanzio Garseanis et domna Onneca" as the children of "Garsea Enneconis" and his unnamed wife, stating that Oneca married "Asnari Galindones de Aragone"[77]. m AZNAR [II] Galíndez Conde de Aragón, son of GALINDO [I] Aznar Conde de Aragón & his wife --- (-893).
**d) [JIMENA (-after Jun 912, bur [Astorga, transferred to Oviedo Santa María])
** García & his [wife/mistress] had one [illegitimate] child: e) daughter . Ibn Hayyan´s Muqtabis II records "la hija de Garsiya ibn W.n.q." as the wife of "Amrus ibn Amr ibn Amrus" in A.H. 259 [872/73][85]. It is possible that this daughter of [King] García was illegitimate. m as his (x) wife, AMRUS ibn Umar Wali [governor/king] of Huesca, son of UMAR ibn Amrus (-[Huesca] Apr 875).
*2. GALINDO Iñíguez (-after 851). The Arab historian ibn Hayyân records that "le chef ibn Wannaqo et son fils Galind" were wounded during the battle for Pamplona in 843 and that "Lubb ibn Musa et Galind ibn Wannaqo" defected to the Arabs the following year[86]. He is not included among the children of King Íñigo "Arista" listed in the Codex de Roda. Galindo was among the personages who greeted Eulogius at Córdoba in 851[87]. [m ([after 844]) ---. The name of Galindo's wife is not known. It is likely that she was a Muslim, whom Galindo married after his conversion. One possibility is that the sources which refer to "García" (see Part A, above), who married the daughter of Musa ibn Musa of the Banu Qasi and is recorded with a son named Musa, are in fact referring to Galindo Iñíguez. Galindo & his wife had one child]:
**a) [MUSA ibn Galind ([845/46 or after]-executed Huesca 4 Aug 871). No proof has been found that Musa ibn Galind was the son of Galindo Iñíguez. However, as noted above, the latter is recorded as having defected to the Arabs, and presumably converted to Islam, and no record has been idenfified of another noble of this name having converted. His birth date is estimated on the assumption that Galindo married a Muslim wife after his supposed conversion, as suggested above. Wali (governor/king) of Huesca. Al-Udri records that "Amrus ibn Umar ibn Amrus" rebelled against "Musa ibn Galindo, amil de Huesca" whom he killed in the same city which he captured, in A.H. 256 [869/70], specifying that Musa was killed A.H. "el sábado 13 del mes de ramadán" [4 Aug 871][88]. The Arab historian ibn Hayyân records that "Musa ibn Galind émir de Huesca" was executed in 870[89].]
*3. ASSONA Iñíguez . The Codex de Roda names "Garsea Enneconis et domna Assona…et domna ---" as the children of "Enneco cognomento Aresta", stating that Assona married "domno Muza qui tenuit Borza et Terrero"[90]. m MUSA ibn Musa, son of MUSA ibn Fortun & his [second] wife --- (-Tudela 26 Sep 862).
*4. - Iñíguez . The Codex de Roda names "Garsea Enneconis et domna Assona…et domna --" as the children of "Enneco cognomento Aresta", stating that the unnamed daughter married "Garsea Malo"[91]. m (after [838]) as his second wife, GARCÍA [I] Galíndez “el Malo” Conde de Aragon, son of GALINDO Velázquez & his wife Faquilo -- (-before 858).

SOURCE NOTES:
www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal11145

RESEARCH NOTES:
3 children

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]