== Notes for [[Item:Q91065|Q91065]] ==

* https://youtu.be/dOrcSeG__-U (pretty neat!)

==Herod "the Great" or Herod "the Impious"==

King Herod was known to the Romans as "the Great", but in the eyes of the people over whom he ruled he was always known as "the Impious", despite his costly restoration of the Temple in Jerusalem. Herod was a Roman citizen, Governor of Galilee by 47 BC, and then King of Judea from 37 to 4 BC.

He was one of the major figures in politics of Palestine in the early years of the Roman Empire. In 7 BC he strangled to death two of his sons, Aristobulus and Alexander, drawing a comment from Roman Emperor Augustus (27 BC-14 AD) that it was safer to be one of Herod’s pigs than one of his sons. Another son was later born to Herod and, for his safety, his mother dispatched him to the care of her family in Ariminum, a city near Ravenna in northern Italy.31 He was Prince Joseph, the Joseph of Arimathea in the Gospels, and he later became the unseen power behind his father’s throne.

__________________________

http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-2880605/Entrance-King-Herod-Great-s-palace-unearthed-Complex-set-corridors-leads-elaborate-hall-ruler.html _(2014)_

__________________________

[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herod_the_Great#Marriages_and_descendants '''Herod the Great'''] (born 73 or 74 BCE, died 4 BCE in Jericho, was an Edomite (a Semitic group from the region between the Dead Sea and the Gulf of Aqaba) client king of the Roman provinces of Judea, Galilee and Samaria (near present-day [Nablus]). Important details of his biography are gleaned from the works of the 1st century CE Roman-Jewish historian Josephus Flavius.

He was described as "a madman who murdered his own family and a great many rabbis." He is also known for his colossal building projects in Jerusalem and elsewhere, including the rebuilding of the Second Temple in Jerusalem (sometimes referred to as Herod's Temple).

Herod the Great appears in the Gospel according to Matthew (Ch. 2), which describes an event known as the Massacre of the Innocents.

According to this account, shortly after the birth of Jesus, Magi from the East visited Herod to inquire the whereabouts of "the one having been born king of the Jews", because they had seen his star in the east and therefore wanted to pay him homage. Herod, as King of the Jews, was alarmed at the prospect of a usurper. Herod assembled the chief priests and scribes of the people and asked them where the "Anointed One" (the Messiah, Greek: Ο Χριστός (ho christos)) was to be born. They answered, in Bethlehem, citing Micah 5:2.

Herod therefore sent the Magi to Bethlehem, instructing them to search for the child and, after they had found him, to "report to me, so that I too may go and worship him". However, after they had found Jesus, the Magi were warned in a dream not to report back to Herod.

Similarly, Joseph was warned in a dream that Herod intended to kill Jesus, so he and his family fled to Egypt. When Herod realized he had been outwitted by the Magi, he gave orders to kill all boys of the age of two and under in Bethlehem and its vicinity. Joseph and his family stayed in Egypt until Herod's death, then moved to Nazareth in Galilee in order to avoid living under Herod's son Archelaus.

Regarding the Massacre of the Innocents, although Herod was certainly guilty of many brutal acts, including the killing of his wife and two of his sons, no other known source from the period makes any reference to such a massacre. Since Bethlehem was a small village, the number of male children under the age of 2, would probably not exceed 20. This may be the reason for the lack of other sources for this history, although Herod's order in Matthew 2:16 includes those children in Bethlehem's vicinity making the massacre larger numerically and geographically.

>>>_______________

'''Herodes''' (Ἡρῴδης; Hērṓidēs). H. I.; '''Herod the Great'''. Born in c. 73 BC, son of Antipatter and the Arabian woman Cyprus. In 47 appointed strategos of Galilaea, he came into conflict with the Sanhedrin of Jerusalem because of the execution on his own authority of persons involved in a revolt. The Roman governor of Syria Sex. Iulius [I] Caesar made him the strategos of Coilesyria and Samaria.

...http://referenceworks.brillonline.com/entries/brill-s-new-pauly/mariamme-e723620
Source: Brill’s New Pauly

>>______________

ID: I64685

Name: Herod of Judea
Prefix: King Given Name: Herod Surname: of Judea Nickname: The Great Sex: M _UID: 43EB9CCF63E4234B94C1C46D37EFE3E0BD60 Change Date: 6 Oct 2005 Birth: ABT 73 BC Death: ABT 4 BC Father: Antipater II of Judea Mother: Cypros of Nabatea

Marriage 1 Malthace Children -1. HEROD @@ ANTIPAS OF JUDEA b: 21 BC

Marriage 2 Mariamne I of Judea Children -1. Alexander of Judea -2. Salampsio of Judea -3. Aristobulus IV of Judea Forrás / Source: http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I64685

----------------------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herod_the_Great Herod the Great From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Reign 37 - 4 BC Born 74 BC Died 4 BC (aged 70) Place of death Jericho, Samaria Buried Herodium, Judea Predecessor Antigonus II Mattathias Successor Herod Archelaus Wives
Doris
Mariamne I
Mariamne II
Malthace
Cleopatra of Jerusalem

Dynasty Herodian Dynasty Father Antipater the Idumaean Mother Cypros Forrás / Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herod_the_Great

--------------------

Herod's marriages and children:

Doris -1. Son Antipater III, executed 4 BC

Mariamne I, daughter of Hasmonean Alexandros
-1. Son Alexander, executed 7 BC
-2. Son Aristobulus IV, executed 7 BC
-3. Daughter Salampsio
-4. Daughter Cypros

Mariamne II, daughter of High-Priest Simon
-1. Son Herod II Boethus

Malthace
-1. Son Herod Archelaus – Ethnarch
-2. Son Herod Antipas - Tetrarch
-3. Daughter Olympias

Cleopatra of Jerusalem
-1. Son Herod Philip II – Tetrarch
-2. Son Herod

Pallas
-1. Son Phasael

Phaidra
-1. Daughter Roxanne

Elpis
-1. Daughter Salome bat Herod I

A cousin (name unknown)
-1. no known children

A niece (name unknown)
-1. no known children

Marriages and descendants Herod the Great + Doris -1. Antipater III d. 4 BC? executed ————————————————————————————————————————————— Herod the Great + Mariamne I, d. 29 BC?, dt. of Hasmonean Alexandros. -1. Aristobulus d. 7 BC? ∞m. Berenice ....=1.1 Mariamne III m. her uncle Archelaus ? ....=1.2 Herod III King of Chalcis ....=1.3 Herodias + ∞m. 1. ♂Herod II Boethus her uncle
+ ∞m. 2. ♂Herod Antipas her uncle ....=1.4 Herod Agrippa King of Israel ....=1.5 Aristobulus V -2. Alexander d. 7 BC? -3. Salampsio (daugter)+ ∞m♂ Phasael ....=3.1. Cypros (gr. daughter) -4. Cypros (daugter)+ m. Antipater(2) ————————————————————————————————————————————— Herod the Great + Mariamne II, dt. of Simon the High-Priest. -1. Herod II Boethus ————————————————————————————————————————————— Herod the Great + Malthace (a Samaritan) -1. Herod Antipas b. 20 BCE? + Phasaelis, dt. of Aretas IV, king of Arabia "divorced" to marry: + Herodias, dt. of Aristobulus (son of Herod the Great) -2. Archelaus -3. Olympias (daugter) ————————————————————————————————————————————— Herod the Great + Cleopatra of Jerusalem -1. Philip the Tetrarch d. 34 CE ————————————————————————————————————————————— Ancestors Parents:Antipater the Idumaean + Cypros, Princess from Petra, Jordan in Nabatea. Siblings: -1. Phasael -2. Herod the Great (74-4 BC) -3. Joseph -4. Pheroras -5. Salome I Parents of his wife: Alexandros + Alexandra Wife: Mariamne Brother of his wife: Aristobulus III of Israel (d. 35 BCE) (last Hasmonean scion; appointed high priest; drowned) Forrás / Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herod_the_Great#Marriages_and_descendants
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herod_the_Great
--------------------
•Anmärkning: Herodes I ( kung ) i Judeen ( JUDEEN ) " den store " Anteckningar från http://scriptures.lds.org/bdh/herod?sr=1 Följande antavla visar förhållandet mellan de olika medlemmarna i den herodianske familjen nämns i NT (Se bild) De Herodianska familjen Idumaeans av födsel, men hade blivit konverterar till den judiska tron. De hade som syfte att grunda , i skydd av Rom , ett halvt självständigt kungadöme . Genom sitt äktenskap med Mariamne Herodes den store allierade sig med familjen i Maccabees , som hade varit i flera generationer ledarna för den patriotiska parti bland judarna . Herodes var en framgångsrik härskare och var på villkor av vänskap med August, den romerske kejsaren . För att få nåd inför sina undersåtar , som han var mest impopulära , byggde han templet i en enorm kostnad. Hans regeringstid var utskämd av många övergrepp. I ett anfall av svartsjuka hade han sin hustru, som han innerligt älskade , döden , senare hade han sina två söner Alexander och Aristobulus, också mördad. Samma år som han gav order om massakern av barnen i Betlehem, hade han Antipater , en annan av hans egna söner , avrättas. Några månader senare Herodes själv dog. Hans rike var då delat mellan tre av hans söner : Archelaios , som fick Judeen , Idumaea och Samarien , Antipas , som hade Galileen och Peraea , och Philip , som hade den nordöstra stadsdelarna i Palestina. Efter en regeringstid av nio år Archelaios avsattes av Augustus , och Judeen var fäst vid den romerska provinsen Syrien, som styrs av en Procurator . Antipas (kallas i NT ? Herodes den tetrark ?) byggdes som sin huvudstad Tiberias om Galileiska sjön , han är ofta nämns i evangelierna (Matt 14 : 1 , Mark 6 : 14 , Luk 9 : 7 , Lukas 13 : 31 , Lukas 23 : 7-15 ). Han tog som sin hustru Herodias , hustrun till hans halvbror Philip. Han avsattes av kejsaren Caligula och förvisades till Lugdunum i Gallien , AD 39 . Philip gjorde Cesarea Filippi (tidigare Panias ) sitt kapital , och förblev i besittning av hans tetrarchy fram till sin död i AD 33 . Hans område blev sedan en del av provinsen Syrien, men i AD 37 var från Caligula , tillsammans med Abilene (den tetrarchy av Lysanias ), till Agrippa , som fick ta titeln kung . Om nedfallet av Antipas han fått tetrarchy i Galileen, i AD 41 , om anslutning av kejsar Claudius , fick han Judeen , och Samarien också, och så blev härskare över hela det område som regleras av sin farfar . Han bodde i Jerusalem och var angelägen att betrakta som en ortodox Judisk . Han började en förföljelse av kyrkan och sätta James till döden , Peter flyr genom ett mirakel (Apg 12 : 1-23) . Hans död beskrivs i Apostlagärningarna 12 : 20-23 . Hans son Agrippa II , fick av kejsar Claudius att lyckas att endast en liten del av hans far? rike ar . Han nämns i Apostlagärningarna 25 : 13 . Han var den sista av de Herods .

•Född: 73 f.Kr.

•Death : 4 f.Kr.

Pappa: Antipater ( Antipatros ) ( II, Procurator ) i Judeen

Mor : Cypros den Nabataean

Äktenskap 1 Mariamne i Judeen

Barn

1. Aristobulus ( Aristobulos ) i Judeen

2. Alexander av JUDEEN

3. Salampsio i Judeen

Äktenskap 2 Mariamne

Barn

1. Herodes Philip i Judeen

Äktenskap 3 Malthace en samarit

Barn

1. Herodes Antipas den tetrarken KING i Judeen

2. Archelaios i Judeen

Äktenskap 4 Cleopatra

Barn

1. Philip i Itureen

--------------------

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=rohlspur&id=I43534

•ID: I43534

•Name: Herod the Great

•Sex: M

•Birth: 0073 BC in Ashdod, Edom, South Palestine

•Death: 0004 BC in Jericho, Judea

•Note: army commander, overthrew Maccabee dynasty;established himself as King of Palestine (confirmed by MarkAnthony and crowned in Rome by Augustus Caesar), ruled 37 - 4BC;

•Change Date: 17 FEB 2008

Father: Antipater II, Procurator of Judea

Mother: Cypros of Nabathea b: in Nabathea

Marriage 1 Doris of Jerusalem

•Married: 0047 BC

Children

1. Antipater III b: ABT 0050 BC

Marriage 2 Mariamne I b: 0048 BC

•Married: 0037 BC

Children

1. Aristobulus IV b: in Italy

2. Alexander III of Judea

3. Salampsio

4. Cyprus

5. (son)

Marriage 3 (unknown niece)

•Married: 0037 BC

Marriage 4 (unknown cousin)

•Married: 0034/33 BC

Marriage 5 Mariamne II b: ABT 0045 BC

•Married: 0023 BC

•Divorced: 0007/0006 BC

Children

1. Herod Philip I

2. Salome

3. Phaesalis

Marriage 6 Malthrace VI

•Married: 0028 BC

Children

1. Archelaus b: 0023 BC

2. Herod Antipas

3. Olympius

Marriage 7 Cleopatra of Jerusalem b: ABT 0050 BC

•Married: 0020 BC

Children

1. Herod Philip II b: ABT 0019 BC

Marriage 8 Pallas

•Married: 0016 BC

Children

1. Phasaelus

Marriage 9 Phaedra

•Married: 0016 BC

Children

1. Roxane

Marriage 10 Elpis

•Married: 0016 BC

Children

1. Salome

=============

http://he.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D7%91%D7%99%D7%AA_%D7%94%D7%95%D7%A8%D7%93%D7%95%D7%A1

=============

Death date is disputed; The 1 March 4BCE is from Wagner, Sir Anthony Richard; ‘Pedigree and Progress: Essays in the Genealogical Interpretation of History’
--------------------
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herod_the_Great
--------------------
'''Herod the Great'''

This article is about the Roman-appointed king of Judea. For other uses, see Herod, Herod the Great (film), and Herod the Great (play).
King of Judea Reign 37–4 BCE ("Schürer consensus") 36–1 BCE (traditional)[2] Predecessor Antigonus II Mattathias Successor Herod Archelaus Herod Antipas Philip the Tetrarch Salome I Born c. 72 BCE Died March–April 4 BCE (Schürer) or January–April 1 BCE (traditional) Jericho, Judea Burial Most likely the Herodium Spouse Doris Mariamne I Mariamne II Malthace Cleopatra of Jerusalem plus 5 more wives Issue among others Antipater II Alexander Aristobulus IV Princess Salampsio Herod II Herod Antipas Herod Archelaus Olympias the Herodian Philip Dynasty Herodian Father Antipater the Idumaean Mother Cypros Religion Second Temple Judaism Herod I (/ˈhɛrəd/; Hebrew: הוֹרְדוֹס‎, Modern: Hordos, Tiberian: Hōreḏōs; Koinē Greek: Ἡρῴδης Hērǭdēs; c. 72 – 4 or 1 BCE), also known as Herod the Great, was a Roman client king of Judea,[3][4][5] referred to as the Herodian kingdom. The history of his legacy has polarized opinion, as he is known for his colossal building projects throughout Judea, including his renovation of the Second Temple in Jerusalem and the expansion of the Temple Mount towards its north,[6] the Tomb of the Patriarchs in Hebron, the construction of the port at Caesarea Maritima, the fortress at Masada, and Herodium. Vital details of his life are recorded in the works of the 1st century CE Roman–Jewish historian Josephus.[7] Herod also appears in the Christian Gospel of Matthew as the ruler of Judea who orders the Massacre of the Innocents at the time of the birth of Jesus, although a majority of Herod biographers do not believe this event to have occurred.[8] Despite his successes, including singlehandedly forging a new aristocracy from practically nothing,[9] he has still garnered criticism from various historians. His reign polarizes opinion amongst scholars and historians, some viewing his legacy as evidence of success, and some as a reminder of his tyrannical rule.[7]

Upon Herod's death, the Romans divided his kingdom among three of his sons and his sister: Archelaus became ethnarch of Judea, Samaria, and Idumea; Herod Antipas became tetrarch of Galilee and Peraea; Philip became tetrarch of territories north and east of the Jordan; and Salome I was given a toparchy including the cities of Jabneh, Ashdod, and Phasaelis.

Contents 1 Biography 2 Reign in Judea 3 Architectural achievements 4 New Testament references 5 Death 5.1 Successors 6 Herod's tomb 7 Opinions of his reign 8 Chronology 8.1 30s BCE 8.2 20s BCE 8.3 10s BCE 8.4 First decade BCE 9 Wives and children 10 Family trees 10.1 Ancestors 10.2 Marriages and descendants 11 See also 12 References 13 Further reading 14 External links Biography

Copper coin of Herod, bearing the legend "ΒΑΣΙΛΕΩΣ ΗΡΩΔΟΥ" ("Basileōs Hērōdou") on the obverse Herod was born in (or around) 72 BCE[10] in Idumea, south of Judea.[11] He was the second son of Antipater the Idumaean, a high-ranking official under ethnarch Hyrcanus II, and Cypros, a Nabatean Arab. Herod's father was by descent an Edomite, whose ancestors had converted to Judaism. Herod was raised as a Jew.[12][13][14][15][16][17] Strabo, a contemporary, held that the Idumaeans, whom he identified as of Nabataean origin, constituted the majority of the population of Western Judea, where they commingled with the Judaeans and adopted their customs.[18] This is a view shared also by some modern scholarly works which consider Idumaeans as of Arab or Nabataean origins.[19][20][21][22] Thus Herod was ethnically an Arab from both sides.[13][12]

Herod's rise to power is largely due to his father's good standing relation with Julius Caesar, who entrusted Antipater with the public affairs of Judea.[23] Herod, Antipater's son, was appointed provincial governor of Galilee in ca. 47 BCE when Herod was about either 25 or 28 years old (Greek original: "15 years of age"),[24] and where he faithfully farmed the taxes of that region for the Roman Senate, and where he met with success in ridding that region of bandits.[25][26] Antipater's elder son, Phasael, served in the same capacity as governor of Jerusalem. During this time, the young Herod cultivated a good relationship with Sextus Caesar, the acting Roman governor of Syria, who appointed Herod as general of Coelesyria and Samaria, greatly expanding his realm of influence.[27] He enjoyed the backing of Rome, but his brutality was condemned by the Sanhedrin.[28] When yet a private man, Herod had determined to punish Hyrcanus the king, who had once summoned Herod to stand trial for murder, but was restrained from doing so by the intervention of his father and his elder brother.

In 41 BCE, Herod and his brother Phasael were named as tetrarchs by the Roman leader Mark Antony. They were placed in this role to support Hyrcanus II. Later, Antigonus, Hyrcanus' nephew, took the throne from his uncle with the help of the Parthians. Herod fled to Rome to plead with the Romans to restore Hyrcanus II to power. The Romans had a special interest in Judea because their general Pompey the Great had conquered Jerusalem in 63 BCE, thus placing the region in the Roman sphere of influence. In Rome, Herod was unexpectedly appointed King of the Jews by the Roman Senate.[29] Josephus puts this in the year of the consulship of Calvinus and Pollio (40 BCE), but Appian places it in 39 BCE.[2] Herod went back to Judea to win his kingdom from Antigonus. Toward the end of the campaign against Antigonus, Herod married the granddaughter of Hyrcanus II, Mariamne (known as Mariamne I), who was also a niece of Antigonus. Herod did this in an attempt to secure his claim to the throne and gain some Jewish favor. However, Herod already had a wife, Doris, and a young son, Antipater, and chose therefore to banish Doris and her child.

Herod and Sosius, the governor of Syria, at the behest of Mark Antony, set out with a large army in 37 BCE and captured Jerusalem, Herod then sending Antigonus for execution to Mark Antony.[30] From this moment, Herod took the role as sole ruler of Judea and the title of basileus (Βασιλεύς, "king") for himself, ushering in the Herodian dynasty and ending the Hasmonean Dynasty. Josephus reports this as being in the year of the consulship of Agrippa and Gallus (37 BCE), but also says that it was exactly 27 years after Jerusalem fell to Pompey, which would indicate 36 BCE. Cassius Dio also reports that in 37 "the Romans accomplished nothing worthy of note" in the area.[31] According to Josephus, Herod ruled for 37 years, 34 of them after capturing Jerusalem.

Model of Herod's Temple As some believe Herod's family were converts to Judaism, his religious commitment was questioned by some elements of Jewish society.[32] When John Hyrcanus conquered the region of Idumaea (the Edom of the Hebrew Bible) in 140–130 BCE, he required all Idumaeans to obey Jewish law or to leave; most Idumaeans thus converted to Judaism, which meant that they had to be circumcised,[33] and many had intermarried with the Jews and adopted their customs.[34] While Herod publicly identified himself as a Jew and was considered as such by some,[35] this religious identification was undermined by the decadent lifestyle of the Herodians, which would have earned them the antipathy of observant Jews.[36]

Herod later executed several members of his own family, including his wife Mariamne I.[17]

Reign in Judea Herod's rule marked a new beginning in the history of Judea. Judea had been ruled autonomously by the Hasmonean kings from 140 until 63 BCE. The Hasmonean kings retained their titles, but became clients of Rome after the conquest by Pompey in 63 BCE. Herod overthrew the Hasmonean Antigonus in a three-year-long war between 37 and 34 BCE, ruled under Roman overlordship until his death ca. 4 BCE, and officially passed on the throne to his sons, thus establishing his own, so-called Herodian dynasty.

Herod was granted the title of "King of Judea" by the Roman Senate.[37] As such, he was a vassal of the Roman Empire, expected to support the interests of his Roman patrons. Nonetheless, just when Herod obtained leadership in Judea, his rule faced two threats. The first threat came from his mother-in-law Alexandra, who sought to regain power for her family, the Hasmoneans,[38] whose dynasty Herod had overthrown in 37 BCE (see Siege of Jerusalem).[39] In the same year, Cleopatra married the Roman leader Antony.[40] Recognizing Cleopatra's influence over Antony, Alexandra asked Cleopatra for aid in making Aristobulus III the High Priest.[38] As a member of the Hasmonean family, Aristobulus III might partially repair the fortunes of the Hasmoneans if made High Priest.[38] Alexandra's request was made, but Cleopatra urged Alexandra to leave Judea with Aristobulus III and visit Antony.[41] Herod received word of this plot, and feared that if Antony met Aristobolus III in person he might name Aristobulus III King of Judea.[41] This concern induced Herod, in 35 BCE, to order the assassination of Aristobulus, ending this first threat to Herod's throne.[42] The marriage of 37 BCE also sparked a power struggle between Roman leaders Octavian, who would later be called Augustus, and Antony.[40] Herod, owing his throne to Rome, had to pick a side, and he chose Antony.[43] In 31 at Actium, Antony lost to Octavian, posing a second threat to Herod's rule.[44] Herod had to regain Octavian's support if he was to keep his throne.[43] At Rhodes in 31 BCE, Herod, through his ability to keep Judea open to Rome as a link to the wealth of Syria and Egypt, and ability to defend the frontier, convinced Octavian that he would be loyal to him.[45][46][3] Herod continued to rule his subjects as he saw fit. Despite the autonomy afforded to Herod in his internal reign over Judea, restrictions were placed upon him in his relations with other kingdoms.[47]

Herod's support from the Roman Empire was a major factor in enabling him to maintain his authority over Judea. There have been mixed interpretations concerning Herod's popularity during his reign. In The Jewish War, Josephus characterizes Herod's rule in generally favorable terms, and gives Herod the benefit of the doubt for the infamous events that took place during his reign. However, in his later work, Jewish Antiquities, Josephus emphasizes the tyrannical authority that many scholars have come to associate with Herod's reign.[48]

Herod's despotic rule has been demonstrated by many of his security measures aimed at suppressing the contempt his people, especially Jews, had towards him. For instance, it has been suggested that Herod used secret police to monitor and report the feelings of the general populace toward him. He sought to prohibit protests, and had opponents removed by force.[48] He had a bodyguard of 2 000 soldiers.[49] Josephus describes various units of Herod's personal guard taking part in Herod's funeral, including the Doryphnoroi, and a Thracian, Celtic (probably Gallic) and Germanic contingent.[49] While the term Doryphnoroi does not have an ethnic connotation, the unit was probably composed of distinguished veteran soldiers and young men from the most influential Jewish families.[49] Thracians had served in the Jewish armies since the Hasmonean dynasty, while the Celtic contingent were former bodyguards of Cleopatra given as a gift by Augustus to Herod following the Battle of Actium.[49] The Germanic contingent was modeled upon Augustus's personal bodyguard, the Germani Corporis Custodes, responsible for guarding the palace.[49]

Herod spent lavish sums on his various building projects and generous gifts to other dominions, including Rome itself. His buildings were very large, ambitious projects. Herod was responsible for the construction of the Temple Mount, a portion of which remains today as the Western Wall. In addition, Herod also used the latest technology in hydraulic cement and underwater construction to build the harbor at Caesarea.[47] While Herod's zeal for building transformed Judea, his motives were not selfless. Although he built fortresses (Masada, Herodium, Alexandrium, Hyrcania, and Machaerus) in which he and his family could take refuge in case of insurrection, these vast projects were also intended to gain the support of the Jews and improve his reputation as a leader.[50] Herod also built Sebaste and other pagan cities because he wanted to appeal to the country's substantial pagan population.[47] In order to fund these projects, Herod utilized a Hasmonean taxation system that heavily burdened the Judean people. Nevertheless, these enterprises brought employment and opportunities for the people's provision.[51] In some instances, Herod took it upon himself to provide for his people in times of need, such as during a severe famine that occurred in 25 BCE.[52]

Although he made many attempts at conforming to traditional Jewish laws, there were more instances where Herod was insensitive, which constitutes one of the major Jewish complaints of Herod as highlighted in Jewish Antiquities. In Jerusalem, Herod introduced foreign forms of entertainment, and erected a golden eagle at the entrance of the Temple, which suggested a greater interest in the welfare of Rome than of Jews.[51] Herod's taxes garnered a bad reputation: his constant concern for his reputation led him to make frequent, expensive gifts, increasingly emptying the kingdom's coffers, and such lavish spending upset his Jewish subjects.[50] The two major Jewish sects of the day, the Pharisees and the Sadducees, both showed opposition to Herod. The Pharisees were discontented because Herod disregarded many of their demands with respect to the Temple's construction. The Sadducees, who were closely associated with priestly responsibilities in the Temple, opposed Herod because he replaced their high priests with outsiders from Babylonia and Alexandria, in an effort to gain support from the Jewish Diaspora.[53] Herod's outreach efforts gained him little, and at the end of his reign anger and dissatisfaction were common amongst Jews. Heavy outbreaks of violence and riots followed Herod's death in many cities, including Jerusalem, as pent-up resentments boiled over. The scope of the disturbances sparked hopes that the Jews of Judea might some day overthrow the Roman overlords, hopes reawakened decades later in the outbreak of the Great Revolt of 70 CE.[50]

Architectural achievements Main article: Herodian architecture Herod's most famous and ambitious project was the expansion of the Second Temple in Jerusalem. Herod's rebuilding of the Second Temple in Jerusalem was done so that he would "have a capital city worthy of his dignity and grandeur"[47] and with this reconstruction Herod hoped to gain more support from the Jews.[47] Recent findings suggest that the Temple Mount walls and Robinson's Arch may not have been completed until at least 20 years after his death, during the reign of Herod Agrippa II.[54]

In the 18th year of his reign (20–19 BCE), Herod rebuilt the Temple on "a more magnificent scale".[55] Although work on out-buildings and courts continued for another 80 years, the new Temple was finished in a year and a half.[56] To comply with religious law, Herod employed 1,000 priests as masons and carpenters in the rebuilding.[55] The finished temple, which was destroyed in 70 CE, is sometimes referred to as Herod's Temple. Today, only the four retaining walls remain standing, including the Western Wall. These walls created a flat platform (the Temple Mount) upon which the Temple was then constructed.

Herod's other achievements include the development of water supplies for Jerusalem, building fortresses such as Masada and Herodium, and founding new cities such as Caesarea Maritima and the enclosures of Cave of the Patriarchs and Mamre in Hebron. He and Cleopatra owned a monopoly over the extraction of asphalt from the Dead Sea, which was used in shipbuilding. He leased copper mines on Cyprus from the Roman emperor.

New Testament references Main article: Massacre of the Innocents

Massacre of the Innocents, 10th century depiction. Herod on the left Herod appears in the Gospel of Matthew,[57] which describes an event known as the Massacre of the Innocents. According to this account, after the birth of Jesus, a group of magi from the East visited Herod to inquire the whereabouts of "the one having been born king of the Jews", because they had seen his star in the east (or, according to certain translations, at its rising) and therefore wanted to pay him homage. Herod, as King of the Jews, was alarmed at the prospect of a usurper. Herod assembled the chief priests and scribes of the people and asked them where the "Anointed One" (the Messiah, Greek: Ὁ Χριστός, ho Christos) was to be born. They answered, in Bethlehem, citing Micah 5:2. Herod therefore sent the magi to Bethlehem, instructing them to search for the child and, after they had found him, to "report to me, so that I too may go and worship him". However, after they had found Jesus, they were warned in a dream not to report back to Herod. Similarly, Joseph was warned in a dream that Herod intended to kill Jesus, so he and his family fled to Egypt. When Herod realized he had been outwitted, he gave orders to kill all boys of the age of two and under in Bethlehem and its vicinity. Joseph and his family stayed in Egypt until Herod's death, then moved to Nazareth in Galilee to avoid living under Herod's son Archelaus.

Most modern biographers of Herod, and probably a majority of biblical scholars, dismiss Matthew's story as a literary device.[58] Contemporary non-biblical sources, including Herod's friend and personal historian, Nicolas of Damascus, provide no corroboration for Matthew's account of the massacre,[59] and it is not mentioned in the Gospel of Luke. Classical historian Michael Grant states “[t]he tale is not history but myth or folk-lore”,[60] while Peter Richardson notes that the story's absence from the Gospel of Luke and the accounts of Josephus "work[s] against the account's accuracy".[61] Richardson suggests that the event in Matthew's gospel was inspired by Herod's murder of his own sons.[62] That noted, scholars[who?] generally agree that the Massacre of the Innocents reflected the Pharaoh of the Exodus' massacre of Hebrew infants in which the baby Moses was spared, as the author of the Gospel of Matthew took creative liberties throughout the Gospel to portray Jesus as the new Moses.[citation needed]

Death

Coin of Herod the Great Herod died in Jericho,[11] after an excruciatingly painful, putrefying illness of uncertain cause, known to posterity as "Herod's Evil".[63][64] Josephus states that the pain of his illness led Herod to attempt suicide by stabbing, and that the attempt was thwarted by his cousin.[65] In some much later narratives and depictions, the attempt succeeds; for example, in the 12th-century Eadwine Psalter.[66] Other medieval dramatizations, such as the Ordo Rachelis, follow Josephus' account.[67] Most scholarship concerning the date of Herod's death follows Emil Schürer's calculations, which suggest that the date was in or around 4 BCE; this is three years earlier than the previous consensus and tradition (1 BCE).[68][69][70][71][72][73] Two of Herod's sons, Archelaus and Philip the Tetrarch, dated their rule from 4 BCE,[74] though Archelaus apparently held royal authority during Herod's lifetime.[75] Philip's reign would last for 37 years, until his death in the 20th year of Tiberius (34 CE), which implies his accession as 4 BCE.[76] Some scholars support the traditional date of 1 BCE for Herod's death.[77][78][79][80] Filmer and Steinmann, for example, propose that Herod died in 1 BCE, and that his heirs backdated their reigns to 4 or 3 BCE to assert an overlapping with Herod's rule, and bolster their own legitimacy.[2][70][81][69] In Josephus' account, Herod's death was preceded by a lunar eclipse and followed by Passover.[82] A partial eclipse best observed from the west coast of Africa,[83] took place on March 13, 4 BCE, about 29 days before Passover. Whilst this eclipse has been suggested as the one referred to by Josephus,[72] there were other eclipses during this period, with proponents of 5 BCE[71][84] and the two eclipses of 1 BCE occurring January 10, being the most spectacular total lunar eclipse and December 29, another only partial eclipse.[81][85][69]

The Division of Herod's Kingdom:
Territory under Herod Archelaus
Territory under Herod Antipas
Territory under Philip the Tetrarch
Jamnia under Salome I.

Bronze coin of Herod the Great, minted at Samaria. Scholars agree Herod suffered throughout his lifetime from depression and paranoia.[86] Josephus stated that Herod was so concerned that no one would mourn his death, that he commanded a large group of distinguished men to come to Jericho, and he gave an order that they should be killed at the time of his death so that the displays of grief that he craved would take place;[87] but his son Archelaus and his sister Salome did not carry out this wish.[88]

Successors Augustus respected the terms of Herod's will, which stipulated the division of Herod's kingdom among three of his sons.[89] Augustus recognised Herod's son Herod Archelaus as ethnarch of Judea, Samaria, and Idumea to 6 CE, referred to as the tetrarchy of Judea. Augustus then judged Archelaus incompetent to rule, removed him from power, and combined the provinces of Samaria, Judea proper, and Idumea into Iudaea province.[90] This enlarged province was ruled by a prefect until the year 41. As to Herod's other sons, Herod Antipas was tetrarch of Galilee and Peraea from Herod's death to 39 CE when he was deposed and exiled; Philip became tetrarch of territories north and east of the Jordan and ruled until his death in 34 CE.

Herod's tomb

Aerial photo of Herodium from the southwest The location of Herod's tomb is documented by Josephus, who writes, "And the body was carried two hundred furlongs, to Herodium, where he had given order to be buried."[91] Professor Ehud Netzer, an archaeologist from the Hebrew University, read the writings of Josephus and focused his search on the vicinity of the pool and its surroundings. An article in the New York Times states,

Lower Herodium consists of the remains of a large palace, a race track, service quarters, and a monumental building whose function is still a mystery. Perhaps, says Ehud Netzer, who excavated the site, it is Herod's mausoleum. Next to it is a pool, almost twice as large as modern Olympic-size pools.[92]

It took thirty-five years for Netzer to identify the exact location, but on May 7, 2007, an Israeli team of archaeologists of Hebrew University, led by Netzer, announced they had discovered the tomb.[93][94][95][96] The site is located at the exact location given by Josephus, atop tunnels and water pools, at a flattened desert site, halfway up the hill to Herodium, 12 kilometers (7.5 mi) south of Jerusalem.[97] The tomb contained a broken sarcophagus but no remains of a body.

The Israel Nature and Parks Authority and the Gush Etzion Regional Council intend to recreate the tomb out of a light plastic material.[98]

In October 2013, archaeologists Joseph Patrich and Benjamin Arubas challenged the identification of the tomb as that of Herod. According to Patrich and Arubas, the tomb is too modest to be Herod's and has several unlikely features. Roi Porat, who replaced Netzer as excavation leader after the latter's death, stood by the identification.[99]

Opinions of his reign Macrobius (c. 400 CE), one of the last pagan writers in Rome, in his book Saturnalia, wrote: “When it was heard that, as part of the slaughter of boys up to two years old, Herod, king of the Jews, had ordered his own son to be killed, he [the Emperor Augustus] remarked, ‘It is better to be Herod’s pig [Gr. hys] than his son’ [Gr. huios]”. This was a reference of how Herod, as a Jew, would not kill pigs, but had three of his sons, and many others, killed.[100]

According to contemporary historians, Herod the Great "is perhaps the only figure in ancient Jewish history who has been loathed equally by Jewish and Christian posterity",[7] depicted both by Jews and Christians as a tyrant and bloodthirsty ruler.[7] The study of Herod's reign includes polarizing opinions on the man himself. Modern critics have described him as "the evil genius of the Judean nation",[101] and as one who would be "prepared to commit any crime in order to gratify his unbounded ambition."[102] His extraordinary spending spree is cited as one of the causes of the serious impoverishment of the people he ruled, adding to the opinion that his reign was exclusively negative.[103] Herod's religious policies gained a mixed response from the Jewish populace. Although Herod considered himself king of the Jews, he let it be known that he also represented the non-Jews living in Judea, building temples for other religions outside of the Jewish areas of his kingdom. Many Jews questioned the authenticity of Herod's Judaism on account of his Idumean background and his infamous murders of members of his family. However, he generally respected traditional Jewish observances in his public life. For instance, he minted coins without human images to be used in Jewish areas and acknowledged the sanctity of the Second Temple by employing priests in the construction of the Temple.[104]

Along with holding some respect for the Jewish culture in his public life, there is also evidence of Herod's sensitivity toward Jewish traditions in his private life with the presence of around 40 ritual baths or mikvehs found in several of his palaces.[105] These mikvehs were known for being used in Jewish purity rituals during this time where Jewish people could submerge themselves in these pools and purify their bodies without the presence of a priest.[106] There is some speculation as to whether or not these baths were actual mikvehs as they have also been identified as stepped frigidarium or Roman cold-water baths; however, several historians have identified these baths as a combination of both types.[107] While it has been proven that Herod showed a great amount of disrespect toward the Jewish religion, scholar Eyal Regev suggests that the presence of these ritual baths shows that Herod found ritual purity important enough in his private life to place a large number of these baths in his palaces despite his several connections to gentiles and pagan cults.[107] These baths also show, Regev continues, that the combination of the Roman frigidarium and the Jewish mikvehs suggests that Herod sought for there to be some type of combination between the Roman and Jewish cultures as he enjoyed the purity of Jewish tradition and the comfort of Roman luxury simultaneously.[108]

However, he was also praised for his work, being considered the greatest builder in Jewish history,[citation needed] and one who "knew his place and followed [the] rules."[109] In fact, what is left of his building ventures are now popular tourist attractions in the Middle East, which many have come to cherish as both a historical and religious area.[110]

Chronology

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "Herod the Great" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (May 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Further information: Herodian kingdom 30s BCE 39–37 BCE – Roman war against Antigonus. After the conquest of Jerusalem and victory over Antigonus, Mark Antony executes him. 36 BCE – Herod makes his 17-year-old brother-in-law, Aristobulus III, high priest, fearing that the Jews would appoint Aristobulus III as "King of the Jews" in his place. 35 BCE – Aristobulus III is drowned at a party on Herod's orders. 32 BCE – The war against Nabatea begins, with victory one year later. 31 BCE – Judea suffers a devastating earthquake. Octavian defeats Mark Antony, so Herod switches allegiance to Octavian, later known as Augustus. 30 BCE – Herod is shown great favor by Octavian, who at Rhodes confirms him as King of Judea. 20s BCE 29 BCE – Josephus writes that Herod had great passion and also great jealousy concerning his wife, Mariamne I. She learns of Herod's plans to murder her, and stops sleeping with him. Herod puts her on trial on a charge of adultery. His sister, Salome I, was chief witness against her. Mariamne I's mother Alexandra made an appearance and incriminated her own daughter. Historians say her mother was next on Herod's list to be executed and did this only to save her own life. Mariamne was executed, and Alexandra declared herself Queen, stating that Herod was mentally unfit to serve. Josephus wrote that this was Alexandra's strategic mistake; Herod executed her without trial. 28 BCE – Herod executed his brother-in-law Kostobar[111] (husband of Salome, father to Berenice) for conspiracy. Large festival in Jerusalem, as Herod had built a theatre and an amphitheatre. 27 BCE – An assassination attempt on Herod was foiled. To honor Augustus, Herod rebuilt Samaria and renamed it Sebaste. 25 BCE – Herod imported grain from Egypt and started an aid program to combat the widespread hunger and disease that followed a massive drought. He also waives a third of the taxes. Herod began construction on Caesarea Maritima and its harbor. 23 BCE – Herod built a palace in Jerusalem and the fortress Herodion (Herodium) in Judea. He married his third wife, Mariamne II, the daughter of the priest Simon Boethus; immediately Herodes deprived Jesus the son of Phabet of the high priesthood and conferred that dignity on Simon.[112] 22 BCE – The Roman emperor Augustus granted him the regions Trachonitis, Batanaea, and Auranitis to the northeast. Circa 20 BCE – Expansion started on the Temple Mount; Herod completely rebuilt the Second Temple of Jerusalem. 10s BCE Circa 18 BCE – Herod traveled for the second time to Rome. 14 BCE – Herod supported the Jews in Anatolia and Cyrene. Owing to the prosperity in Judaea he waived a quarter of the taxes. 13 BCE – Herod made his first-born son Antipater (his son by Doris) first heir in his will. 12 BCE – Herod suspected his sons from his marriage to Mariamne I, Alexander and Aristobulus, of threatening his life. He took them to Aquileia to be tried. Augustus reconciled the three. Herod supported the financially strapped Olympic Games and ensured their future. Herod amended his will so that Alexander and Aristobulus rose in the royal succession, but Antipater would be higher in the succession. Circa 10 BCE – The newly expanded temple in Jerusalem was inaugurated. War against the Nabateans began. First decade BCE

Tomb of Herod 9 BCE – Caesarea Maritima was inaugurated. Owing to the course of the war against the Nabateans, Herod fell into disgrace with Augustus. Herod again suspected Alexander of plotting to kill him. 8 BCE – Herod accused his sons Alexander and Aristobulus of high treason. Herod reconciled with Augustus, who also gave him the permission to proceed legally against his sons. 7 BCE – The court hearing took place in Berytos (Beirut) before a Roman court. His sons Alexander and Aristobulus were found guilty and executed. The succession changed so that Antipater was the exclusive successor to the throne. In second place the succession incorporated (Herod) Philip, his son by Mariamne II. 6 BCE – Herod proceeded against the Pharisees. 5 BCE – Antipater was brought before the court charged with the intended murder of Herod. Herod, by now seriously ill, named his son (Herod) Antipas (from his fourth marriage with Malthace) as his successor. 4 BCE – Young disciples smashed the golden eagle over the main entrance of the Temple of Jerusalem after the Pharisee teachers claimed it was an idolatrous Roman symbol. Herod arrested them, brought them to court, and sentenced them. Augustus approved the death penalty for Antipater. Herod then executed his son, and again changed his will: Archelaus (from the marriage with Malthace) would rule as ethnarch over the tetrachy of Judea, while Antipas (by Malthace) and Philip (from the fifth marriage with Cleopatra of Jerusalem) would rule as tetrarchs over Galilee and Peraea (Transjordan), also over Gaulanitis (Golan), Trachonitis (Hebrew: Argob), Batanaea (now Ard-el-Bathanyeh) and Panias. Salome I was also given a small toparchy in the Gaza region. As Augustus did not confirm his will, no one received the title of King; however, the three sons were granted rule of the stated territories. Wives and children Herod's wives and children Wife Children Doris son Antipater II, executed 4 BCE Mariamne I, daughter of Hasmonean Alexandros and Alexandra the Maccabee, executed 29 BCE son Alexander, executed 7 BCE son Aristobulus IV, executed 7 BCE daughter Salampsio daughter Cypros Mariamne II, daughter of High-Priest Simon son Herod II Malthace son Herod Archelaus - ethnarch son Herod Antipas - tetrarch daughter Olympias Cleopatra of Jerusalem son Philip the Tetrarch - tetrarch son Herod Pallas son Phasael Phaidra daughter Roxanne Elpis daughter Salome a cousin (name unknown) no known children a niece (name unknown) no known children It is very probable that Herod had more children, especially with the last wives, and also that he had more daughters, as female births at that time were often not recorded.[113] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herod_the_Great

Mat 2:1, 3, 7, 9, 12, 15, 16, 19, 22; Mark 6:16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26, 27; Luke 1:5, 8:3

Bible Dictionary King Herod the Great

THIS CHART NEEDS FIXING
Herod, the King (Mat 2:3)(The Great)
|
|
By Mariamne By Mariamne |
the Maccabean daughter of Simon | By Malthace, By Cleopatra
Princess the high priest | a Samaritan
|
| | | |
|
|____________|____________|____________|_________________|
| | ___________|_____
| | Herod Philip |
| |
Aristobulus (Mat. 14:13) Herod Antipas, Archelaus
Philip,
| (Mark 6:17) the tetratch (Mat. 2:22)
Tetraarch
|______________ (Mat. 14:1)
of Ituraea
| | (Luke 9:7)
(Luke 3:1)
Heord Agrippa I Herodias (Mark 6:14)
(Acts 25:13) (Mat. 14:3) (King Herod)
| (Mark 6:17)
|_________________________________
| | | Herod Argippa II Bernice Drusilla, wife of Felix (Acts 25:13) (Acts 25:13) (Acts 24:24)

The genealogical table shows the relationship between the various members ofs the Herodian family mentioned in the New Testament.
The Herodian family were Idumaens by birth, but had become converts to the Jewish faith. Their object was to found, under the protection of Rome, a semi-independent kingdom. By his marriage with Mariamne Herod the Great allied himself with the family of the Maccabees, who had been for several generations the leaders of the patriotic party among the Jews. Horod was a successful ruler and was on terms of friendship with Augustus, the Roman Emperor. In order to gain favor with his subajectys, with whom he was most unpopular, he rebuilt the te4mple at an immense cost. (See Temple of Herod in
the Bible Dictionary.) His reign was disgraced by many acts of cruelty. In a fit of jealousy he had his wife, whom he dearly loved, put to death; later on he had her two sons, Alexander and Aristobulus, also murdered. In the same year in which he gave the order for the massacre of the infants at Bethlehem, he had Antipater, anothaer of his own sons, put to death. A few months later Herod himself died. His kingdom was then divided between three of his sons: Archelaus, who received Judaea, Idumaea, and Samaria; Antipas, who had Galilee and Peraea; and Philip, who had the northeast districts of Palestine.
After a reign of nine years Archelaus was deposed by Ausustus, and Judaea was attached to the Roman province of Syria, being governed by as Procurator. Antipas (called in the New Testament "Herod the tetratch") built as his capital Tiberias on the Sea of Galilee; he is frequently mentioned in the Gospels (Matt. 14: 1; Mark 6: 14; Luke 9: 7; 13: 31;23:7-15). He took as his wife Herodias, the wife of his half-brother Philip. He was deposed by the emperor Caligula and banished to Lugdunum in Gaul, A.D. 39. Philip made Caesarea Philippi (previously called Panias) his capital, and remained in possession of his tetrarchy until his death in A.D. 33. His terrirtory then became part of the province of Syria, but in A.D. 37 it was gaiven by Caligula, along with Abilene (the tetratchy of Lysanias), to Agrippa, who was allowed to assume the title of king. On the deposition of Antipas he obtained the tetratchy of Galilee, and in A.D. 41 on the accession of the Emperor Claudius, he received Judaea and Sammaria as well, and so became ruler of the whole territory governed by his grandfather. He lived in jerusalem and was anxious to be regarded as an orthodox Jew. He began a persecution of the Church, and put James to death, Peter escaping by a miracle (Acts 12: 1-23). His death is described in Acts 12:20-23. His son Agrippa II, was allowed by the Emperor Claudius to succeed to only a small part oof his father's dominions. He is mentioned in Acts 25: 13. He was the last of the Herods.

Bible Dictionary page 700 - Herod

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per00601.htm#0
Book of Matthew

Mat 2:1, 3, 7, 9, 12, 15, 16, 19, 22; Mark 6:16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26, 27; Luke 1:5, 8:3

Bible Dictionary King Herod the Great

THIS CHART NEEDS FIXING
Herod, the King (Mat 2:3)(The Great)
|
|
By Mariamne By Mariamne |
the Maccabean daughter of Simon | By Malthace, By Cleopatra
Princess the high priest | a Samaritan
|
| | | |
|
|____________|____________|____________|_________________|
| | ___________|_____
| | Herod Philip |
| |
Aristobulus (Mat. 14:13) Herod Antipas, Archelaus
Philip,
| (Mark 6:17) the tetratch (Mat. 2:22)
Tetraarch
|______________ (Mat. 14:1)
of Ituraea
| | (Luke 9:7)
(Luke 3:1)
Heord Agrippa I Herodias (Mark 6:14)
(Acts 25:13) (Mat. 14:3) (King Herod)
| (Mark 6:17)
|_________________________________
| | | Herod Argippa II Bernice Drusilla, wife of Felix (Acts 25:13) (Acts 25:13) (Acts 24:24)

The genealogical table shows the relationship between the various members ofs the Herodian family mentioned in the New Testament.
The Herodian family were Idumaens by birth, but had become converts to the Jewish faith. Their object was to found, under the protection of Rome, a semi-independent kingdom. By his marriage with Mariamne Herod the Great allied himself with the family of the Maccabees, who had been for several generations the leaders of the patriotic party among the Jews. Horod was a successful ruler and was on terms of friendship with Augustus, the Roman Emperor. In order to gain favor with his subajectys, with whom he was most unpopular, he rebuilt the te4mple at an immense cost. (See Temple of Herod in
the Bible Dictionary.) His reign was disgraced by many acts of cruelty. In a fit of jealousy he had his wife, whom he dearly loved, put to death; later on he had her two sons, Alexander and Aristobulus, also murdered. In the same year in which he gave the order for the massacre of the infants at Bethlehem, he had Antipater, anothaer of his own sons, put to death. A few months later Herod himself died. His kingdom was then divided between three of his sons: Archelaus, who received Judaea, Idumaea, and Samaria; Antipas, who had Galilee and Peraea; and Philip, who had the northeast districts of Palestine.
After a reign of nine years Archelaus was deposed by Ausustus, and Judaea was attached to the Roman province of Syria, being governed by as Procurator. Antipas (called in the New Testament "Herod the tetratch") built as his capital Tiberias on the Sea of Galilee; he is frequently mentioned in the Gospels (Matt. 14: 1; Mark 6: 14; Luke 9: 7; 13: 31;23:7-15). He took as his wife Herodias, the wife of his half-brother Philip. He was deposed by the emperor Caligula and banished to Lugdunum in Gaul, A.D. 39. Philip made Caesarea Philippi (previously called Panias) his capital, and remained in possession of his tetrarchy until his death in A.D. 33. His terrirtory then became part of the province of Syria, but in A.D. 37 it was gaiven by Caligula, along with Abilene (the tetratchy of Lysanias), to Agrippa, who was allowed to assume the title of king. On the deposition of Antipas he obtained the tetratchy of Galilee, and in A.D. 41 on the accession of the Emperor Claudius, he received Judaea and Sammaria as well, and so became ruler of the whole territory governed by his grandfather. He lived in jerusalem and was anxious to be regarded as an orthodox Jew. He began a persecution of the Church, and put James to death, Peter escaping by a miracle (Acts 12: 1-23). His death is described in Acts 12:20-23. His son Agrippa II, was allowed by the Emperor Claudius to succeed to only a small part oof his father's dominions. He is mentioned in Acts 25: 13. He was the last of the Herods.

Bible Dictionary page 700 - Herod

KING OF JUDEA; MARRIED 9TH A DAUGHTER OF SALOME, 10TH A NIECE; DIED 4 BC

1 NAME the Great //
2 GIVN the Great
2 SURN
2 NICK the Great

1 NAME the Great //
2 GIVN the Great
2 SURN
2 NICK the Great

RESEARCH NOTES:
"the Great"; King of Judea 37-4 BC

1 NAME the Great //
2 GIVN the Great
2 SURN
2 NICK the Great

Herod the Great
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.

Herod I, also known as Herod the Great, was a Roman client-king of Judaea (c. 74 BC - March 4 BC in Jerusalem). The details of his biography can best be gleaned from the works of the 1st century AD Jewish historiographer Josephus. To the majority of non-specialist Christians Herod is best known from the Gospel according to Matthew that gives in chapter 2 an account of the events leading up to and including what subsequently has come to be referred to by Christians as the Massacre of the Innocents, of which however no mention in other contemporary sources has come down to us.

Contents [hide]
1 Biography
2 30s BC
3 20s BC
4 10s BC
5 0s BC
6 Date of Herod's death
7 Marriages and Children
8 Herod's family trees
9 Achievements
10 Herod in the New Testament
11 After Herod's death
12 References and External Links



[edit]
Biography

Copper coin of Herod, bearing the legend "Basileus Herodon on the obverse and a Macedonian sun-symbol on the reverse.Herod the Great arose from a wealthy, influential Idumaean family. The Idumaeans, successors to the Edomites of the Hebrew Bible, settled in Idumea, formerly known as Edom, in southern Judea. When the Maccabean John Hyrcanus conquered Idumea in 130-140 BC, he required all Idumaeans to obey Jewish law or to leave; most Idumaeans thus converted to Judaism.

Herod identified himself as Jewish, although according to the Law he was not. For he was the second son of Antipater the Idumaean, founder of the Herodian dynasty, and his wife Cypros, a princess from Petra in Nabatea (now part of Jordan). The family rubbed shoulders with the greats in Rome, such as Pompey, Cassius, and in 47 BC his father was appointed Procurator over Judea, who then appointed his son governor of Galilee at the age of 25.

After his father was poisoned in 43 BC, allegedly by a tax-collector, Herod had the murderer executed. After returning from a campaign, he was offered the betrothal to the teenage princess Mariamne (sometimes spelled Mariamme) from the Hasmonean dynasty who were the titular rulers of Judaea. As he was already married, he banished his first wife Doris and her 3 year old son, also named Antipater, and married Mariamne.

In 40 BC Antigonos and the Parthians invaded Judea, and Herod fled Jerusalem to Rome for the first time. There he was titled King of Judaea by Mark Antony.

[edit]
30s BC
39 BC-37 BC War against Antigonos. After the winning of Jerusalem and victory over Antigonos, Marc Antony executes Antigonos.

36 BC Herod makes his 17 year old brother-in-law Aristobulus III of Judea high priest. He feared the Jews would appoint Aristobulus "king of the Jews" in his place.

35 BC Aristobulus drowns at a party. Historians claim there is insufficient evidence against Herod for his death.

32 BC Start of the war against Nabatea, with victory one year later.

31 BC strong earthquake in Judea. Octavian defeats Mark Antony, so Herod switches allegiance to Octavian, later Augustus.

30 BC Herod was then shown great favour by Octavian who at Rhodes confirms him as King of Judaea.

[edit]
20s BC
29 BC Josephus writes that Herod had great passion and also great jealousy concerning his wife Mariamne. She learns of Herod's plans to murder her, and stops sleeping with him. Herod puts her on trial on a trumped-up charge of adultery. His sister Salome (not Herodias's daughter Salomé) was chief witness against her.

Mariamne's mother made an appearance and incriminated her own daughter. Historians say her mother was next on Herod's list to be executed and did this only to save her own life. Writings state that Mariamne was calm and serene at her execution at the age of 25 years, having given birth to 5 children in 7 years.

Alexandra, Mariamne's mother, then made a bid for power, declaring herself Queen and stating that Herod was mentally unfit to serve any longer. Josephus wrote that this was Alexandra's strategic mistake and Herod executed her without trial.

28 BC Herod executed his brother-in-law Kostobar (husband of Salome, father to Berenice) for conspiracy. Large festival in Jerusalem, as Herod had built a Theatre and an Amphitheatre.

27 BC An assassination attempt on Herod is discovered in time. To honour Gaius Julius Caesar Octavianus (Augustus) Herod rebuilds Samaria and renames it Sebaste.

25 BC After a great drought there is hunger and epidemics. Herod imports grain from Egypt and starts an exemplary aid programme. He also waives a third of the taxes.

23 BC Herod builds a palace in Jerusalem and the fortress Herodian in Judaea. Herod marries his third wife, also named Mariamne, the daughter of high priest Simon.

22 BC Building starts on Caesarea Maritima and its harbour. From the Romans he obtains the regions Trachonitis, Batanaea and Auranitis under his rule.

Circa 20 BC Expansion starts on the Second Temple.

[edit]
10s BC
Circa 18 BC Herod travels for the second time to Rome.

14 BC Herod supports the Jews in Anatolia and Cyrene. Owing to the prosperity in Judaea he waives a quarter of the taxes. He argues with his sons.

13 BC Herod makes his firstborn son Antipater (his son with Doris) first heir in his will.

12 BC Because Herod suspects both his sons (from his marriage to the first Mariamne) Alexandros and Aristobulos of threatening his life, he takes them to Aquileia to be tried; but Augustus is able to reconcile the three. Herod supports the financially strapped Olympic Games and ensures their future. Herod amends his will so that Alexander and Aristobulos rise in the royal succession, but Antipater would be higher in the succession.

Circa 10 BC The newly expanded temple in Jerusalem is inaugurated. War against the Nabateans.

[edit]
0s BC
9 BC The inauguration of Caesarea Maritima is a marvellous spectacle with a festival. Owing to the course of the war against the Nabateans Herod falls into disgrace with Augustus. Herod again suspects Alexander intends to kill him.

8 BC Herod accuses his sons from the first Mariamne of high treason. Herod is reconciled with Augustus, which also gives him the permission to proceed legally against his sons.

7 BC The court hearing takes place in Berytos (Beirut) before a Roman court. Mariamne's sons are found guilty and executed. Now the succession is changed so that Antipater is the exclusive successor to the throne. In second place the succession incorporates Herod Philip, the son from the second Mariamne.

6 BC Herod proceeds harshly against the Pharisees, who had announced that the birth of the Messiah would mean the end of his rule.

5 BC Antipater is brought before the court charged with intended murder of Herod. The sentence must first be approved only by the Roman emperor. Herod makes his son Herod Antipas from his 4th marriage with Malthace as his successor. Herod is seriously ill.

4 BC Young Torah-students smash the golden eagle over the main entrance of the Temple of Jerusalem after the Pharisee teachers claim it is a Roman symbol. Herod arrests them, brings them to court, sentences and punishes them. The emperor Augustus approves of the death penalty for Antipater. Herod executes his son.

As he has just executed his sole heir, Herod again changes his will: Archelaus (from the marriage with Malthace) will rule as King over the Herod's entire kingdom, while Antipas (from Malthace) and Philip (from the fifth marriage with Cleopatra of Jerusalem) as Tetrarchs over Galilee and Peraea, also over Gaulanitis (Golan), Trachonitis (Hebrew: Argob), Batanaea (now Ard-el-Bathanyeh) and Panias.

Herod died at the end of March, or early April of 4 BC. As Augustus does not confirm his will, no one gets the title of King. However, the three sons do get the stated territories.

[edit]
Date of Herod's death
Some chronologers hold that he died in the year 5 or 4 BC. Their chronology is based to a large extent on Josephus’ history. In dating the time that Herod was appointed king by Rome, Josephus uses a "consular dating", that is, he locates the event as occurring during the rule of certain Roman consuls. According to this, Herod's appointment as king would be in 40 BC, but the data of another historian, Appianos, would place the event in 39 BC. By the same method Josephus places Herod's capture of Jerusalem in 37 BC, but he also says that this occurred 27 years after the capture of the city by Pompey (which was in 63 BC). (Jewish Antiquities, XIV, 487, 488 [xvi, 4]) His reference to that latter event would make the date of Herod's taking the city of Jerusalem 36 BC. Now, Josephus says that Herod died 37 years from the time that he was appointed king by the Romans, and 34 years after he took Jerusalem. (Jewish Antiquities, XVII, 190, 191 [viii, 1]) This might indicate that the date of his death was 2 BC or perhaps 1 BC.

According to Josephus, Herod died not long after an eclipse of the moon and before a Passover. (Jewish Antiquities, XVII, 167 [vi, 4]; 213 [ix, 3]) Since there was an eclipse on March 11, 4 BC. (March 13, Julian), some have concluded that this was the eclipse referred to by Josephus.

On the other hand, there was a total eclipse of the moon in 1 BC, about three months before Passover, while the one in 4 BC was only partial.

Another line of calculation centres around the age of Herod at the time of his death. Josephus says that he was about 70 years old. He says that at the time Herod received his appointment as governor of Galilee (which is generally dated 47 BC), he was 15 years old; but this has been understood by scholars to be an error, 25 years evidently being intended. (Jewish Antiquities, XVII, 148 [vi, 1]; XIV, 158 [ix, 2]) Accordingly, Herod's death occurred in 2 BC or 1 BC.

Herod's date of death also indicates the latest time at which the birth of Jesus of Nazareth could have occurred. Because Herod's death is now established to have occurred at the latest in 1 BC, and because Jesus was born before Herod died, the traditional date of Jesus' birth at the start of the Common era is wrong.

[edit]
Marriages and Children
1. married Doris

Son Antipater, executed 4 BC
2. married Mariamme (I.) - daughter of Hasmonean Alexandros

Son Alexandros, executed 7 BC
Son Aristobulos, executed 7 BC
Daughter Salampsio
Daughter Cypros
3. married Mariamme (II.) - daughter of High-Priest Simon

Son Herod
4. married Malthace

Son Herodes Archelaos - Ethnarch
Son Herodes Antipas - Tetrarch
Daughter Olympias
5. married Cleopatra of Jerusalem

Son Herod Philip - Tetrarch
Son Herod
6. married Pallas

Son Phasael
7. married Phaidra

Daughter Roxane
8. married Elpis

Daughter Salome
9. married a cousin name unknown

10. married a niece name unknown

It is very probable that Herod had more children, especially with the last wives, and also that he had more daughters, as women at that time were not counted as important.

[edit]
Herod's family trees
--- = married
| = descended from
... = sibling
dt = daughter
b = born
? = not included here or unknown
Alexandra --- ?
|
---------------------
| |
Aristobulus III of Judea ... Mariamne, dt
(d. 35 BC) m. Herod the Great
last Hasmonean scion
appointed high priest
drowned



Antipater the Idumaean --- Cypros, Arab princess
| from Petra, Jordan in Nabatea
|
|
Herod the Great
(74 BC-4 BC)



Herod the Great --- total 10 wives, 14 children



Herod the Great --- Cleopatra of Jerusalem
|
Philip the Tetrarch
d AD 34



Herod the Great --- Doris
|
Antipater
d 4 BC?



Herod the Great --- Malthace, a Samaritan
|
--------------------------------------------------
| | |
Herod Antipas Archelaus Olympias
b 20 BC? --- Phasaelis,
dt Aretas IV, king Arabia
'divorced' to marry:
--- Herodias,
dt of Aristobulus son of Herod the Great



Herod the Great --- Mariamne d 29 BC? dt of Hasmonean Alexander
|
--------------------------------------------------
| | | |
Aristobulus Alexander Salimpsio --- Phaesal Cypros
d 7 BC? d 7 BC? | m.
m. Berenice Cypros Antipater(2)
|
Herodias, dt
m. Herod Antipas



Herod the Great --- Mariamne dt of Simon the High-Priest
|
Herod Philip
Antipater(2) was son of Joseph and Salome
Note: dates with ? need verifying against modern findings
[edit]
Achievements
Herod has entered posterity as a ruthless ruler and on account of his cruelty, not least to close members of his own family; but he was also an able and far-sighted administrator who helped in building the economic might of Judaea, founding cities and developing agricultural projects, his most famous and ambitious project having been the rebuilding of the Jewish Temple in Jerusalem to the most beautiful in its time in order to ingratiate himself with the many of his subjects who were Jews by descent.

Some of Herod's other achievements include: the rebuilding the water supplies for Jerusalem, rebuilding the Palace in Jerusalem, refurbishing the boundary fortresses such as Masada, and creating new cities such as Caesarea Maritima and Herodion. From the extraction of asphalt from the Dead Sea, he shared with Cleopatra the monopoly on its important use in ship building. He leased copper mines on Cyprus from the Roman emperor. He had a dominant position in the production of bronze, using British tin.

[edit]
Herod in the New Testament
See main article Massacre of the Innocents
Herod the Great plays a minor role in The Gospel according to Matthew (ch. 2), which describes an event known as the Massacre of the Innocents.

Shortly after the birth of Jesus, Magi from the East visit Herod to inquire the whereabouts of "the one having been born king of the Jews", because they had seen his star in the east and therefore wanted to pay him homage. Herod, who is himself King of Judea, is alarmed at the prospect of the new-born king usurping his rule.

Herod is advised by the all the assembled chief priests and scribes of the people that the Prophet had written that the "Anointed One" (Grk. ho christos) is to be born in Bethlehem of Judea. Herod therefore sends the Magi to Bethlehem, instructing them to search for the child, and that, when they find him, they should "report to me, so that I too may go and worship him". However, after they find Jesus, the Magi are warned in a dream not to report back to Herod. Similarly, Joseph is warned in a dream that Herod intends to kill Jesus, so Joseph and his family flee to Egypt in order to escape Herod. When Herod realizes he has been outwitted by the Magi, he gives orders to kill all boys of the age of two years and under in Bethlehem and its vicinity.

It should be noted, however, that the historical accuracy of this event is in question, since the author of the Gospel of Matthew may have had a religious motivation for presenting such events, and neither the other canonical gospel accounts nor any other document from the period makes any reference to such a massacre.

Herod the Great's son, Herod Antipas (who is also called Herod) is even more prominently featured in the New Testament for his role in Jesus's arrest and execution.

[edit]
After Herod's death
After Herod's death, his kingdom was divided between three of his sons, namely Archelaus, Herod Antipas, and Herod Philip, who however ruled only as tetrarchs rather than kings.


[edit]
References and External Links
BBC Manchester/Discovery channel production broadcast 2004 March 14
Family trees
extract Britanicca Vol 5 page 879
Encylopedia.com
Outline of Great Books Volume I - King Herod: extracts from the works of Josephus
Timeline 49 to 1 BC



Preceded by:
Antigonus King of Judaea
37–4 BC Succeeded by:
Herod Archelaus
Ruler of Galilee
37–4 BC Succeeded by:
Herod Antipas
Ruler of Batanea
37–4 BC Succeeded by:
Herod Philip

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Anywhere beyond this point is solely based on the Bible and some archelogical evidence. I can not prove nor disprove the content in the Bible on what it holds on historical geneology.
-Bradley Kassian

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]