== Notes for [[Item:Q100510|Q100510]] ==

Vidal Benveniste de Porta (Catalan: Vidal Benvenist ça Porta; died 1268) was the Jewish batlle of Barcelona, Girona and Leida and a brother of Nahmanides.[1]

Benveniste was an important capitalist of Barcelona and advanced money to King Jaume I of Aragon, mainly on the security of the municipal dues owed to the king. Thus on 17 December 1257, he advanced 3,863 sous on the dues of his bailiwick;[2] and on the 15th of the following month he received the right to sell the dues of Barcelona and Girona for two years.[3] The total indebtedness of the king was no less than 199,483 sous,[4] which Benveniste was allowed to recover by taking the dues of Lleida and other places of his bailiwick.[5] Part of the payment was made by the Jews of Barcelona themselves, who were ordered to hand over 12,000 sous to Benveniste.[6]

Meanwhile the king continued his applications to Benveniste for funds, drawing a check on him for 5,000 sous on June 12, 1260;[7] while two years later the king acknowledged his indebtedness to Benveniste of 15,221 sous for payment made on account of the Infanta Donna Joanna, on May 21, 1262. In return for the advance, the dues of Vilafranca (ib. No. 205), as well as twenty squares of land there,[8] and the dues of the Balearic Islands[9] and of Perpinyà,[10] were granted to Benveniste. The latter continued to act as banker for the king, since a record is found of acknowledgment of a debt of 15,000 sous, paid by Benveniste to the bishop of Barcelona when proceeding on an embassy to France on 1 January 1254;[11] and as late as 1 February 1268, the dues of the Jews of Girona were assigned to Benveniste.[12]

Altogether Benveniste stood high in favor with King Jaume—no doubt for value received—and when on May 29, 1264, his brother Nahmanides was pardoned, two-thirds of the fine he had incurred for the alleged crime of vituperating Jesus in the celebrated controversy of 1263 was remitted, the king expressly stating that the pardon was given "amore Benveniste de Porta, fratris tui".[13] [edit]Sources

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Jewish Encyclopedia. 1901–1906. [edit]Notes

^ See Grätz, Gesch. der Juden, vii.38; Jewish Quarterly Review, viii.492, 710). ^ Jacobs, Inquiry into the Sources of Spanish-Jewish History No. 134. ^ Jacobs No. 142. ^ Jacobs No. 144. ^ Jacobs No. 162 ^ Jacobs No. 168a. ^ Jacobs No. 170a. ^ Jacobs No. 232. ^ Jacobs No. 257. ^ Jacobs No. 239. ^ Jacobs No. 355. ^ Jacobs No. 681. ^ Jacobs, Appendix, No. 4, p. 130). http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Benveniste_de_Porta

********************************************************************

The family surname is De Saporta (or variant thereof); over time the first name of Benveniste has been applied as the surname of the lineage, see: https://www.academia.edu/7867357/El_testamento_de_Benvenist_de_Saporta_1268_

----

The family surname is De Saporta (or variant thereof); over time the first name of Benveniste has been applied as the surname of the lineage, see: https://www.academia.edu/7867357/El_testamento_de_Benvenist_de_Saporta_1268_

In the will he makes Yehuda HaLevy de la Cavalleria executor; his descendant later marries into Cavalleria family

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD82130B1EFBBFA9822EF79916C23A9
geni:6000000017177766072

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]