== Notes for [[Item:Q87835|Q87835]] ==

Quintus Marcius Rex
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Quintus Marcius Rex was a member of the Marcii Reges, the family founded by the Roman King Ancus Marcius.

His father as praetor in 144 BC built the Aqua Marcia aqueduct, the longest aqueduct of ancient Rome. The aqueduct was known for its water purity and its cold temperature.

Marcius carried on war against the Stoeni, a Ligurian people at the foot of the Alps, and obtained a triumph in the following year on account of his victories over them. Marcius lost during his consulship his only son, a youth of great promise, but had such mastery over his feelings as to meet the senate on the day of his son's burial, and perform his regular official duties

His daughter Marcia would marry Gaius Julius Caesar II. They had a son Sextus Julius Caesar (a politician and supporter of Gaius Marius); a daughter Julia, wife of Gaius Marius and another son Gaius Julius Caesar III, a praetor who would marry Aurelia Cotta and would became parents to Gaius Julius Caesar IV the dictator.

A descendant of Marcius is that consul of 56 BC, Lucius Marcius Philippus.

This article incorporates text from the public domain Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology by William Smith (1867).

Preceded by:
Lucius Aurelius Cotta and Lucius Caecilius Metellus Delmaticus Consul of the Roman Republic
with Marcus Porcius Cato
118 BC Succeeded by:
Lucius Caecilius Metellus Diadematus and Quintus Mucius Scaevola

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]