== Notes for [[Item:Q88091|Q88091]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berenice_I_of_Egypt

--------------------

Birth: 340 B.C.

P: Egypt

Death: Aft. 285 B.C.

General Notes

Queen of Egypt Berenice I of Macedonia died 0275 B.C..1 Queen of Egypt, 0290-0275 B.C.. She married King of Egypt Ptolemy I Soter Lagid, son of Lagus of Macedonia and Arsinoë I Argaead , 0317 B.C; His 4th. Her 2nd.1,2 She married Philip of Macedonia 0319 B.C. In or later; Her 1st.2 She came to Egypt in the retinue of Eurydice, daughter of Antipater, when Eurydice married Ptolemy.3 She was born 0333 B.C. In circa. She was the daughter of Magas of Macedonia and Antigone of Macedonia .2 There is not agreement as to which wife was mother of Ptolemy II. Some sources show the mother as Eurydice, daughter of Antipater, Regent of Macedonia (1,2). Green shows her as Bernice (3). She was given a fabricated genealogy, as half-sister of the King, because she was not of royal blood, in order to legitimize her marriage, and the right of her children to succeed.1 She was the granddaughter(?) of Cassander, the son of Antipater.1 Sources: 1. Stuart, R.W. 'Royalty for Commoners', line 413. ; 2. Bryan, K. 'Davidic Descents to the House of Plantagenet' Augustan, Vol. XXV, 16-23. ; 3. Green, P. 'Alexander to Actium' pp.736.

Children of Queen of Egypt Berenice I of Macedonia and King of Egypt Ptolemy I Soter Lagid:

King of Egypt Ptolemy II Philadelphus Lagid+ b. 0308 B.C., d. 0246 B.C.

Queen of Egypt and Libya Arsinoë II Philadelphus Lagid + b. 0316 B.C., d. 0270 B.C.

Children of Queen of Egypt Berenice I of Macedonia and Philip of Macedonia :

Antigone of Macedonia + b. 0317 B.C., before, d. 0295 B.C.

Magas of Cyrene+ b. 0318 B.C., d. 0250 B.C.

[S172] Various Encyclopaedea Britannica (U.S.A.: Encyclopaedea Britannica, Inc., 1976). Hereinafter cited as Encyclopaedea Britannica.

[S1052] Chris Bennett's Egyptian Royal Genealogy Website, online . Hereinafter cited as Egyptian Royal Genealogy.

[S705] ., Dictionary of World Biographies, Volume 1, the Ancient World, Dictionary of World Biographies (70 East Walton Street, Chicago, Illinois, 60611: Fitzroy Dearborn Publishers), pg. 716. Hereinafter cited as Bios Ancient.

--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berenice_I_of_Egypt
--------------------
Berenice I - Reina de Egipto. (417- 275 AC.) Berenice llegó a Egipto en el séquito de Eurídice, segunda reina de Ptolomeo, casó en el marco de un acuerdo político con su padre, Antípatro de Macedonia .Berenice ,quizás no fue de sangre real, pero si una aristrócata macedonica.
--------------------
'''
=Berenice I of Egypt=
'''

Berenice I (Greek: Βερενίκη; c. 340 BC – between 279 and 268 BC) was a Greek Macedonian noblewoman and through her marriage to Ptolemy I Soter, became the second queen, after Eurydice, of the Ptolemaic dynasty of Egypt.

'''Family'''

Berenice was originally from Eordeaea. She was the daughter of obscure local noblemen called Magas and Antigone. Her maternal grandfather was a nobleman called Cassander who was the brother of Antipater, the regent for Alexander's empire, and through her mother was a relation to his family.

'''First marriage'''

In 325 BC, Berenice married an obscure local nobleman and military officer called Philip. Philip was previously married and had other children. Through her first marriage, she bore Philip's son, King Magas of Cyrene; his daughter Antigone, who married King Pyrrhus of Epirus; and a daughter called Theoxena.

Magas dedicated an inscription to himself and his father, when he served as a priest of Apollo. Pyrrhus gave her name to a new city called Berenicis.

'''Marriage to Ptolemy'''

After the death of her first husband, Berenice travelled to Egypt with her children as a lady-in-waiting for her mother’s first cousin Eurydice who was the wife of Ptolemy I. Ptolemy I was one of the generals of King Alexander the Great and founder of the Ptolemaic dynasty of Ancient Egypt. Berenice caught the eye of Ptolemy I who married her in 317 BC. Berenice bore Ptolemy I: two daughters Arsinoe II, Philotera and a son Ptolemy II Philadelphus.

In an unknown Olympiad, she was a victor in the chariot races. Ptolemy II was recognized as his father's heir in preference to Eurydice's children to Ptolemy I. During his reign, Ptolemy II built a port on the Red Sea and named it Berenice after his mother. After she died, Ptolemy II and later Ptolemy IV Philopator decreed divine honors to her (Theocritus, Idylls xv. and xvii.).

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berenice_I_of_Egypt

OR "BERENIKE"; b. ca. 340 BC-d. bef. 275 BC; DEIFIED

PRINCESS

Berenice I of Egypt
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Berenice I, daughter of Lagus, was first the wife of Philip, an obscure Macedonian nobleman, with whom she gave birth to the future Magas of Cyrene. Upon Philip's death, she came to Egypt as a lady-in-waiting to Eurydice, bride of Ptolemy I, Alexander's general and founder of the Ptolemaic dynasty. Berenice caught the eye of the king. Her son with Ptolemy I, Ptolemy II Philadelphos, was recognized as heir in preference to Eurydice's children.

Ptolemy gave her name to the new port he built on the Red Sea, Berenice. King Pyrrhus of Epirus also gave the name Berenicis to a new city. Her son Ptolemy II Philadelphos decreed divine honours to her on her death. (See Theocritus, Idylls xv. and xvii.)

This part of the entry was originally from the 1911 Encyclopedia Britannica.

She exerted influnce on all state matters, and fought beside Ptolemy on the battlefield. After Ptolemy's death, her sons were killed in a war with her brother-in-law. She led against him to avenge her children, and personally killed him. She then repeatedly drove her chariot over his body. She is the mother of Arsinoe II.
[edit]

References

Salmonson, Jessica Amanda.(1991) The Encyclopedia of Amazons. Paragon House. Page 33. ISBN

Appointed 290 BC, Queen of Egypt 2
Note:
Berenice I (fl. c. 317-c. 275 BC), queen of Egypt, third wife of Ptolemy I Soter, and mother of Arsinoe II and Ptolemy II Philadelphus.
Berenice arrived in Egypt in the retinue of Eurydice, Ptolemy's second queen, whom he married as part of a political agreement with her father, Antipater of Macedonia. About 317 Ptolemy married Berenice. Probably because she was not of royal blood, a genealogy was fabricated tomake her a half sister of the king. In 308 Berenice gave birth to Ptolemy II Philadelphus, and in 290 Ptolemy made her queen of Egypt. In 285 Ptolemy II was made coregent and successor to his father, bypassingEurydice's children. Ptolemy II's second wife was his sister Arsinoe II, also the child of Berenice. [Encyclopædia Britannica CD '97, BERENICE I]
----------
Berenice, daughter of Lagus, [was the] wife of an obscure Macedonian solider and subsequently of Ptolemy Soter, with whose bride, Eurydice,she came to Egypt as a lady in waiting. Her son, Ptolemy Philadelphus, was recognized as heir over the heads of Eurydice's children. So great was her ability and her influence that Pyrrhus of Epirus gave the name Berenicis to a new city. Her son Philadelphus decreed divine honours to her on her death.

Appointed 290 BC, Queen of Egypt 2
Note:
Berenice I (fl. c. 317-c. 275 BC), queen of Egypt, third wife of Ptolemy I Soter, and mother of Arsinoe II and Ptolemy II Philadelphus.
Berenice arrived in Egypt in the retinue of Eurydice, Ptolemy's second queen, whom he married as part of a political agreement with her father, Antipater of Macedonia. About 317 Ptolemy married Berenice. Probably because she was not of royal blood, a genealogy was fabricated tomake her a half sister of the king. In 308 Berenice gave birth to Ptolemy II Philadelphus, and in 290 Ptolemy made her queen of Egypt. In 285 Ptolemy II was made coregent and successor to his father, bypassingEurydice's children. Ptolemy II's second wife was his sister Arsinoe II, also the child of Berenice. [Encyclopædia Britannica CD '97, BERENICE I]
----------
Berenice, daughter of Lagus, [was the] wife of an obscure Macedonian solider and subsequently of Ptolemy Soter, with whose bride, Eurydice,she came to Egypt as a lady in waiting. Her son, Ptolemy Philadelphus, was recognized as heir over the heads of Eurydice's children. So great was her ability and her influence that Pyrrhus of Epirus gave the name Berenicis to a new city. Her son Philadelphus decreed divine honours to her on her death.

Appointed 290 BC, Queen of Egypt 2
Note:
Berenice I (fl. c. 317-c. 275 BC), queen of Egypt, third wife of Ptolemy I Soter, and mother of Arsinoe II and Ptolemy II Philadelphus.
Berenice arrived in Egypt in the retinue of Eurydice, Ptolemy's second queen, whom he married as part of a political agreement with her father, Antipater of Macedonia. About 317 Ptolemy married Berenice. Probably because she was not of royal blood, a genealogy was fabricated tomake her a half sister of the king. In 308 Berenice gave birth to Ptolemy II Philadelphus, and in 290 Ptolemy made her queen of Egypt. In 285 Ptolemy II was made coregent and successor to his father, bypassingEurydice's children. Ptolemy II's second wife was his sister Arsinoe II, also the child of Berenice. [Encyclopædia Britannica CD '97, BERENICE I]
----------
Berenice, daughter of Lagus, [was the] wife of an obscure Macedonian solider and subsequently of Ptolemy Soter, with whose bride, Eurydice,she came to Egypt as a lady in waiting. Her son, Ptolemy Philadelphus, was recognized as heir over the heads of Eurydice's children. So great was her ability and her influence that Pyrrhus of Epirus gave the name Berenicis to a new city. Her son Philadelphus decreed divine honours to her on her death.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]