== Notes for [[Item:Q3107|Q3107]] ==

Ortega y Pérez Gallardo, Ricardo. '''''Historia genealógica de las familias más antiguas de México, Volume 1''''' [A. Carranza y comp, 1908 - Mexico] ... https://books.google.com/books?id=JNExAQAAMAAJ&pg=PA87&lpg=PA87&dq=Lucas+de+Lara+y+Cervantes&source=bl&ots=go9H52aRll&sig=yueDth-D-rj3DfVAWXrt-unihsg&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiV-fjS8MvWAhUU2mMKHd4ZD6EQ6AEIWTAM#v=onepage&q=Lucas%20de%20Lara%20y%20Cervantes&f=false ... Read pages online.

The British Museum ... http://www.britishmuseum.org/research/collection_online/collection_object_details/collection_image_gallery.aspx?assetId=269251001&objectId=3027127&partId=1 ... ''' ''Gomez de Cervantes’ Memorial and the Anonymous Pictorial Manuscript / Memorial de Don Gonçalo Gomez de Cervantes del modo de vivir que tienen los indos, y del beneficio de las minas de la plata, y de la cochinella. / Relación de [lo] que toca la Grana Cochinilla''''' ... Codex; contains two parts; one being the text in Spanish language, the other a pictorial section. Consisting of '''seventy-six leaves with thirteen drawings''', of which twelve show the cultivation of nopal cactus and one of various animals. Written and painted on European paper. ... Museum numberAm2006,Drg.210 ... 16th century, Mixtec ... Curator's comments: Gómez de Cervantes was asked by the Spanish authority to compile a report on New Spain. His work is titled ‘Memorial de Gonzalo Gomez de Cervantes para el Doctor Eugenio Salazar, oidor del Real consejo de las Indias’. It is a complex work of much interest in which the pictorial part is incorporated and discussed. ... Acquisition notes: Early history of the manuscript is not well known. It was sold by Evans at Renouard’s sale of 1834, bought by Richards and sold by him to Lord Kingsborough. It was purchased by the bookseller Rodd at the Kingsborough sale of 1843, and sold to the the British Museum on 11th March 1843 together with other books and manuscripts known as ‘Papeles varios de Indias XVIII, sec. vol. I, BM press CLIID’. ... [Photographs of each page are included at this site.]

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051ADA359F61EFBBFA9822EF79916C5858
geni:6000000003199640327


[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]