== Notes for [[Item:Q90296|Q90296]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domitilla_the_Elder

---------------------------------------------------

http://www.roman-empire.net/emperors/vespasian.html

Titus Flavius Sabinus Vespasianus was born in AD 9 at Reate, north of Rome. His father Flavius Sabinus was a tax-collector and held equestrian rank. His mother, Vespasia Polla, belonged to an equestrian family, and her brother managed to become senator. Vespasian and his brother Sabinus both also managed to follow in their uncle's footsteps and become senators.

In AD 39 Vespasian married Flavia Domitilla. It was not necessarily a good match for a man seeking a high-flying career. Flavia was not even a full Roman citizen. And had been the mistress of a Roman equestrian in Tripolitania. It appears their marriage was truly one inspired by love, rather than political ambitions. Flavia and Vespasian did have three children together. Though she died long before Vespasian was to become emperor. And he would still remember her with great affection when he came to power.

--------------------
'''
=Domitilla the Elder=
'''

Flavia Domitilla Major (Major, Latin for the elder) Flavia Domitilla the Elder or Domitilla the Elder (died before 69, perhaps c. 65) was the wife of the Roman Emperor Vespasian.

'''Life'''

Flavia Domitilla was born in Sabratha to Italian colonists who had moved there during the reign of Augustus. She was a daughter of Flavius Liberalis, a humble quaestor’s clerk. Before her marriage, she was a formal mistress to an African knight.

Vespasian married her around 38 AD. She was the mother of Domitilla the Younger and of the emperors Titus and Domitian. She died before Vespasian became emperor.

She was the grandmother of Saint Flavia Domitilla, daughter of Domitilla the Younger.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domitilla_the_Elder

OR "VITELLIUS"

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]