== Notes for [[Item:Q101875|Q101875]] ==

[https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/skIQ61CfLsw?rel=0 '''Donna Gracia Mendes Nassi'''] YouTube

[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gracia_Mendes_Nasi '''Donna Gracia Mendes Nassi'''] (Gracia is archaic Portuguese and Spanish for the Hebrew Hannah, also known by her Christianized name Beatriz de Luna Miques, 1510–1569) was one of the wealthiest Jewish women of Renaissance Europe. She married into the eminent international banking and finance dynasty of Mendes, and was the aunt of Joseph Nasi, who became a prominent figure in the politics of the Ottoman Empire.

Dona Gracia was born in Lisbon, Portugal, into an ancient, venerable family of marranos, originally from Aragon, that fled to Portugal when the Catholic Monarchs expelled the Jews in 1492 (see Alhambra decree and History of the Jews in Spain).

In 1528, Gracia and Francisco Mendes '''married in a public Catholic wedding and then a Crypto-Judaic ceremony''' with the signing of a ketubah. Francisco Mendes (originally Benveniste) ran, along with his brother Diogo, a powerful trading company and bank of world repute with agents across Europe and around the Mediterranean. The House of Mendes probably began as a company trading precious objects. Following Portuguese exploration, which led to the sea route to India, they became important spice traders.

In 1538 Francisco died, leaving her with an infant daughter, (known privately as Reyna, queen - Anna), (future wife of Joseph Nasi). Diogo had opened a branch office of their banking house in the Habsburg Netherlands city of Antwerp with the help of a member of their family, Rabbi Abraham Benveniste. She moved to Antwerp and joined Diogo.

Soon after she settled in the city, the last of the Nasi-Mendes brothers, Diogo, died in 1542. Dona Gracia assumed the management of the Mendes commercial empire and was a very successful businesswoman. Her enormous wealth put her into a position to influence kings and popes, which she used to protect crypto-Jews and contribute money to free various hostages. It is believed she was the driving force in the publication of the Ferrara Bible from Sephardic source texts; the second, public printing of this document was dedicated to her.

Under Donna Gracia, the House of Mendes dealt with Henry II of France, Henry VIII of England, Charles V of Spain and the Holy Roman Empire, Maria of Austria, Regent of the Low Countries, Popes Paul III and Paul IV, and Suleiman the Magnificent, Sultan of the Ottoman Empire. These dealings involved commercial activities, loans, and bribes. Payments to the Pope delayed the establishment of the Inquisition in Portugal (see History of the Jews in Portugal).

'''Causes War Between Venice and Turkey.'''

It was not until 1544 or 1549 that she was able to go with her daughter, her widowed sister, and the latter's daughter to Venice. Here she met with new difficulties, occasioned by her own sister, for Gracia had been appointed by her brother-in-law guardian of his minor daughter and trustee of her property until her marriage. In 1551, a bubonic plague epidemic broke out, and the Jews, who were blamed for causing it, were forced out of the city. She tried to help those evicted but was arrested once her younger sister, who was anxious to escape from Gracia's tutelage, denounced her as a Jew to the Venetian authorities, alleging that she intended to flee with her wealth to Turkey and there openly to avow Judaism. At the same time the sister employed an anti-Semitic Frenchman to denounce Gracia to the French government, within whose territory a large part of her wealth was invested. In consequence of these machinations the King of France as well as the Senate of Venice confiscated the property of the Mendes family, and imprisoned Gracia at Venice in order to prevent her flight. Her nephews, especially the energetic Joaõ Miguez (or Joseph Nasi, as he called himself as a Jew), who was also Gracia's son-in-law, took steps to liberate her and to save the fortune. They appealed to Sultan Sulaiman, explaining to him that a widow had the intention of bringing great treasures into the Turkish empire, but that the republic of Venice prevented her from doing so. Moses Hamon, physician to the sultan, also took the matter up, hoping that the heiress of the wealthy Gracia would marry his son. Thereupon a Turkish ambassador was despatched to Venice, with a mandate to the signoria to grant the captive Marano woman free passage to Turkey, together with her property and suite, and Gracia thus became unwittingly the cause of war between Venice and the Porte.

In spite of the sultan's mandate, the negotiations dragged over two years. Meanwhile Gracia was liberated (c. 1550) and immediately went to Ferrara, where she acknowledged herself to be a Jewess and lived openly as a Jew for the first time in her life. At that time she adopted her Jewish name, Gracia Nassi.

In 1553 she moved to the Ottoman domains, and married her daughter Reyna to her nephew Joseph. Her sister soon followed her, and although the two had become reconciled, she still had many difficulties with her and with a nephew.

In 1556 the Pope sentenced a group of Marranos who had returned to Judaism in Portugal to death by fire. In response, Dona Gracia organized a trade embargo on the port of Ancona in the Papal States. She built synagogues, yeshivas and hospitals. One of the synagogues is still standing in Istanbul and is named after her (La Señora).

In 1558 she leased Tiberias, in Palestine, from Sultan Suleiman, for a yearly fee of 1000 ducats and, in 1561, Joseph Nasi obtained ruling authority over Tiberias and Safed, developing major new centres of Jewish settlement.

In 1558, she was granted a long-term lease on the Tiberias region in Israel, from Sultan Suleiman, for a yearly fee of 1000 ducats. The Ottoman Empire, under the Sultan, had conquered that part of the Holy Land some years earlier, but it largely been a desolate place. As a result, she obtained the ruling authority over the Tiberias area. With the help of the Sultan, she then began to rebuild the area's abandoned towns to make them available to her refugees so they could settle there, if they wished. Her aim was to make Tiberias into a major new centre of Jewish settlement, trade and learning. In 1561, Joseph Nasi obtained ruling authority over Tiberias and Safed, developing major new centres of Jewish settlement. This venture has often been called one of the earliest attempts at a modern Zionist movement.

Gracia Mendes Nasi died in Istanbul early in 1569.

Read more: [http://www.chabad.org/library/article_cdo/aid/111939/jewish/Donna-Gracia-Mendez-Nassi.htm Jewish History] and [http://www.jewishencyclopedia.com/view.jsp?artid=455&letter=M Jewish Encyclopedia]

Il est peu de personnes dans l'histoire juive, particulièrement au Moyen Age, qui jouèrent un rôle aussi élevé spirituellement, et en même temps aussi profitable pour leurs frères, que la noble dame juive Donna Gracia.

Les légendes qui se formèrent autour de cette figure peu commune sont innombrables. Mais les faits, loin de les contredire, ou même de les ramener à des dimensions plus raisonnables, prouvent au contraire qu'on est en présence d'une personnalité extraordinaire. Plusieurs milliers de Marranos et d'autres juifs persécutés ne lui donnaient pas d'autre nom que " Notre Ange".

Donna Gracia est née au Portugal au début du 16ème siècle d'une famille de nobles, les Benveniste, qui avaient fui l'Espagne au début de l'Inquisition. Fort riche elle-même, elle avait épousé Francisco Mendez-Nassi dont la fortune était encore plus considérable que la sienne. Il possédait une banque, l'une des plus importantes du monde, et dont l'activité s'étendait bien au-delà des frontières du pays.

Il ne vécut pas longtemps. A sa mort, Donna Gracia décide de quitter le Portugal; elle emmène Reyna, son unique enfant, et quelques membres de sa famille. Le bras de la puissante Inquisition commençait à s'appesantir au-delà de l'Espagne où déjà la vie devenait intolérable aux Marranos.

C'étaient, vous le savez, les Juifs qui, comme Donna Gracia, demeuraient secrètement fidèles à la foi de leurs pères, tout en donnant le change par une apparente adhésion à l'église catholique, en attendant de pouvoir un jour fuir l'oppression.

LA FUITE A ANVERS

Bonne juive, elle haïssait chaque moment où elle devait dissimuler ses véritables sentiments.

L'abandon d'une partie importante de sa fortune n'arrêta pas Donna Gracia. Elle alla à Anvers où son beau-frère Diego dirigeait la branche de la banque des Mendez-Nassi dont l'importance était telle qu'il entretenait des relations suivies avec la plupart des cours d'Europe.

A l'époque, beaucoup d'autres Marranos arrivaient dans la capitale flamande en vue de s'y établir. Mais même là, l'Inquisition ne tarda pas à les rejoindre. Si bien que, eux qui avaient fui leur pays pour recouvrer leur liberté perdue, se virent contraints de redoubler de précautions afin de paraître encore plus chrétiens qu'en Espagne même et en Portugal.

Donna Gracia (ou Béatrice de Lune, selon le nom adopté en tant que prétendue catholique) fut une femme dont la beauté n'avait d'égale que sa culture et sa richesse. Elle était hautement respectée des nobles et des personnages du rang le plus élevé, de France, des Flandres et des autres pays avec lesquels les établissements Mendez-Nassi entretenaient des rapports d'affaires. Mais porter le masque lui pesait. Bonne juive, elle haïssait chaque moment où elle devait dissimuler ses véritables sentiments.

Un nouveau départ s'imposa. Un pays libre lui devenait indispensable, surtout après la mort de son beau frère. Elle commença les préparatifs avec précaution. L'Empereur Charles V, soupçonnant que quelque chose se tramait, décida de saisir la fortune de la noble dame. Mais celle-ci, le gagnant de vitesse, réussit à quitter Anvers en 1549 avec sa fille, sa sœur devenue veuve, et sa nièce. Elle emportait avec elle le plus clair de ses biens.

LA VILLE DES DOGES

Le groupé se dirigea vers Venise ; de nombreux bateaux en partaient régulièrement vers des contrées lointaines où les juifs n'avaient rien à craindre et pouvaient vivre ouvertement selon leur foi.

Suivant l'exemple de son neveu, le célèbre Don Joseph Nassi qui, ayant cherché refuge en Turquie, était devenu ministre du Sultan, c'est-à-dire l'un des hommes les plus influents d'Europe, Donna Gracia décida de se rendre à Constantinople. Mais elle devait-connaître encore quelques années d'inquiétude avant de pouvoir réaliser son projet, retrouver sa liberté et rentrer en possession de son immense fortune, dont, nous le verrons tout à l'heure, elle devait être dépouillée pour quelque temps. Voici comment les choses se passèrent.

Le roi de France, instrument docile entre les mains de l'Église, était très irrité de cette fuite d'Anvers, d'autant plus qu'elle concernait aussi bien la personne de Donna Gracia que ses biens qui, de ce fait, échappaient à sa convoitise. A son instigation - des imprudences commises par un. parent qui faisait partie du petit groupe de réfugiés y aidèrent - le gouvernement de Venise décida de mettre en prison la noble dame et sa famille, et confisqua tous leurs biens avant quelles pussent s'embarquer à destination de la Turquie.

DERNIÈRE ÉTAPE : LA TURQUIE

Elle ne tarde pas à devenir le centre de l'aide mondiale aux Marranos et aux juifs en butte aux persécutions de toutes sortes.

C'est alors que Don Joseph Nassi intervint, usant de sa grande influence auprès du Sultan. Ce fut chose facile ; ce dernier n'attendait qu'un prétexte : depuis quelque temps la concurrence des marchands de Venise gênait sa politique.

Un émissaire spécial partit pour la République des Doges avec pour mission de présenter une requête pleine de fermeté demandant la libération de la dame Marrano et la restitution de sa fortune.

Négociations et menaces de guerre alternèrent; elles durèrent deux ans avant que le Sultan n'obtînt satisfaction. Donna Gracia est enfin relâchée. Elle s'installe avec sa fille pour quelques mois à Ferrare, où toutes deux reviennent ouvertement à la pratique de la religion juive.

En 1552 elle finit par s'établir à Constantinople. Là, elle ne tarde pas à devenir le centre de l'aide mondiale aux Marranos et aux juifs en butte aux persécutions de toutes sortes. Son argent ne servait plus désormais seulement aux affaires, mais aussi à payer les faveurs des princes et: à faire ouvrir le plus possible de portes aux persécutés.

Elle encouragea la culture juive, et les poètes le lui rendirent en chantant dans de longs poèmes les efforts qu'elle ne cessa de prodiguer pour venir en aide aux Juifs du monde en cette époque si troublée. Et ils n'eurent pas besoin d'exagérer ses mérites ; car Donna Gracia fit édifier des Synagogues, fondit des Yéchivoth et des bibliothèques, et soutint, par tous les moyens, érudits et étudiants en Torah.

Elle aida des centaines de Marranos à s'établir dans leurs pays d'adoption, et fit tout ce qu'elle put afin de les mettre en mesure de revenir à la pratique ouverte de leur foi.

Sa fille épousa son propre cousin Don Joseph Nassi ce qui, de surcroît, évita la dispersion de la fortune familiale. Malheureusement, plus tard, le Sultan donna à sa politique un cours différent ; la situation des juifs, se détériora en Turquie, et bientôt elle devint aussi dramatique que dans les pays contaminés par l'Inquisition. La plus grande partie de la fortune des Mendez-Nassi fut confisquée.

Des tableaux, des médailles et, par-dessus tout, des communautés entières préservèrent le souvenir de cette bienfaitrice de génie.

" Quiconque entreprend de raconter les nobles actions et les rares vertus de Donna Gracia " écrivait un érudit contemporain, Rabbi Isaac Abohab, " devra écrire des volumes s'il veut lui rendre justice ".

--------------------
Gracia Mendes Nasi (Gracia is Portuguese and Spanish for the Hebrew Hannah, which means Grace. She also known by her Christianized name Beatriz de Luna Miquez, 1510–1569) was one of the wealthiest Jewish women of Renaissance Europe. She married into the eminent international banking and finance company known as the House of Mendes. She was the aunt and business partner of Joseph Miques (alias Joseph Nasi), who became a prominent figure in the politics of the Ottoman Empire. She also developed an escape network that saved hundreds of Conversos from the Inquisition.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD994E011EFBBFA9822EF79916CA76A
geni:6000000010755958722

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]