== Notes for [[Item:Q104902|Q104902]] ==

[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eliezer_ben_Hurcanus '''Eliezer ben Hyrcanus'''] (the surname coming from the father's Hellenized name) אליעזר בן הורקנוס‎ , '''a Kohen,''' was one of the most prominent tannaim of the 1st and 2nd centuries, disciple of R. Johanan ben Zakkai and colleague of Gamaliel II, whose sister he married (see Imma Shalom), and of Joshua ben Hananiah.He is the sixth most frequently mentioned sage in the Mishnah. [http://www.geni.com/people/Rabbi-Tarfon/6000000019789888524 ''Read Full Article'']
>>>><nowiki>---------------------------------</nowiki>

Source: Encyclopedia of Talmudic Sages, by Gershom Bader. Read Pages 192 - 204
(Page: 195)

>Rabbi Eliezer was sometimes referred to a Rabbi Eliezer the Great, but wherever reference is made to Rabbi Eliezer, with no other title, he is the person referred to.

>Among his disciples was Rabbi Akiva who, even after he attained the greatest position of leaderhip, never refrained from mentioning that he was Rabbi Eliezer's pupil. Rabbi Liezer was alo vered in the language of the neighboring peoples an several times he accompanied Rabban Gamaliel on the latter's trips to Rome to plead the cause of the Jews.

>His father was a wealthy man who owned many fields. Father and sons devoted themselves to the cultivation of the land and all of them were earthy rude people, ''amei aratzim'' who could not even recite the ''Shema.''

>At twenty years old Rabbi Eliezer decided to leave the field and study. He fled penniless and empty-handed to Jerusalem to Rabban Jochanan ben Zakkai and declared his wish to study. Within three hers he became Rabbi Jochanan ben Zakkai's outstanding pupil.

>Rabbi Eliezer was known for his stubborn and harsh disposition. He was an avid follower of Shammai.
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eliezer_ben_Hurcanus

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000019788568688

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]