== Notes for [[Item:Q104086|Q104086]] ==

NOTE profile has been vanadalised to inculde an Email addres of elroy360000@@yahoo.com

a duplicate profile for her apprears to be @@ http://www.geni.com/people/ramos/6000000007384827762?through=6000000014361717977 as female labeled "Ramos" data appears to have been removed - bogus name inserted and the profiles is locked out

=========================

2. JUANA2 DE TREVINO-QUINTANILLA-Y-SALAZAR (PEDRO1 DE SALAZAR) was born 1592. She married LUIS RAMON-DE-MORALES. He was born 1590.
Children of JUANA DE TREVINO-QUINTANILLA-Y-SALAZAR and LUIS RAMON-DE-MORALES are:
* 5. i. DIEGO3 DE MORALES.
* 6. ii. LEONOR DE MORALES, b. Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
* 7. iii. CAPTAIN ANTONIO DE MORALES-TREVINO, b. Saltillo, Coahulia, Mexico.
* 8. iv. LUIS DE MORALES.
* 9. v. SERGEANT MAJOR JOSEPH DE MORALES-Y-RAMON, d. 1670, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
* 10. vi. ALFEREZ REAL RODRIGO DE MORALES-TREVINO, b. 1634, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico; d. Aft. 01 Nov 1660, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
* 11. vii. FRANCISCA DE MORALES-TREVINO, b. 1641.
* viii. CRISTOBAL DE MORALES, b. 1620.

http://www.somosprimos.com/inclan/salazar.htm
=============
Juana de Trevino SALAZAR1749,2103,2698 was born (date unknown). Parents: Pedro (Juan?) de SALAZAR and Isabel de TREVIÑO (aka Isabel de Quintanilla).

Spouse: Capt. Luis de MORALES. Children were: Leonor de MORALES, Capt. Antonio de MORALES, Rodrigo de MORALES, Diego de MORALES, Francisca de MORALES, Luis de MORALES, Joseph RAMON (Joseph de Morales).

http://www.raullongoria.net/Genealogy/FamilyTree/b198.html#P982

--------------------
2. JUANA2 DE TREVINO-QUINTANILLA-Y-SALAZAR (PEDRO1 DE SALAZAR) was born 1592. She married LUIS RAMON-DE-MORALES. He was born 1590. Children of JUANA DE TREVINO-QUINTANILLA-Y-SALAZAR and LUIS RAMON-DE-MORALES are: 5. i. DIEGO3 DE MORALES. 6. ii. LEONOR DE MORALES, b. Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico. 7. iii. CAPTAIN ANTONIO DE MORALES-TREVINO, b. Saltillo, Coahulia, Mexico. 8. iv. LUIS DE MORALES. 9. v. SERGEANT MAJOR JOSEPH DE MORALES-Y-RAMON, d. 1670, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico. 10. vi. ALFEREZ REAL RODRIGO DE MORALES-TREVINO, b. 1634, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico; d. Aft. 01 Nov 1660, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico. 11. vii. FRANCISCA DE MORALES-TREVINO, b. 1641. viii. CRISTOBAL DE MORALES, b. 1620.

2. JUANA2 DE TREVINO-QUINTANILLA-Y-SALAZAR (PEDRO1 DE SALAZAR) was born 1592. She married LUIS RAMON-DE-MORALES. He was born 1590. Children of JUANA DE TREVINO-QUINTANILLA-Y-SALAZAR and LUIS RAMON-DE-MORALES are: 5. i. DIEGO3 DE MORALES. 6. ii. LEONOR DE MORALES, b. Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico. 7. iii. CAPTAIN ANTONIO DE MORALES-TREVINO, b. Saltillo, Coahulia, Mexico. 8. iv. LUIS DE MORALES. 9. v. SERGEANT MAJOR JOSEPH DE MORALES-Y-RAMON, d. 1670, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico. 10. vi. ALFEREZ REAL RODRIGO DE MORALES-TREVINO, b. 1634, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico; d. Aft. 01 Nov 1660, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico. 11. vii. FRANCISCA DE MORALES-TREVINO, b. 1641. viii. CRISTOBAL DE MORALES, b. 1620.

2. JUANA2 DE TREVINO-QUINTANILLA-Y-SALAZAR (PEDRO1 DE SALAZAR) was born 1592. She married LUIS RAMON-DE-MORALES. He was born 1590.Children of JUANA DE TREVINO-QUINTANILLA-Y-SALAZAR and LUIS RAMON-DE-MORALES are:5. i. DIEGO3 DE MORALES.6. ii. LEONOR DE MORALES, b. Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.7. iii. CAPTAIN ANTONIO DE MORALES-TREVINO, b. Saltillo, Coahulia, Mexico.8. iv. LUIS DE MORALES.9. v. SERGEANT MAJOR JOSEPH DE MORALES-Y-RAMON, d. 1670, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.10. vi. ALFEREZ REAL RODRIGO DE MORALES-TREVINO, b. 1634, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico; d. Aft. 01 Nov 1660, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.11. vii. FRANCISCA DE MORALES-TREVINO, b. 1641.viii. CRISTOBAL DE MORALES, b. 1620

.http://www.somosprimos.com/inclan/salazar.htm
--------------------
Antonia GUILLEN107,182 was born (date unknown). Parents: Domingo GONZALEZ and Maria de ABREGO.

Spouse: Capt. Pedro de AGUIRRE. Antonia GUILLEN and Capt. Pedro de AGUIRRE were married. Children were: Capt. Nicolas de AGUIRRE, Margarita de AGUIRRE, Ynes de AGUIRRE, General Pedro de AGUIRRE, Juan de AGUIRRE, Clara (Ana) de AGUIRRE, Maria de AGUIRRE, Teresa de AGUIRRE.

http://www.raullongoria.net/Genealogy/FamilyTree/b112.html#P8357

--------------------
Antonia GUILLEN107,182 was born (date unknown). Parents: Domingo GONZALEZ and Maria de ABREGO.

Spouse: Capt. Pedro de AGUIRRE. Antonia GUILLEN and Capt. Pedro de AGUIRRE were married. Children were: Capt. Nicolas de AGUIRRE, Margarita de AGUIRRE, Ynes de AGUIRRE, General Pedro de AGUIRRE, Juan de AGUIRRE, Clara (Ana) de AGUIRRE, Maria de AGUIRRE, Teresa de AGUIRRE.

http://www.raullongoria.net/Genealogy/FamilyTree/b112.html#P8357

--------------------
Antonia GUILLEN107,182 was born (date unknown). Parents: Domingo GONZALEZ and Maria de ABREGO.

Spouse: Capt. Pedro de AGUIRRE. Antonia GUILLEN and Capt. Pedro de AGUIRRE were married. Children were: Capt. Nicolas de AGUIRRE, Margarita de AGUIRRE, Ynes de AGUIRRE, General Pedro de AGUIRRE, Juan de AGUIRRE, Clara (Ana) de AGUIRRE, Maria de AGUIRRE, Teresa de AGUIRRE

http://www.raullongoria.net/Genealogy/FamilyTree/b112.html#P8357 .

--------------------
=== GEDCOM Note ===
(Research):http://www.somosprimos.com/inclan/salazar.htm&nbsp; n.2

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000017360762587

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]