== Notes for [[Item:Q100801|Q100801]] ==

Isaaq ben Yaqob de Lattes of Perpignan -- 14th century. Southern France or Spain.

Jewish scholar and physician, perhaps in Provence. Author of medical texts, and also of the Qiryat Sefer (Borough of the Book), a casuistic and theological work written in 1372. According to his preface, Isaak divided the Qiryat Sefer into two parts naming the first Shaʿarey Tzion (Gates of Zion) and the second Toldot Yitzkhaq (after himself, also so that his family will remember him). The title of the whole work, Qiryat Sefer, is to be found in a verse between the two parts, though it is not mentioned by Isaak in his preface.

The first part of the work, Shaʿarey Tzion, is historical in nature. Deriving from a long line of scholars himself, Isaak relates in the first chapter about the Seder ha-Qabbalah (order of tradition) "from the day God created Adam on earth until us, here in the year 5132", in order to show "who is worth relying on". This Gelehrtengeschichte describes in chronological order the works of scholars and their importance from biblical to medieval times, ending with the year 1372 ad and covering all medieval European Jewish centers. Isaak used as his model the commentary on Massekhet Avot by Menahem ben Solomon ha-Meiri (ending in 1300) and added to it, among other sources, from the introduction to Qiryat Sefer of David ben Samuel of Estelle; without indicating his dependency, he also mentions these scholars among the many he describes. He refers to Samson ben Isaaq of Chinon and his Sefer ha-Qeritut as well as to the scholars of the Lattes family.

Many subsequent scholars relied on Isaak's chapter, among them Saadiah ben Maimun ibn Danan (second half of the 15th century, in his Seder ha-Dorot), Gedaliah ben Yoseph ibn Yihyah (1515–87, in his Shalshelet ha-Qabbalah), David Conforte (1617/18–ca 1690, in Qore ha-Dorot), and Hayyim Yoseph Atzulai (1724-1806).

The most important manuscripts are Jerusalem, Jewish National and University Library, ms. heb. 4˚6780 (ca 1460), Oxford, Bodleian, ms. mich. 602 (15th century), and Moscow, Российская государственная библиотека, ms. Guenzburg 1336 (14th/15th century).

Eva Haverkamp

Bibliography

Texts: S.Z. havlin, History of the Oral Law and of Early Rabbinic Scholarship, 1992, 22006, 145-81. S. buber, Schaare Zion, 1885. Lit: E. renan, Les Écrivains Juifs Français du XIVe Siècle, 1893, 336-46.

Cite this page

Eva Haverkamp. "Isaaq ben Yaqob de Lattes of Perpignan." Encyclopedia of the Medieval Chronicle. Brill Online, 2013. <http://referenceworks.brillonline.com/entries/encyclopedia-of-the-medieval-chronicle/isaaq-ben-yaqob-de-lattes-of-perpignan-SIM_01431>

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD8B9C251EFBBFA9822EF79916CED4F
geni:6000000022466764254

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]