== Notes for [[Item:Q112637|Q112637]] ==

https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dadildis_de_Pallars

============================================

Parents unknown, but often said to have been a daughter of [http://www.geni.com/people/Lope-IV-Count-Of-Bigorre/6000000000437081406 Lope IV de Bigorre] and [http://www.geni.com/people/Faquil%C3%A8ne-de-Toulouse/6000000000424707234 Faquilène de Rouergue].

The Codex de Roda records that "Garsea Scemenonis" married secondly "domna Dadildi de Paliares soror Regimundi comitis"[193].
--------------------
Søster til: Raimund I Count of Pallars and Ribagorza, der også hører til mine aner.

Leo: Europäische Stammtafeln, J.A. Stargardt Verlag, Marburg, Schwennicke, Detlev (Ed.), Reference: II 54.

----

===Family

[https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garc%C3%ADa_Jiménez_de_Pamplona '''García Jiménez'''] (835-after 885) was a high-medieval knight of the realm of Pamplona, who is mentioned by that surname in the Codex of Roda. He was co-regent of the kingdom during the reigns of García Íñiguez of Pamplona and his son Fortún Garcés.a
.

The Códice de Roda shows García Jiménez to have married twice, firstly to Oneca, "Rebel of Sangüesa" with whom he had two children:
# Íñigo, called 'king' in the Códice de Roda when reporting his marriage to a granddaughter of Fortún Garcés of Pamplona, but not in his own entry as son of García Jiménez. He perhaps succeeded to his father's sub-kingdom (else the term is being used as an honorific rather than a title).
# Sancha, married as her first husband Íñigo Fortúnez, son of king Fortún Garcés of Pamplona, and subsequently remarried to Galindo Aznárez II, Count of Aragon.

García Jiménez married secondly''' Dadildis de Pallars''', sister of count Raymond I of Pallars and Ribagorza, having by her two sons:
# Sancho I, later sole king of Pamplona.
# Jimeno, tutor of his nephew García Sánchez and regent until his death on 29 May 931.


===References
* < [https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garc%C3%ADa_Jiménez_de_Pamplona Wikipedia] > retrieved 11 March 2023
* http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garc%C3%ADa_Jim%C3%A9nez
* http://genealogics.org/getperson.php?personID=I00106646&tree=LEO
** Leo: Europäische Stammtafeln, J.A. Stargardt Verlag, Marburg, Schwennicke, Detlev (Ed.), Reference: II 54.
* https://genealogics.org/getperson.php?personID=I00467846&tree=LEO

Source: Codex de Roda

1 NAME Onneca Rebelle /de Sangueza/
2 GIVN Onneca Rebelle
2 SURN de Sangueza

-- MERGED NOTE ------------

Wikidata: https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q26701870 | Geni: https://www.geni.com/people/6000000003772993409

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]