== Notes for [[Item:Q116456|Q116456]] ==

*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sancho_Garc%C3%A9s,_Lord_of_Uncastillo

--------

Sancho Garcés, Señor de Uncastillo y Sangüesa, hijo bastardo del rey García Sánchez III de Navarra, casado con Constanza, la hija del primer matrimonio de Estefanía de Foix y por lo tanto, hermanastra suya. Su hijo, Ramiro Sánchez de Pamplona fue el padre de García VI, el Restaurador, rey de Pamplona.

--------------------

Sancho Garcês

http://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sancho_Garc%C3%AAs

Origem: Wikipédia, a enciclopédia livre.

Sancho Garcês (1050 — 1084) foi o 9º filho do rei Garcia III de Navarra. Foi Senhor de Uncastillo e Sangüesa em Espanha. Teve o 1º casamento com D. Constanza de Marañón e o 2º casamento com D. Andregoto.

Do 1º casamento nasceu Ramiro Sanchez de Navarra (1170 — 1116) que foi Infante de Navarra, Senhor de Monzón e casado com D. Elvira Rodriguez de Bivar, filha do famoso Rodrigo Diaz de Vivar El Cid.

----------

SANCHO García ([1030/35]-after 29 Nov 1074). "Sancius rex" granted property to "senior Sancio Furtuniones" by charter dated 7 Dec 1057, confirmed by "…Infante domno Santio et uxor eius domna Contanza…"[458]. Señor de Uncastillo y Sangüesa. Salazar y Acha discusses his marriage[459]. The Crónica Najerense records that “infans domnus Sancius, quem rex Garsias Pampilonensium ex concubina habuerat” abducted “filiam regine Stephanie”, who was betrothed to “Santius rex”, and took her to the court of the Moorish king of Zaragoza and later to Ramiro I King of Aragon, triggering the war between Castille and Aragon during the course of which the Aragonese king was killed in 1064[460]. Sancho IV King of Navarre granted “unas casas en la ciudad de Calahorra” to “germano meo domno Sancio et uxori vestra vel germana mea domna Constanza” by charter dated 29 Nov 1074[461]. m (before 7 Dec 1057) CONSTANZA, daughter of --- & his wife [Stephanie de Foix] (-after 29 Nov 1074). "Sancius rex" granted property to "senior Sancio Furtuniones" by charter dated 7 Dec 1057, confirmed by "…Infante domno Santio et uxor eius domna Contanza…"[462]. Sancho IV King of Navarre granted “unas casas en la ciudad de Calahorra” to “germano meo domno Sancio et uxori vestra vel germana mea domna Constanza” by charter dated 29 Nov 1074[463]. Salazar y Acha hypothesises that Constanza was the daughter of Stephanie de Foix, wife of García V King of Navarre, by an otherwise unrecorded earlier marriage with a noble at the court of Barcelona, suggesting that it would be unusual for King Sancho to refer to his brother´s wife as “germana” unless there was also a blood relationship between them[464]. However, this hypothesis, although appealing, appears unlikely to be correct because Queen Estefania does not include Constanza in her testament dated to [1066] which names all her other known children[465]. Sancho & his first wife had [two] children:

a) ESTEFANÍA Sánchez (-after 19 Apr 1129). The carta de arras of “Froila prole de Diego” to “Estefanía hija de Sancho” is dated 11 Sep 1087, confirmed by “comes Fredenando Didaz”[466]. Estefanía´s royal ancestry is referred to in the charter dated 1 Mar 1112 under which “commes Henricus” (conde de Portugal) granted property to “commes Froila et uxori vestre Stephania, commitissa, ex regali sanguine et prosapie horta”[467]. Her connection with Sancho García, illegitimate son of García IV King of Navarre, is suggested by the charter dated to [1110/15] which refers to the donation of land “en Puente de la Reina” which previously belonged to “comes don Fruila et uxor eius domna Stephania et infans Ranimirus” to Pamplona Cathedral[468], “infans Ranimirus” in this document being identified by Canal Sánchez-Pagín (it would appear correctly) as the son of Sancho García[469]. The only element of doubt is the fact that Ramiro is called “infans” even though he was not the son of the monarch, although it should be noted that Ramiro Sánchez is given this title in both the “Corónicas” Navarras and the Crónica latina de los reyes de Castilla (see below). Estefanía made a purchase of property at Corniero without her husband in 1121, presumably a widow[470]. She granted a fuero to the community of Villarmildo 19 Apr 1129[471]. m (before 11 Sep 1087) don FRUELA Díaz, son of don DIEGO Pérez & his wife doña María Froilaz (-after 1119). Mayordomo of Alfonso VI King of Castile 1 May 1106[472].

b) RAMIRO Sánchez (-1116). The Crónica Latina names “infante Ramiro, que fue hijo del infante Sancho de cierta dueña, hijo del rey García” as father of King García[473]. Señor de Monzón. m (after 1098) doña ELVIRA [Cristina] Rodríguez, daughter of don RODRIGO Díaz de Vivar "El Cid Campeador" & his wife doña Jimena Díaz. The "Corónicas" Navarras name "dona Cristiana…dona Maria" as the two daughters of "este meo Çid" and his wife, stating that Cristina married "l'ifant don Romiro"[474]. Her origin is also suggested by the Crónica de San Juan de la Peña which states that "el infant Don Garcia fillo de Don Ramiro…" was "sobrino del Cit Ruidiaz"[475].

--------------------

--------------------
De Wikipedia:

El infante Sancho, nacido poco antes de 1038, fue hijo del rey García Sánchez III de Pamplona con una concubina antes de contraer matrimonio con Estefanía de Foix. Aparte de ejercer las tenencias de Uncastillo y Sangüesa, también pudo ser el Sancho Garcés que aparece como tenente en Ruesta (1058), Surta (1065), Autol (1071) y Anguiano y Tobía en 1073. Tuvo varios hermanos, hijos del matrimonio legítimo de su padre, entre ellos el rey Sancho Garcés IV y el infante Ramiro, señor de Calahorra, de Torrecilla de Cameros. También fue hermano de Mencía Garcés, esposa del magnate Fortún Ochoa, hija ilegítima del rey García Sánchez III, aunque se desconoce si fueron hijos de la misma madre.

Falleció el 6 de enero de 1083 junto con su hermanastro Ramiro de Pamplona quien dirigía las huestes del ejército enviado por el rey Alfonso VI en la jornada conocida como la «traición de Rueda» donde perdieron la vida muchos nobles, como el conde Gonzalo Salvadórez.

Sr. de Uncastillo y Sangüesa

Sr. de Uncastillo y Sangüesa

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]