== Notes for [[Item:Q112712|Q112712]] ==

Regarding '''Piniolo Gundemariz''', he appears (acc. Salazar Acha) to have been (older?) brother of the rebel Count Suario Gundemariz, and of Nuno Gundemariz. To me this name cluster, particularly Nuno, points more toward Castile, but such a conclusion is easily distorted by a marriage across regional (naming tradition) boundaries. Piniolo's children appear to have included Gundemaro, Aragonta, Elvira, Nuno, and Oveco, but the latter three could have come from his marriage to the sister of Fruela Velaz.

''in: GEN-MEDIEVAL-L Archives'' <http://listsearches.rootsweb.com/th/read/GEN-MEDIEVAL/2000-03/0952708865>

_____________________________________________________________________________

'''Pinio Gumardiz , ó Gundemariz''', que en el año de 960. que es Era de 998. confirmó la donación , que hizo Mirón Presbytero; y el, y sus hermanos Fruela, y Suero Gundemariz tienen repetidas memorias en los Instrumentos de la Santa Iglesia de Oviedo, y en otros , que dexamos citados en el cap. 3 6. de este segundo Tomo : fueron hijos de Pinio Gundemariz - Sonna , ó Sancho Pinioliz , Gundemaro Pinioliz , y Oveco Pinioliz ; y haviendo tratado, con el motivo de descubrir el origen de la Casa de Guzmán , de la sucession de Gundemaro Pinioliz , ahora referiremos la de Sancho, ó Sonna Pinioliz, su hermano primogénito.

''in: Villademoros, JMT 1760, Asturias ilustrada. Tomo II, Parte Tercera, Oficina Arojo, Madrid, p. 9.'' <http://books.google.com.ec/books?pg=PA10&lpg=PA10&dq=Ximeno+S%C3%A1nchez+aragonta&sig=cTtZaA4XFKj_dQka8w5PnbFaDkU&ei=aYsJTcjgG8P98Aar5vGfAQ&ct=result&id=Bkj9xRLJFmQC&hl=pt-BR&ots=mz-fQZG3HK#v=onepage&q=Ximeno%20S%C3%A1nchez%20aragonta&f=false>

- - -

https://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/SPANISH%20NOBILITY%20EARLY%20MEDIE...

FAMILY of PIÑOLO GUNDEMÁRIZ
PIÑOLO Gundemáriz, son of GUNDEMAR --- & his wife --- (-after 20 Jan 962). “...Pinnol Gondemariz...” confirmed the charter dated 8 Jun 954 under which King Ordoño III donated “eglesia...Sancti Claudii, Luperci et Uictorici in arraballde...civitatis Legione” to the church of León[471]. "Fortunius Garseani" donated property to the monastery of Sahagún by charter dated 20 Jan 962, confirmed by "…Piniolus Gundemari…"[472].

m JIMENA Vélaz, daughter of VELA Nuñez & his wife Totilde ---. Her parentage and marriage are confirmed by a charter at Corias which records that “comes Vela et uxor eius comitissa Todildi” reconstructed “monasterium Sancti Micaelis de Varzena”, specifying that they had “iiiior filios Vermutus Velaz, Sancio Velaz, Ouevo Velaz, Xemena Vela”, and adding that Jimena Vela was “mater comitissa Aragonti de qua...natus est Piniolus comes”[473].

Piñolo & his wife had [seven] children:

a) GUNDEMARO Pinioliz (-before 1012). Armiger 976. “...Gundemarus Pinioliz...” subscribed the charter dated 24 Dec 988 under which Vermudo II King of León donated “homines...in Uangueses cum incommuniatos de Cegio” to Celanova[474]. Conde en Asturias 996. m MUNIADOMNA, daughter of ---. Gundemaro & his wife had one child:

i) FERNANDO Gundemáriz (-after 1044). "[Ermegildus cognomento] Menendus Folienz…cum uxore sua…Gunterode Ordoniz" donated "villa…Tauoadelo quos fuit de comes domno Gundisaluo Menendi" to Vimeiro, naming "Ordonio Ranemiriz et sua mulier domna Geluira…suo genro Fredenando Gundemariz et…sua mulier Mummadomna Ordoniz", by charter dated 31 Mar 1045[475]. [m JIMENA de Léon, daughter of ALFONSO V King of León & his [first/second wife Elvira Menéndez/Urraca García de Navarra] ([1016/25]-). Menéndez Pidal hypothesises that “Jimena”, wife of Fernando Gundemáriz, was the daughter of Alfonso V King of León (and grandmother of Jimena Díaz, who married Rodrigo Díaz "el Cid")[476]. His theory attempts to explain why [her supposed granddaughter] Jimena was described as "neptem suam" by Alfonso VI King of Castile[477]. There are several difficulties with Menéndez Pidal´s hypothesis. Firstly, no source has been identified which names Fernando´s wife as Jimena. Secondly, the wife of Fernando Gundemáriz is named Muniadomna Ordóñez in another source: "[Ermegildus cognomento] Menendus Folienz…cum uxore sua…Gunterode Ordoniz" donated "villa…Tauoadelo quos fuit de comes domno Gundisaluo Menendi" to Vimeiro, naming "Ordonio Ranemiriz et sua mulier domna Geluira…suo genro Fredenando Gundemariz et…sua mulier Mummadomna Ordoniz", by charter dated 31 Mar 1045[478]. Thirdly, Fernando´s known wife Muniadomna was the niece of Elvira Menéndez, wife of King Alfonso V, which represents a sufficiently close family relationship for King Alfonso VI to call her granddaughter “neptem suam” (assuming that the term was used in an extended sense, which is not at all uncommon). Fourthly, the chronology appears tight for a daughter of King Alfonso V to have been the grandmother of Jimena (whose marriage is dated to 1074). The evidence for the supposed marriage of this Jimena de León therefore appears slight.] m MUNIADOMNA Ordóñez, daughter of ORDOÑO Ramírez & his wife Elvira --- (-[before 1045]). "[Ermegildus cognomento] Menendus Folienz…cum uxore sua…Gunterode Ordoniz" donated "villa…Tauoadelo quos fuit de comes domno Gundisaluo Menendi" to Vimeiro, naming "Ordonio Ranemiriz et sua mulier domna Geluira…suo genro Fredenando Gundemariz et…sua mulier Mummadomna Ordoniz", by charter dated 31 Mar 1045[479]. Fernando & his wife had [three] children:

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]