== Notes for [[Item:Q115939|Q115939]] ==

Elvira of Castile (before 1082?-1151) was the illegitimate daughter of Alfonso VI of León, by his mistress Jimena Muñoz, and full sister of Theresa, Countess of Portugal. She married, firstly, Raymond IV of Toulouse in 1094, being mother of count Alfonso Jordan. On the death of Raymond, Elvira returned to Castile and there, before 1117, married count Fernando Fernández, having three additional children, Diego, García, and Teresa Fernández, wife of count Osorio Martinez, whose family inherited many of Elvira's Iberian holdings.

Jimena Muñoz's name sometimes appears as Jimena Nuñez, because of a mistaken assumption that the two names are identical. She has been called sister of Rodrigo Muñoz, founder of the Guzman, but this is chronologically unlikely. However, she may have been sister of a count of the same name.

Elvira should not be confused with her half-sister Elvira Alfonso, wife of Roger II, King of Sicily 1130-1154.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elvira_of_Castile

--------------------

Elvira of Castile (c. 1100 – 8 February 1135) was a daughter of Alfonso VI of Castile by his fourth queen, Isabel (perhaps identical to the Moslem convert Zaida, baptized as Isabel, who had been Alfonso's mistress).

Elvira married Roger II of Sicily in 1117, but only infrequently saw him thereafter, for he was much preoccupied with rebellions on the Italian Peninsula and she stayed with her children in Palermo the capital. Despite this, the marriage was undoubtedly happy, for she bore Roger five sons before she died in 1135. Her death put Roger in such a deep depression that he was thought dead, he was so reclusive.

Their sons were:

Roger (died 12 May 1148), heir, Duke of Apulia (from 1135), possibly also Count of Lecce.

Tancred (died 1138), Prince of Bari (from 1135).

Alfonso (died 1144), Prince of Capua (from 1135) and Duke of Naples.

William (died 7 May 1166), his successor, Duke of Apulia (from 1148).

Henry, died in infancy.

--------------------

Elvira of Castile

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

For the legitimate daughter of Alfonso VI, see Elvira of Castile, Queen of Sicily.

Elvira of Castile (before 1082?-1151) was the illegitimate daughter of Alfonso VI of León, by his mistress Jimena Muñoz, and full sister of Theresa, Countess of Portugal. She married, firstly, Raymond IV of Toulouse in 1094, being mother of count Alfonso Jordan. On the death of Raymond, Elvira returned to Castile and there, before 1117, married count Fernando Fernández, having three additional children, Diego, García, and Teresa Fernández, wife of count Osorio Martinez, whose family inherited many of Elvira's Iberian holdings.

Jimena Muñoz's name sometimes appears as Jimena Nuñez, because of a mistaken assumption that the two names are identical. She has been called sister of Rodrigo Muñoz, founder of the Guzman, but this is chronologically unlikely. However, she may have been sister of a count of the same name.
--------------------
FUENTE:

-http://homepages.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~cousin/html/p371.htm

Elvira of Castile (before 1082?-1151) was the illegitimate daughter of Alfonso VI of León, by his mistress Jimena Muñoz, and full sister of Theresa, Countess of Portugal. She married, firstly, Raymond IV of Toulouse in 1094, being mother of count Alfonso Jordan. On the death of Raymond, Elvira returned to Castile and there, before 1117, married count Fernando Fernández, having three additional children, Diego, García, and Teresa Fernández, wife of count Osorio Martinez, whose family inherited many of Elvira's Iberian holdings.

Jimena Muñoz's name sometimes appears as Jimena Nuñez, because of a mistaken assumption that the two names are identical. She has been called sister of Rodrigo Muñoz, founder of the Guzman, but this is chronologically unlikely. However, she may have been sister of a count of the same name.

OR "GELOIRA"; NATURAL DAUGHTER

Elvira of Castile (Sicilian queen)
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Elvira of Castile was the daughter of Alfonso VI of Castile by his fourth queen, Isabel (perhaps identical to the Moslem convert Zaida, baptized as Isabel, who had been Alfonso's mistress). Elvira married Roger II of Sicily in 1117, but only infrequently saw him thereafter, for he was much preoccupied with rebellions on the peninsula and she stayed with her children in Palermo the capital. Despite this, the marriage was undoubtedly happy, for she bore Roger five sons before she died in 1135. Her death put Roger in such a deep depression that he was thought dead, he was so reclusive.

Their sons were:

1. Roger (died 12 May 1148), heir, Duke of Apulia (from 1135), possibly also Count of Lecce
2. Tancred (died 1138), Prince of Bari (from 1135)
3. Alfonso (died 1144), Prince of Capua (from 1135) and Duke of Naples
4. William (died 7 May 1166), his successor, Duke of Apulia (from 1148)
5. Henry, died in infancy

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elvira_of_Castile_%28Sicilian_queen%29"

Categories: Spanish people | Queen cons

Name Prefix:<NPFX> Princess Name Suffix:<NSFX> of Castile and Leon

Name Prefix:<NPFX> Princess Name Suffix:<NSFX> of Castile and Leon

It is reported that Elvira died at a very young age.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]