== Notes for [[Item:Q114516|Q114516]] ==

===Biography

< [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pedro_Ansúrez Wikipedia] > '''Pedro Ansúrez''' (floruit 1065–1117;[2] died probably 9 September 1118[3]) was a Castilian nobleman, count of Liébana, Saldaña and Carrión in the closing decades of the eleventh century and the opening decades of the twelfth. He is considered the founder and first lord of Valladolid.

Pedro was a descendant of the Beni Gómez family of Castilian nobility, the son of Ansur Díaz, by his first wife, whose name is unknown.[4] His grandfather, Diego Fernández, was a count of Saldaña and Carrión.

Pedro married twice, the first time by 17 June 1084[5] to Elo (or Eylo), daughter of Count Alfonso Muñoz and Aldonza González of Trigueros. She was dead by 17 September 1114, when Pedro made a donation for the good of her soul to the canons of the cathedral of Valladolid, and he appears the next day with his second wife, Elvira Sánchez, whom he may have wed some time before.[5]

Pedro had five children: Alfonso, Fernando, María, Mayor, and Urraca. Alfonso died young and his sarcophagus, commissioned by Pedro, can still be seen in the museum of Sahagún. Pedro and Elo's children were raised in the household of a lesser nobleman: that of Citi Álvarez and his wife Froilo, who were duly rewarded for their services with a grant of land.[6]

----

< [https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pedro_Ansúrez Wikipedia] > '''Pedro Ansúrez''' (c. 10371 -Valladolid, September 9, 1118/11192) was Count in Liébana, Carrión and Saldaña and Lord of Valladolid, in whose cathedral he is buried.


'''Descent'''

He married Eylo Alfonso,10 who died between 1110 and 1113,20 daughter of Count Alfonso Muñoz and Count Aldonza González, which benefited him with numerous properties, among others in the Trigueros valley.24 b
From his marriage to Eylo Alfonso he had the following five children: 10 20
# Major, the firstborn, who married in first marriages with Alvar Fáñez Minaya, 10 confidant of El Cid and companion in his conquests; 26 and in second with Martín Pérez de Tordesillas.10 27
# Mary, who was the wife of Armengol V, thete of Urgell, and soon his widow; and mother of the heir Armengol VI.27 20
# Urraca, who married on two occasions: the first with the Galician count Sancho Pérez, 10 26 27 29 died before 1113, one of the children of the first marriage of Gontrodo cognomento "Mayor" Rodríguez, the second wife of the count Pedro Froilaz; 30 and, in second marriage, with Lope López de Carrión.26
# Alfonso, who died on December 8, 1093 at a young age.10 20 28 31
# Fernando, who survived his father but did not reach such a prominent position as he.10 20 He ruled as a lieutenant of San Román de Entrepeñas, according to the documentation of the monastery of Santa María de Piasca.10 20 He married Eylo Rodríguez, with whom he appears on April 29, 1120 making a donation to the monastery of San Román de Entrepeñas10 of some.


In 1113, Count Pedro Ansúrez remarried, this time with Elvira Sánchez, 20 10 of whom there were no descendants.





===Genealogy
==== Chapter 11. FAMILY of PEDRO ANSÚREZ

https://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/SPANISH%20NOBILITY%20LATER%20MEDIEVAL.htm#AnsurDiazdied1047B

ANSUR Díaz, son of conde DIEGO Fernández de Saldaña & his wife Marina --- (-after 29 Sep 1047). “...Fernando Didaz comes...Ansur Didaz, Gomez Didaz...” subscribed the charter dated 17 Feb 1035 under which King Vermudo III recognised the church of Palencia and made donations[904]. "Fernando Didaz comes…Assur Diaz, Gomez Didaz" subscribed the charter dated 1036 under which Vermudo III King of León donated property[905]. “...comite Fredinando Didaz, Asurz Didaz” witnessed the charter dated 24 May 1038 under which Fernando I King of Castile granted “castellum...Vierbele” to “Garcia Eneconis”[906]. Conde [Apr/Oct] 1042. "Assur Diaz et uxor mea Iusta" donated property in León to León Cathedral by charter dated 29 Sep 1047[907].
* [m firstly ---. The name of Ansur´s first wife is not known. Ansur & his [first/third] wife had three children:
**1. PEDRO Ansúrez (-9 Sep 1119). The Chronicon Mundi of Lucas Tudensis names "tres fratres nobiles…Petrus Ansuri, Gundisaluus Ansuri et Fernanduss Ansuri"[916]. Mayordomo of Alfonso VI King of León 24 Jul 1067 to 3 Sep 1067. Conde [1071]. - see below.

Conde. Señor de Valladolid

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]