== Notes for [[Item:Q99551|Q99551]] ==

Haninai ben Hofnai ha-David Exilarch at Babylon

Exilarch at Babylon from (581-589)

The exilarchs were direct descendant of the House of King David and were recognized as not only being the representative of the Jewish community in Babylon but as also having noble status.

Over 1,500 year history of the Jewish community in Babylon approximately 40 people held that title, all tracing their ancestry back to King David. This was a noble line that was always preserved in Jewish history.

He was killed in the attempt by the Sasanian King Chosroes II to wipe out the entire royal House of David, due mostly to Jewish hostilities to him in support of an usurping king (Hermisdas IV).

--------------------
Haninai I ben Hofnai beni David was Exilarch (Exilarch [Hebrew: ראש גלות Rosh Galut, Aramaic: ריש גלותא Reish Galuta lit. "head of the exile", Greek: Æchmalotarcha], referring to the leaders of the Diaspora Jewish community following the deportation of the population of Judah into Babylonian exile after the destruction of the kingdom of Judah) at Babylonia between 580 and 589. He married UNKNOWN bat Hananiah mi-Sura, daughter of Gaon Hananiah mi-Sura, before 589.

Exilarch Haninai I ben Hofnai beni David was killed in the attempt by the Sasanian King Khusro II (also our ancestor) to wipe out the entire royal House of David, due mostly to Jewish hostilities to him in support of an usurping king (Hermisdas IV).

See "My Lines"

( http://homepages.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~cousin/html/p294.htm#i12961 )

from Compiler: R. B. Stewart, Evans, GA

( http://homepages.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~cousin/html/index.htm )
--------------------
Hananai* BEN HOFNAI (Exilarch at Babylon)

0560 - 0590

* TITLE: Exilarch at Babylon

* BIRTH: 0560, Persia

* DEATH: 0590

Father: Kafnai* HOFNAI

Family 1 :

1. +Bustanai* BEN HANINI
--------------------
Ocupation: Exilarch in Bavel 581-589,

son of Hofnai and nn to: nn

He was Exilarch in Baghdad from 581 to 589.

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per03359.htm#0

RESEARCH NOTES:
Lay head of Jewish community in Babylon 580-590

He was Exilarch in Baghdad from 581 to 589.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD7B35E21EFBBFA9822EF79916C52CE
geni:6000000000961705384

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]