== Notes for [[Item:Q100797|Q100797]] ==

David ben Daniel

David ben Daniel was Babylonian exilarch after the Mongol conquest. Little is known about him other than that he was a fifth-generation descendant of Zakkai ben Azariah, brother of Daniel ben Azariah, the gaon of Palestine in the sixth decade of the eleventh century.

In April 1288, David ben Daniel wrote a letter from Mosul threatening to excommunicate Solomon (Petit) ben Samuel of Acre, who had raised objections to Maimonides’ Guide to the Perplexed. Ben Daniel began by explaining the purpose and functions of Maimonides’ writings; he then accused Solomon Petit, by name, of finding fault with Maimonides’ teachings because he did not understand them and was pursuing power. David warned Solomon that only he, “the exilarch of all the Diasporas of Israel, residing in Mosul,” or Maimonides’ grandson, the nagid David ben Abraham, could nullify an edict of excommunication. The letter was also signed by eleven members of the bet din.

Nevertheless, one year later, in June or July 1289, the nasi Jesse ben Hezekiah in Damascus, issued an excommunication edict against Solomon Petit and declared that all Jews who had any written material whatsoever that disagreed with Maimonides were to hand it over to Maimonides’ grandson David within three days.

David ben Daniel was succeeded by his son Daniel ben David, who is mentioned by the Muslim chronicler Ibn al-Fuwaṭī.

Elinoar Bareket

Bibliography

Gil, Moshe. Jews in Islamic Countries in the Middle Ages (Leiden: Brill, 2004), pp. 445–446.

Strauss [-Ashtor], Eliyahu. History of the Jews in Egypt and Syria under the Mamlūks, 3 vols. (Jerusalem: Mosad Harav Kook, 1944–70) [Hebrew].

Elinoar Bareket. "David ben Daniel." Encyclopedia of Jews in the Islamic World. Executive Editor Norman A. Stillman. Brill Online, 2013.

Reference. Jim Harlow. 30 August 2013 <http://brillonline.nl/entries/encyclopedia-of-jews-in-the-islamic-world/david-ben-daniel-SIM_0006370>

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD8C28E91EFBBFA9822EF79916C02FF
geni:6000000022293744083

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]