== Notes for [[Item:Q87540|Q87540]] ==

'''Tigranes the Great''' (Armenian: Տիգրան Մեծ (140–55 BC; also called Tigranes II and sometimes Tigranes I) was emperor of Armenia under whom the country became, for a short time, the strongest state east of the Roman Republic. He was a member of the Artaxiad Royal House. Under his reign, the Armenian kingdom expanded beyond its traditional boundaries, allowing Tigranes to claim the title Great King, and involving Armenia in many battles against opponents such as the Parthian and Seleucid empires, and the Roman Republic.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tigranes_the_Great

--------------------
Glaphyra's mother, the first wife of Archelaus, was an Armenian Princess whose name is unknown and who died by 8 BCE.[7] She may have been a daughter of King Artavasdes II of Armenia, son of Tigranes the Great and Cleopatra of Pontus, a daughter of Mithridates VI from his first wife his sister Laodice.[6] If so, Glaphyra’s parents may have been distant relatives. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glaphyra

--------------------
'''
=Tigranes the Great=
'''

Tigranes II, more commonly known as Tigranes the Great (Armenian: Տիգրան Մեծ, Tigran Mets; Ancient Greek: Τιγράνης ὁ Μέγας Tigránes ho Mégas; Latin: Tigranes Magnus) (140-55 BC) was King of Armenia under whom the country became, for a short time, the strongest state east of the Roman Republic.[3] He was a member of the Artaxiad Royal House. Under his reign, the Armenian kingdom expanded beyond its traditional boundaries, allowing Tigranes to claim the title Great King, and involving Armenia in many battles against opponents such as the Parthian and Seleucid empires, and the Roman Republic.

'''Early years'''

Tigranes had been a hostage until the age of 45 at the court of King Mithridates II of Parthia after the Armenian defeat in 105 BC. Other sources give the date as much earlier, at around 112-111 BC. After the death of King Tigranes I in 95 BC, Tigranes bought his freedom, according to Strabo, by handing over "seventy valleys" in Atropatene to the Parthians.

When he came to power, the foundation upon which Tigranes was to build his Empire was already in place, a legacy of the founder of the Artaxiad Dynasty, Artaxias I, and subsequent kings. The mountains of Armenia, however, formed natural borders between the different regions of the country and as a result, the feudalistic nakharars had significant influence over the regions or provinces in which they were based. This did not suit Tigranes, who wanted to create a centralist empire. He thus proceeded by consolidating his power within Armenia before embarking on his campaign.

He deposed Artanes, the last king of Armenian Sophene and a descendant of Zariadres.

'''Alliance with Pontus'''

During the First Mithridatic War (89-85 BC), Tigranes supported Mithridates VI of Pontus but was careful not to become directly involved in the war.

He rapidly built up his power, allying with Mithridates VI of Pontus and marrying his daughter Cleopatra. Tigranes had agreed that he was to extend his influence in the East, while Mithridates was to conquer Roman land in Asia Minor and in Europe. By creating a stronger Hellenistic state, Mithridates was to contend with the well-established Roman foothold in Europe. Mithridates then put into effect a planned a general attack on Roman and Italians in Asia Minor, tapping into local discontent with the Romans and their taxes and urging the peoples of Asia Minor against all foreign influence. 80,000 people were slaughtered in the province of Asia Minor, known as the Asiatic Vespers. The two kings' attempts to control Cappadocia and then the massacres resulted in guaranteed Roman intervention. The senate decided on Lucius Cornelius Sulla, who was then one of the current consuls, to be commander of the army against Mithridates.

'''Wars against the Parthians and Seleucids'''

After the death of Mithridates II of Parthia in 88 BC, Tigranes took advantage of the fact that the Parthian Empire had been weakened by Scythian invasions and internal squabbling:

''When he acquired power, he recovered these (seventy) valleys, and devastated the country of the Parthians, the territory about Ninus (Nineveh), and that about Arbela. He subjected to his authority the Atropatenians, and the Goryaeans (on the Upper Tigris); by force of arms he obtained possession also of the rest of Mesopotamia and, after crossing the Euphrates, of Syria and Phoenicea. —Strabo''

In 83 BC, after a bloody strife for the throne of Syria, governed by the Seleucids, the Syrians decided to choose Tigranes as the protector of their kingdom and offered him the crown of Syria. Magadates was appointed as his governor in Antioch. He then conquered Phoenicia and Cilicia, effectively putting an end to the last remnants of the Seleucid Empire, though a few holdout cities appear to have recognized the shadowy boy-king Seleucus VII Philometor as the legitimate king during his reign. The southern border of his domain reached as far as Ptolemais (modern Akko). Many of the inhabitants of conquered cities were sent to his new metropolis of Tigranocerta.

At its height, his empire extended from the Pontic Alps (in modern north-eastern Turkey) to Mesopotamia, and from the Caspian Sea to the Mediterranean. Tigranes apparently invaded territories as far away as Ecbatana and took the title king of kings which, at the time, according to their coins, even the Parthian kings did not assume. He was called "Tigranes the Great" by many Western historians and writers, such as Plutarch. The "King of Kings" never appeared in public without having four kings attending him. Cicero, referring to his success in the east, said that he "made the Republic of Rome tremble before the prowess of his arms."

Tigranes' coin consist of tetradrachms and copper coins having on the obverse his portrait wearing a decorated Armenian tiara with ear-flaps. The reverse has a completely original design. There are the seated Tyche of Antioch and the river god Orontes at her feet.

'''Wars against Rome'''

Mithridates had found refuge in Armenian land after confronting Rome, considering the fact that Tigranes was his ally and relative. The "King of Kings" eventually came into direct contact with Rome. The Roman commander, Lucullus, demanded the expulsion of Mithridates from Armenia – to comply with such a demand would be, in effect, to accept the status of vassal to Rome and this Tigranes refused. Charles Rollin, in his Ancient History, says:

''Tigranes, to whom Lucullus had sent an ambassador, though of no great power in the beginning of his reign, had enlarged it so much by a series of successes, of which there are few examples, that he was commonly surnamed "King of Kings." After having overthrown and almost ruined the family of the kings, successors of the great Seleucus; after having very often humbled the pride of the Parthians, transported whole cities of Greeks into Media, conquered all Syria and Palestine, and given laws to the Arabians called Scenites, he reigned with an authority respected by all the princes of Asia. The people paid him honors after the manners of the East, even to adoration.''

Lucullus' reaction was an attack that was so precipitate that he took Tigranes by surprise. According to Roman historians Mithrobazanes, one of Tigranes' generals, told Tigranes of the Roman approach. Tigranes was, according to Keaveney, so impressed by Mithrobazanes' courage that he appointed Mithrobazanes to command an army against Lucullus – Mithrobazanes was however defeated and killed. After this defeat Tigranes withdrew north to Armenia to regroup which left Lucullus free to put Tigranocerta under siege.

When Tigranes had gathered a large army he returned to confront Lucullus. On October 6, 69 BC, Tigranes' much larger force was decisively defeated by the Roman army under Lucullus in the Battle of Tigranocerta. Tigranes' treatment of the inhabitants (the majority of the population had been forced to move to the city) led disgruntled city guards to open the gates of the city to the Romans. Learning of this, Tigranes hurriedly sent 6000 cavalrymen to the city in order to rescue his wives and some of his assets. Tigranes escaped capture with a small escort.

On October 6, 68 BC, the Romans approached the old capital of Artaxata. Tigranes' and Mithridates' combined Armeno-Pontian army of 70,000 men formed up to face them but were resoundingly defeated. Once again, both Mithridates and Tigranes evaded capture by the victorious Romans. However, the Armenian historians claim that Romans lost the battle of Artaxata and Lucullus' following withdrawal from the Kingdom of Armenia in reality was an escape due to the above-mentioned defeat. The Armenian-Roman wars are depicted in Alexandre Dumas' Voyage to the Caucasus.

The long campaigning and hardships that Lucullus' troops had endured for years, combined with a perceived lack of reward in the form of plunder, led to successive mutinies among the legions in 68–67. Frustrated by the rough terrain of Northern Armenia and seeing the worsening morale of his troops, Lucullus moved back south and put Nisibis under siege. Tigranes concluded (wrongly) that Nisibis would hold out and sought to regain those parts of Armenia that the Romans had captured. Despite his continuous success in battle, Lucullus could still not capture either one of the monarchs. With Lucullus' troops now refusing to obey his commands, but agreeing to defend positions from attack, the Senate sent Gnaeus Pompey to recall Lucullus to Rome and take over his command.

'''Pompey and the reconciliation with Rome'''

In 67 BC Pompey was given the task of defeating Mithridates and Tigranes. Pompey first concentrated on attacking Mithridates while distracting Tigranes by engineering a Parthian attack on Gordyeyne. Phraates III, the Parthian king, was soon persuaded to take things a little further than an annexation of Gordyeyne when a son of Tigranes (also named Tigranes) went to join the Parthians and persuaded Phraates to invade Armenia in an attempt to replace the elder Tigranes with the younger. Tigranes decided not to meet the invasion in the field but instead ensured that his capital, Artaxata, was well defended and withdrew to the hill country. Phraates soon realized that Artaxata would not fall without a protracted siege, the time for which he could not spare due to his fear of plots at home. Once Phraates left Tigranes came back down from the hills and drove his son from Armenia. The son then fled to Pompey.

In 66 BC, Pompey advanced into Armenia with the younger Tigranes, and Tigranes the Great, now almost 75 years old, surrendered. Pompey treated him generously and allowed him to retain his kingdom shorn of his conquests[21] in return for 6,000 talents/180 tonnes of silver. His unfaithful son was sent back to Rome as a prisoner.

Tigranes continued to rule Armenia as an ally of Rome until his death in 55/54.

'''Halley's comet'''

An ABC News article on May 19, 2004 noted that according to the Armenian and Italian researchers, the "symbol on his crown that features a star with a curved tail may represent the passage of Halley's Comet in 87 BC." Tigranes could have seen Halley's comet when it passed closest to the Sun on August 6 in 87, according to the researchers, who said the comet would have been a 'most recordable event'– heralding the New Era of the King of Kings.

'''Legacy'''

Over the course of his conquests, Tigranes founded four cities that bore his name, including the capital of Tigranocerta (Tigranakert).

According to one count, 24 operas have been composed about Tigranes the Great by European composers, including by prominent Italian and German composers, such as Alessandro Scarlatti (Tigrane, 1715), Antonio Vivaldi (La virtu trionfante dell'amore e dell'odio ovvero il Tigrane, 1724), Niccolò Piccinni (Tigrane, 1761), Tomaso Albinoni, Giovanni Bononcini, Francesco Gasparini, Pietro Alessandro Guglielmi, Johann Adolph Hasse, Giovanni Battista Lampugnani, Vincenzo Righini, Antonio Tozzi, etc.

"Sea to sea Armenia" (Armenian: Ծովից ծով Հայաստան Tsovits tsov Hayastan) is a popular expression used by Armenians to refer to the Kingdom of Armenia of Tigranes the Great which extended from the Caspian Sea to the Mediterranean Sea.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tigranes_the_Great

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per00594.htm#0

KNOWN AS "THE GREAT"; KING OF ARMENIA 95-56 BC; UNCERTAIN OF MOTHER OF CHILDREN

1 NAME the Great //
2 GIVN the Great
2 SURN
2 NICK the Great

1 NAME the Great //
2 GIVN the Great
2 SURN
2 NICK the Great

1 NAME the Great //
2 GIVN the Great
2 SURN
2 NICK the Great

RESEARCH NOTES:
"the Great"; King of Armenia 94-56 BCE; father of Artaxias I (Arshak) King of
Iberia
- - Artavasdes II King of Armenia
- - Dght I of Tigranes Princess of Armenia
- - Dght II of Tigranes Princess of Armenia
- - Dght III of Tigranes Princess of Armenia
- - Tigranes I King of Sophene
- - Aryazata Automa Princess of Armenia
- - Dght IV of Tigranes Princess of Armenia

Name Prefix:<NPFX> King Name Suffix:<NSFX> Ii, Of Armenia

Name Prefix:<NPFX> King Name Suffix:<NSFX> Ii, Of Armenia

Ruled 95 - 55 BC, King of Armenia 1 2
Note:
Tigranes II THE GREAT, Tigranes also spelled TIGRAN, or DIKRAN (b. c.140--d. c. 55 BC), king of Armenia from 95 to 55 BC, under whom the country became for a short time the strongest state in the Roman East.
Tigranes was the son or brother of Artavasdes I and a member of the dynasty founded in the early 2nd century by Artaxias. He was given as ahostage to the Parthian king Mithradates II, but later he purchased his freedom by ceding 70 valleys bordering on Media, in northwestern Iran.
Thereafter, Tigranes began to enlarge his kingdom, first annexing thekingdom of Sophene (east of the Upper Euphrates River). He also entered into alliance with Mithradates VI Eupator of Pontus, whose daughterCleopatra he married. The interference of the two kings in Cappadocia(in eastern Asia Minor) resulted in successful Roman intervention in 92 BC.
Tigranes then began war with the Parthians, whose empire (southeast of the Caspian Sea) was temporarily weakened after the death of Mithradates II (about 87) by internal dissensions and invasions of the Scythians. Tigranes reconquered the valleys he had ceded and laid waste a great part of Media; the kings of Atropatene (Azerbaijan), Gordyene andAdiabene (both on the Upper Tigris River), and Osroene became his vassals. He also annexed northern Mesopotamia, and in the Caucasus the kings of Iberia and Albania accepted his suzerainty. In 83 the Syrians, tired of Seleucid dynastic struggles, offered him their crown, and in 78-77 he reoccupied Cappadocia. Tigranes took the title "king of kings" and built a new royal city, Tigranocerta, on the borders of Armeniaand Mesopotamia (the actual site is disputed), where he accumulated all his wealth and to which he transplanted the inhabitants of 12 Greektowns of Cappadocia, Cilicia, and Syria.
In 72 the Romans forced Mithradates of Pontus to flee to Armenia, and, in 69, Roman armies under Lucullus invaded Armenia. Tigranes was defeated at Tigranocerta on Oct. 6, 69, and again near the former capital of Artaxata in September 68. The recall of Lucullus gave some respite to Mithradates and Tigranes, but in the meantime a son of Tigranes,also called Tigranes, rebelled against him. Although the younger Tigranes was given an army by the Parthian king Phraates III, he was defeated by his father and was forced to flee to the Roman general Pompey. When Pompey advanced into Armenia, Tigranes surrendered (66 BC). Pompey received him graciously and gave him back his kingdom (in exchange for Syria and other southern conquests). Tigranes ruled about 10 yearslonger over Armenia, as a Roman client-king, though he lost all his conquests except Sophene and Gordyene. He was succeeded by his son Artavasdes II.
After the defeat of the Seleucid king Antiochus the Great by Rome at the Battle of Magnesia (winter 190-189 BC), his two Armenian satraps, Artashes (Artaxias) and Zareh (Zariadres), established themselves, with Roman consent, as kings of Greater Armenia and Sophene, respectively, thus becoming the creators of an independent Armenia. Artashes built his capital Artashat (Artaxata) on the Aras River near modern Yerevan. The Greek geographer Strabo names the capital of Sophene as Carcathiocerta. An attempt to end the division of Armenia into an eastern and a western part was made about 165 BC when the Artaxiad ruler soughtto suppress his rival, but it was left to his descendant Tigranes II the Great (95-55 BC) to establish, by his conquest of Sophene, a unitythat was to last almost 500 years.
Under Tigranes, Armenia ascended to a pinnacle of power unique in itshistory and became, albeit briefly, the strongest state in the Roman east. Extensive territories were taken from the kingdom of Parthia in Iran, which was compelled to sign a treaty of alliance. Iberia (Georgia), Albania, and Atropatene had already accepted Tigranes' suzerainty when the Syrians, tired of anarchy, offered him their crown (83 BC). Tigranes penetrated as far south as Ptolemais (modern 'Akko, Israel).
Although Armenian culture at the time of Tigranes was Iranian, as it had been and as it was fundamentally to remain for many centuries, Hellenic scholars and actors found a welcome at the Armenian court. The Armenian empire lasted until Tigranes became involved in the struggle between his father-in-law, Mithradates VI of Pontus, and Rome. The Roman general Lucius Licinius Lucullus captured Tigranocerta, Tigranes' new capital, in 69 BC. He failed to reach Artashat, but in 66 the legions of Pompey, aided by one of Tigranes' sons, succeeded, compelling the king to renounce Syria and other conquests in the south and to become an ally of Rome. Armenia became a buffer state, and often a battlefield, between Rome and Parthia. Maneuvering between larger neighbours,the Armenians gained a reputation for deviousness; the Roman historian Tacitus called them an ambigua gens ("ambiguous people").

Ruled 95 - 55 BC, King of Armenia 1 2
Note:
Tigranes II THE GREAT, Tigranes also spelled TIGRAN, or DIKRAN (b. c.140--d. c. 55 BC), king of Armenia from 95 to 55 BC, under whom the country became for a short time the strongest state in the Roman East.
Tigranes was the son or brother of Artavasdes I and a member of the dynasty founded in the early 2nd century by Artaxias. He was given as ahostage to the Parthian king Mithradates II, but later he purchased his freedom by ceding 70 valleys bordering on Media, in northwestern Iran.
Thereafter, Tigranes began to enlarge his kingdom, first annexing thekingdom of Sophene (east of the Upper Euphrates River). He also entered into alliance with Mithradates VI Eupator of Pontus, whose daughterCleopatra he married. The interference of the two kings in Cappadocia(in eastern Asia Minor) resulted in successful Roman intervention in 92 BC.
Tigranes then began war with the Parthians, whose empire (southeast of the Caspian Sea) was temporarily weakened after the death of Mithradates II (about 87) by internal dissensions and invasions of the Scythians. Tigranes reconquered the valleys he had ceded and laid waste a great part of Media; the kings of Atropatene (Azerbaijan), Gordyene andAdiabene (both on the Upper Tigris River), and Osroene became his vassals. He also annexed northern Mesopotamia, and in the Caucasus the kings of Iberia and Albania accepted his suzerainty. In 83 the Syrians, tired of Seleucid dynastic struggles, offered him their crown, and in 78-77 he reoccupied Cappadocia. Tigranes took the title "king of kings" and built a new royal city, Tigranocerta, on the borders of Armeniaand Mesopotamia (the actual site is disputed), where he accumulated all his wealth and to which he transplanted the inhabitants of 12 Greektowns of Cappadocia, Cilicia, and Syria.
In 72 the Romans forced Mithradates of Pontus to flee to Armenia, and, in 69, Roman armies under Lucullus invaded Armenia. Tigranes was defeated at Tigranocerta on Oct. 6, 69, and again near the former capital of Artaxata in September 68. The recall of Lucullus gave some respite to Mithradates and Tigranes, but in the meantime a son of Tigranes,also called Tigranes, rebelled against him. Although the younger Tigranes was given an army by the Parthian king Phraates III, he was defeated by his father and was forced to flee to the Roman general Pompey. When Pompey advanced into Armenia, Tigranes surrendered (66 BC). Pompey received him graciously and gave him back his kingdom (in exchange for Syria and other southern conquests). Tigranes ruled about 10 yearslonger over Armenia, as a Roman client-king, though he lost all his conquests except Sophene and Gordyene. He was succeeded by his son Artavasdes II.
After the defeat of the Seleucid king Antiochus the Great by Rome at the Battle of Magnesia (winter 190-189 BC), his two Armenian satraps, Artashes (Artaxias) and Zareh (Zariadres), established themselves, with Roman consent, as kings of Greater Armenia and Sophene, respectively, thus becoming the creators of an independent Armenia. Artashes built his capital Artashat (Artaxata) on the Aras River near modern Yerevan. The Greek geographer Strabo names the capital of Sophene as Carcathiocerta. An attempt to end the division of Armenia into an eastern and a western part was made about 165 BC when the Artaxiad ruler soughtto suppress his rival, but it was left to his descendant Tigranes II the Great (95-55 BC) to establish, by his conquest of Sophene, a unitythat was to last almost 500 years.
Under Tigranes, Armenia ascended to a pinnacle of power unique in itshistory and became, albeit briefly, the strongest state in the Roman east. Extensive territories were taken from the kingdom of Parthia in Iran, which was compelled to sign a treaty of alliance. Iberia (Georgia), Albania, and Atropatene had already accepted Tigranes' suzerainty when the Syrians, tired of anarchy, offered him their crown (83 BC). Tigranes penetrated as far south as Ptolemais (modern 'Akko, Israel).
Although Armenian culture at the time of Tigranes was Iranian, as it had been and as it was fundamentally to remain for many centuries, Hellenic scholars and actors found a welcome at the Armenian court. The Armenian empire lasted until Tigranes became involved in the struggle between his father-in-law, Mithradates VI of Pontus, and Rome. The Roman general Lucius Licinius Lucullus captured Tigranocerta, Tigranes' new capital, in 69 BC. He failed to reach Artashat, but in 66 the legions of Pompey, aided by one of Tigranes' sons, succeeded, compelling the king to renounce Syria and other conquests in the south and to become an ally of Rome. Armenia became a buffer state, and often a battlefield, between Rome and Parthia. Maneuvering between larger neighbours,the Armenians gained a reputation for deviousness; the Roman historian Tacitus called them an ambigua gens ("ambiguous people").

Ruled 95 - 55 BC, King of Armenia 1 2
Note:
Tigranes II THE GREAT, Tigranes also spelled TIGRAN, or DIKRAN (b. c.140--d. c. 55 BC), king of Armenia from 95 to 55 BC, under whom the country became for a short time the strongest state in the Roman East.
Tigranes was the son or brother of Artavasdes I and a member of the dynasty founded in the early 2nd century by Artaxias. He was given as ahostage to the Parthian king Mithradates II, but later he purchased his freedom by ceding 70 valleys bordering on Media, in northwestern Iran.
Thereafter, Tigranes began to enlarge his kingdom, first annexing thekingdom of Sophene (east of the Upper Euphrates River). He also entered into alliance with Mithradates VI Eupator of Pontus, whose daughterCleopatra he married. The interference of the two kings in Cappadocia(in eastern Asia Minor) resulted in successful Roman intervention in 92 BC.
Tigranes then began war with the Parthians, whose empire (southeast of the Caspian Sea) was temporarily weakened after the death of Mithradates II (about 87) by internal dissensions and invasions of the Scythians. Tigranes reconquered the valleys he had ceded and laid waste a great part of Media; the kings of Atropatene (Azerbaijan), Gordyene andAdiabene (both on the Upper Tigris River), and Osroene became his vassals. He also annexed northern Mesopotamia, and in the Caucasus the kings of Iberia and Albania accepted his suzerainty. In 83 the Syrians, tired of Seleucid dynastic struggles, offered him their crown, and in 78-77 he reoccupied Cappadocia. Tigranes took the title "king of kings" and built a new royal city, Tigranocerta, on the borders of Armeniaand Mesopotamia (the actual site is disputed), where he accumulated all his wealth and to which he transplanted the inhabitants of 12 Greektowns of Cappadocia, Cilicia, and Syria.
In 72 the Romans forced Mithradates of Pontus to flee to Armenia, and, in 69, Roman armies under Lucullus invaded Armenia. Tigranes was defeated at Tigranocerta on Oct. 6, 69, and again near the former capital of Artaxata in September 68. The recall of Lucullus gave some respite to Mithradates and Tigranes, but in the meantime a son of Tigranes,also called Tigranes, rebelled against him. Although the younger Tigranes was given an army by the Parthian king Phraates III, he was defeated by his father and was forced to flee to the Roman general Pompey. When Pompey advanced into Armenia, Tigranes surrendered (66 BC). Pompey received him graciously and gave him back his kingdom (in exchange for Syria and other southern conquests). Tigranes ruled about 10 yearslonger over Armenia, as a Roman client-king, though he lost all his conquests except Sophene and Gordyene. He was succeeded by his son Artavasdes II.
After the defeat of the Seleucid king Antiochus the Great by Rome at the Battle of Magnesia (winter 190-189 BC), his two Armenian satraps, Artashes (Artaxias) and Zareh (Zariadres), established themselves, with Roman consent, as kings of Greater Armenia and Sophene, respectively, thus becoming the creators of an independent Armenia. Artashes built his capital Artashat (Artaxata) on the Aras River near modern Yerevan. The Greek geographer Strabo names the capital of Sophene as Carcathiocerta. An attempt to end the division of Armenia into an eastern and a western part was made about 165 BC when the Artaxiad ruler soughtto suppress his rival, but it was left to his descendant Tigranes II the Great (95-55 BC) to establish, by his conquest of Sophene, a unitythat was to last almost 500 years.
Under Tigranes, Armenia ascended to a pinnacle of power unique in itshistory and became, albeit briefly, the strongest state in the Roman east. Extensive territories were taken from the kingdom of Parthia in Iran, which was compelled to sign a treaty of alliance. Iberia (Georgia), Albania, and Atropatene had already accepted Tigranes' suzerainty when the Syrians, tired of anarchy, offered him their crown (83 BC). Tigranes penetrated as far south as Ptolemais (modern 'Akko, Israel).
Although Armenian culture at the time of Tigranes was Iranian, as it had been and as it was fundamentally to remain for many centuries, Hellenic scholars and actors found a welcome at the Armenian court. The Armenian empire lasted until Tigranes became involved in the struggle between his father-in-law, Mithradates VI of Pontus, and Rome. The Roman general Lucius Licinius Lucullus captured Tigranocerta, Tigranes' new capital, in 69 BC. He failed to reach Artashat, but in 66 the legions of Pompey, aided by one of Tigranes' sons, succeeded, compelling the king to renounce Syria and other conquests in the south and to become an ally of Rome. Armenia became a buffer state, and often a battlefield, between Rome and Parthia. Maneuvering between larger neighbours,the Armenians gained a reputation for deviousness; the Roman historian Tacitus called them an ambigua gens ("ambiguous people").

Tigranes the Great
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.

Tigranes the Great (ruled 95 BC-56 BC) (also called Tigranes II and sometimes Tigranes I) was a king of Armenia. He was the son of Artavasdes I.

Around 100 BC the Parthians placed him on the throne of Armenia, in return for "seventy valleys" in Armenia (Strabo 11.14.15). He rapidly built up his power, allying with Mithridates VI of Pontus and marrying his daughter Cleopatra. Ultimately the two kings' attempts to control Cappadocia resulted in Roman intervention, in the person of Lucius Cornelius Sulla.

Tigranes also expanded his domain into Parthia, going into Media as far as Ecbatana and to Arbela in Assyria, capturing northern Mesopotamia. In 83 BC he took over Syria, Phoenicia, and Cilicia, effectively putting an end to the Seleucid dynasty. Many of the inhabitants of conquered cities were sent to his new metropolis Tigranocerta.

But his empire was not a lasting one. In 69 BC he warred with Rome, eventually losing Tigranocerta to Lucullus and being separated from Mithridates by Pompey in 66 BC. Tigranes' son went over to Pompey, and as they approached Artaxata, Tigranes himself surrendered, gave up all his territories except Armenia, and finished out his life as a tributary of Rome.

He was suceeded as king of Armenia by his son, Artavasdes II.

Preceded by:
Philip I and Antiochus XII Ruler of the Seleucid Empire Succeeded by:
Antiochus XIII

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]