== Notes for [[Item:Q87620|Q87620]] ==

ID: I62456 Name: '''Marcus Aetius Balbus of Rome''' Given Name: Marcus Aetius Balbus Surname: of Rome Sex: M _UID: BAC8E19A5DCA9F48BF55084EA531A0C0AB68 Change Date: 15 Oct 2005 Death: deceased
* Marriage 1 '''Pompeia''' Married:
* Children '''Marcus Atius Balbus of Rome'''

Forrás / Source: http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I62456

--------------------

Senator of plebs status from Aricia (modern Arricia)

He was Consul in 99 BC. He was executed.

He was Consul in 99 BC. He was executed.

What's in a Name?

The name "Balbi" was referenced in Phoenicia approximately 2,000 B.C. Itis thought to have derived from the word "Baal" one of two chiefdivinities at that time. The Balbi name was associated with one of themajor Phoencian cities, Tyre, located on the Mediterranean Coast, and wasfamous for a rare purple dye. Now this city is named "Sur" and is locatedin what is today southern Lebanon. The Phoenicians founded the city ofGadir or Gades, now Cadiz, Spain in 1100 B. C. In historical descriptionsof Gades an individual named Balbus (Latin for Balbi) was cited as thenephew of the owner Balbus. Many centuries later Julius Caesar met LuciusBalbus in Gades and subsequently brought Balbus to Rome. Gade'scityemblem is comprised of a single fish situated horizontally facingleft. The crest of the Balbi family of Genoa is comprised of three fishsituated horizontally facing left.

There are number of famous Balbus military and political individualscited during the days of the Roman Empire, dating back to 168 B.C. Thereare also ancient Balbus sites in Rome: Balbus Theater (also shown asBalbi Theater) constructed by Cornelius Balbus in 13 B. C., and CryptaBalbi.

http://www.balbifamily.com/balbi%20news%20bytes.htm

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]