== Notes for [[Item:Q113128|Q113128]] ==

'''Aboazar Lovesendes''' or '''Aboaçar Lovesendes''' (c.955-978) was a medieval knight. He was the ancestor of the Lords of Maia.

According to expert Todd Farmerie, "Aboazar, founder of the Maya, was Abunazar Lovesendes, proving his father was an otherwise unknown Lovesendo."

There is a modern theory "Abunazar Lovesendes (de Maya) son of Lovesendo, [was] a back-door associate of the Leonese royalty, by Ortiga, descendant of Ummayad Abd Allah." This is a "Recent attempt to salvage/reconstruct traditional Maya descent. Based on appearance of some of the relevant names in contemporary documents, and some hypotheses regarding how the tradition may have become corrupted from the events which (hypothetically) served as its basis."

Another speculative claim is that Aboazar was born in León, Spain, son of [https://www.geni.com/people/Lovesendo-Ram%C3%ADrez-de-Amaya/4068107661440020572 Lovesendo Ramires] and Zaira bint Zaydan, descendant of Abdullah ibn Muhammad al-Umawi. His grandfather was Ramiro III of León. He was married to Unisco Godins, daughter of Godinho, Count of Asturias.

--------------------

"... foi chamado o Cid Alboazar venceo m.tas batalhas aos Mouros em Castella e Portugal e os expulsou de toda a comarca de Entre Douro e Minho, e allem Douro the S. Martinho de Mouros e Lamego, povoou m.tas terras, e dotou o Mosteiro de S. Tirso onde jaz enterrado..." Felgueiras Gaio - Araújos §1 N2

== Sources ==

* Todd A. Farmerie, "[https://groups.google.com/forum/#!searchin/soc.genealogy.medieval/Aboazar$20Lovesendes%7Csort:relevance/soc.genealogy.medieval/x-U3vtd9BMo/dydPytUwSSoJ Muslim/Christian descents in Early-Medieval Spain"] at soc.genealogy.medieval (June 16, 2001).

* http://geneall.net/en/name/42185/aboazar-lovesendes/

Fundó junto con su mujer el Monasterio de San Tirso entre el Duero y el Miño

Ver observações em seu suposto irmão, Lovesendes Ramires.
***
* Tomou várias terras aos mouros pelos anos 1000 como o Castelo de São Romão e Castro de Avioso e Castro de Gondemar, desde o Lima ao Douro e em trás os montes.
* Fundou o Mosteiro de Santo Tirso de Riba de Ave.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]