== Notes for [[Item:Q110833|Q110833]] ==

Ibn Yashūsh, Isaac (Abū Ibrāhīm) Ibn Qasṭār

Born in Toledo around 982, Abū Ibrāhīm Isaac ibn Yashūsh died in the same city in 1056. He was a court physician in the service of ʿAlī ibn Mujāhid and his son Iqbāl al-Dawla, governors of the Denia taifa on the eastern coast of al-Andalus. Ibn Abī Uṣaybiʿa, in his biographical compendium on physicians, Ṭabaqāt al-Aṭibbāʾ, praised Ibn Yashūsh as a person of acute intelligence and genteel manners, well versed in grammar, philosophy, the Hebrew Bible, and Jewish law, and in addition a confirmed bachelor. Moses ibn Ezra thought it appropriate to name him alongside Ibn Janāḥ as a master of the Hebrew language. Abraham ibn Ezra included him in the list of distinguished grammarians in his Sefer Moznayim as among the best of his generation. Although the authors that cite him agree that his surname was Ibn Yashūsh, his nickname (laqab) seems to have become somewhat corrupted over time, with unintelligible versions like Ibn Qasṭār and Ibn Saqṭar in circulation, which only make sense if read as Ibn Qusṭar (son of the money-changer).

The Kitāb al-Taṣārif (Book of Conjugations), a grammatical opus known in Hebrew as Sefer ha-Ṣerufim, is Ibn Yashūsh’s most famous work. Some specialists think that it can be identified with the manuscripts of the same title in the Oxford and Leningrad libraries published by Joseph and Hartwig Derenbourg and by Paul Kokowzoff. In his time, Ibn Yashūsh was considered one of the most important Hebrew grammarians. From its historical context, his book could not have been very different from the books of verbs (Ar. kutub al-afʿāl) written by Ḥayyūj and Ibn Janāḥ; from its title, it surely included, at the very least, all of the paradigms that could be obtained by applying the faʿala (paʿal) paradigm to the Hebrew language.

Additionally, Ibn Yashūsh wrote a Bible commentary, known as Ha-Yiṣḥaqi, in which he adopted a methodology that was branded as independent and daring when it came to identifying the kings of Edom collected in the genealogical list in Genesis 36. Abraham ibn Ezra, who praised Ibn Yashūsh’s philological work, felt that the exegetical book Ha-Yiṣḥaqi should be burned. Some scholars think that Ha-Yiṣḥaqiwas actually written by Isaac ben Solomon Israeli, the philosopher and physician in Qayrawan, and therefore that he was the object of Ibn Ezra’s “anathema.”

José Martínez Delgado

Bibliography

Ashtor, Eliyahu. The Jews of Moslem Spain , vol. 2 (Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society, 1979), pp. 293 ff.

Ibn Ezra, Abraham. Perushe ha-Torah le-R. Abraham ibn Ezra, vol. 1 (Jerusalem, 1976), p. 105.

Millás Vallicrosa, José María. Literatura hebraicoespañola, 3rd ed.(Buenos Aires: Labor, 1973), pp. 48 and 76.

Sáenz-Badillos, Angel, and Targarona Borrás, Judit, Diccionario de autores judíos (Sefarad. Siglos X–XV) (Cordova: Ediciones El Almendro, 1988), p. 173.

Steinschneider, Moritz. Die Arabische Literatur der Juden (Frankfurt: J. Kaufmann, 1902), pp. 135 ff.

Citation José Martínez Delgado. " Ibn Yashūsh, Isaac (Abū Ibrāhīm) Ibn Qasṭār." Encyclopedia of Jews in the Islamic World. Executive Editor Norman A. Stillman. Brill Online , 2013. Reference. Jim Harlow. 31 January 2013 <http://referenceworks.brillonline.com/entries/encyclopedia-of-jews-in-the-islamic-world/ibn-yashush-isaac-abu-ibrahim-ibn-qastar-COM_0011260>

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]