== Notes for [[Item:Q111478|Q111478]] ==

=Pedro Duque de Cantabria=

* Claimed to be the son of Ervigio, rey de los visigodos and Liubigotona by the 18th century genealogist Salazar y Castro, but modern genealogists consider this to be a fabrication.
* Mitochondrial DNA sequences and Y chromosome haplotypes were characterized in Pasiegos, a human isolate from Cantabria, and compared with those of other Cantabrian and neighbouring Northern Spain populations. Cantabria appears to be a genetically heterogeneous community. Whereas Lebaniegos do not differ from their eastern Basque and western Asturian and Galician neighbours, Pasiegos and other non-Lebaniego Cantabrians show significant differences with all of them. Pasiegos are peculiar for their high frequencies of Y chromosomal markers (E-M81) with North African assignation, and Y chromosomal (R-SRY2627) and mtDNA (V, I, U5) markers related to northern European populations. This dual geographic contribution is more in agreement with the complex demographic history of this isolate, as opposed to recent drift effects. The high incidence in Cantabrians with pre-V and V mtDNA haplotypes, considered as a signal of Postglacial recolonization in Europe from south-western refugees, points to such refugees as a better candidate population than Basques for this expansion. However, this does not discount a conjoint recolonization.
* The Chronicon Albeldense records that “primus in Asturias Pelagius” was expelled from the kingdom by "Vitizane Rege de Toleto", arrived in Asturias after "a Sarracenis Spania occupata est", and adds that he was the first to organise a rebellion against the Muslims in Asturias while "Juzeph" reigned in Córdoba[11]. The Chronicle of Alfonso III contains a lengthy romanticised account of Pelayo's life in Asturias and his conflict with the Moorish army including his supposed major victory against the Muslims which took place at Covadonga in 722[12]. The victory at Covadonga has acquired symbolic importance in Spain over the centuries, but it is not mentioned at all in the Muslim sources and there is little evidence about the nature of the conflict which actually took place. If the Akhbar al-Majmua correctly records the numbers of the Asturian resistance (see above), it is possible that it was little more than a minor skirmish.

==[http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/VANDALS,%20SUEVI,%20VISIGOTHS.htm#ErvigiosonofArdabastodied687B '''Project MedLands, VANDALS, SUEVI and VISIGOTHS''']

'''ARDABASTO''', son of --- . The Chronicle of Alfonso III records that "Ardabastus came from Greece after being expelled from his country by the emperor…arrived in Spain" and was "received…magnificently" by King Chindasvinto who gave him his niece in marriage[356]. His parentage is unknown, although this passage suggests that he must have been a person of importance in Byzantium. Salazar y Castro, in his genealogical table of the Visigothic kings, shows "Atanagildo" as the son of Hermenegildo, as well as his marriage to "Flavia Juliana hija de Pedro Augusto, hermano del Emperador Mauricio", and their sons "Paulo" and "Ardavasto", as well as the latter´s marriage to "prima, hija o hermana del Rey Cindasuindo"[357] (see above). The primary sources on which these statements are based are not specified. The table includes numerous errors and the information should therefore be viewed with caution. The name "Ardabasto" suggests a connection with Armenia, "Artavazd" being one of the names used frequently in the Mamikonian family of Armenia, holders of the hereditary position "sparapet" [supreme general] between the 5th and 8th centuries[358]. There could also be a connection with Artabasdos (-before 772), strategos of the theme of Armenia, who in 717 married Anna, daughter of Emperor Leon III "the Isaurian". '''married ([642]) --- of the Visigoths, niece of CHINDASVINTO King of the Visigoths''', daughter of ---. The Chronicle of Alfonso III records the marriage of "Ardabastus…from Greece" and the niece of King Chindasvinto[359]. The marriage must have taken place very early in the reign of King Chindasvinto given the tight possible birth date range of the couple´s granddaughter Cixilo.

'''Ardabasto and his wife had [two] children:'''

* 1. '''ERVIGIO''' ([643]-Toledo 15 Nov 687). The Chronicle of Alfonso III names "Ervig" as the son of "Ardabastus…from Greece" & his wife[360]. His birth date is estimated from his parents´ assumed marriage date range, working back from the tight birth date range assigned to his daughter Cixilo. He was brought up at the court of King Recesvinto, where he used the title "comes"[361]. After deposing King Wamba in 680, '''he was elected to succeed as ERVIGIO King of the Visigoths.''' The Chronica Regum Visigotthorum records that “Ervigius” succeeded “Id Oct 719” and was anointed “XII Kal Nov”[362]. The Continuator of Isidor's Historia Gothorum, Wandalorum, Sueborum records the accession of "Ervigius" and his reign of 7 years[363]. In light of the dubious circumstances of his accession, he married his daughter to his most powerful opponent whom he nominated as his successor, by-passing his own sons[364]. The sons of King Ervigio must have been minors at the time if the chronology of events shown above is correct. In 681, he revised and enlarged the Liber iudiciorum compiled by his predecessor King Recesvinto[365]. The Chronicle of Alfonso III records that Ervigio "died a natural death in Toledo" having ruled six years and four months[366]. The Chronica Regum Visigotthorum records that “Ervigius” reigned for seven years and 25 days, and died “XVII Kal Dec”[367]. '''married ([662]) LIUBIGOTONA,''' daughter of ---. Her marriage is confirmed by the charter dated to [680/86] which records that "socer noster Ervigius princeps…domina mea Leuvitona regina" granted "filiam suam" as wife of "Egicæ regis"[368]. According to Europäische Stammtafeln[369] she was Liubigotona the Visigoth, daughter of Suíntila King of the Visigoths, but the primary source on which this is based has not yet been identified. If this parentage is correct, she would have been considerably older than her husband, given the death of her supposed father in 633. Salazar y Castro, in his genealogical table of the Visigothic kings, shows "Liubigtobona nieta de Recaredo" as the wife of King Ervigio and mother of his children[370]. The primary source on which this statement is based are not specified. The table includes numerous errors and the information should therefore be viewed with caution. Her husband's successor forced his predecessor's widow to retire to a nunnery[371].

'''Ervigio & his wife had [three or more] children:'''

>>>>>* a) '''CIXILO''' ([663/65]-). The Chronicle of Alfonso III records the marriage of "the nobleman Egica, nephew of Wamba" and "Ervig…his daughter Cixilo"[372]. Her birth date range is estimated from (1) the estimated birth and marriage dates of her father, based on the arrival of her grandfather in Spain during the reign of King Chindasvinto, and (2) the birth of her son Witiza before her repudiation. Given this tight birth date range, it is likely that Cixilo was her father's eldest child. Her parentage and marriage are confirmed by the charter dated to [680/86] which records that "socer noster Ervigius princeps…domina mea Leuvitona regina" granted "filiam suam" as wife of "Egicæ regis"[373]. The Chronicle of Alfonso III records her repudiation "when [King Ervigio] ascended the throne"[374]. '''married ([681/86], repudiated [688]) EGICA, nephew of WAMBA ex-King of the Visigoths,''' son of --- (-[701/02]). '''He was elected to succeed his father-in-law in 687 as EGICA King of the Visigoths.'''
>>>>>* b) '''sons'''. The primary source which confirms their parentage has not yet been identified, although Falcón records that King Ervigio by-passed his own sons when nominating his son-in-law Egica as his successor[375].
>>>>>* c) ['''VERMUDO''' . Salazar y Castro, in his genealogical table of the Visigothic kings, shows "Veremundo Duque de Cantabria" and "Pedro Duque de Cantabria" as the sons of King Ervigio[376]. The primary sources on which these statements are based are not specified. The table includes numerous errors and the information should therefore be viewed with caution.
>>>>>* d) ['''PEDRO,''' Salazar y Castro, in his genealogical table of the Visigothic kings, shows "Veremundo Duque de Cantabria" and "Pedro Duque de Cantabria" as the sons of King Ervigio[377]. The primary sources on which these statements are based are not specified. The table includes numerous errors and the information should therefore be viewed with caution. The Chronicle of Alfonso III describes his son, Alfonso I King of Asturias, as "of the royal line" without specifying his ancestry[378]. The Historia Silense names "Petrus ex Recaredi…Gotorum principis progenie"[379], although Pedro's descent from King Recaredo I cannot be established. It is assumed that this alleged family relationship with the Visigoths is another example of an invention by later genealogists wishing to fill the information gaps left by the primary sources. Duque de Cantabria[380].]

==[http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/ASTURIAS,%20LEON.htm Project MedLands ASTURIAS, LEON]

'''PELAYO''' ([685/90] -Cangas de Onís 737 [29], bur Santa Eulalia). "Pelagium, filium quondam Fafilani ducis ex semine regio" according to the Chronicle of Alfonso III [30]. The Chronicon Albeldense names “Pelagius filius Veremundi, nepos Ruderici regis Toletani”, adding that he was the first to enter “in Asturibus montibus sub rupe in antrum de Auseba” [31]. Barrau-Dihigo comments that this passage forms part of a list of genealogical information which appears to be of dubious value [32]. According to the Chronicle of Alfonso III, Pelayo was sword-bearer for Kings Witiza and Rodrigo [33], when presumably he must at least have been an adolescent or young adult. According to the Chronicon Albeldense, Pelayo was expelled from Toledo “a Vitizane rege”, adding that he entered Asturias after the Moorish invasion, started the rebellion “regnante Juzeph in Cordoba”, and captured “Monuza” in León and “Oppa episcopus” [34]. The Chronicle of Alfonso III records that he fled to Asturias after the Moorish invasion "oppressed by the dominion of the Ishmaelites", although on arrival he made contact with the Muslim prefect of Gijón who sent Pelayo as his envoy to Córdoba [35]. '''He was elected in [718] as PELAYO King of Asturias, based in the Picos de Europa district of eastern Asturias.''' The Chronicle of Alfonso III records that his supporters' first clear victory against the Muslims took place at Covadonga in 722 [36], although as discussed further in the Introduction the historical importance of the battle on the ground is unclear. The kingdom's first capital was at Cangas de Onís, later moved to Oviedo. The Akhbar al-Majmua records that "

'''Pelayo & his wife had two children:'''

* a) '''FÁFILA''' ([715/20] -mid-Jun 739, bur Santa Cruz). The Chronicle of Alfonso III names "Favila, Pelayo's son" when recording that he succeeded his father, commenting that he "constructed… a basilica in honor of the Holy Cross" and lived only a short time [42]. His birth date range is estimated on the assumption that he was a young adult when elected to succeed his father as king. He succeeded his father in 737 as FÁFILA King of Asturias. The Chronicle of Alfonso III states that "he is reported to have been killed by a bear during a moment of levity" [43]. The Chronicon Albeldense states that “Fasila filius eius [Pelayo]” reigned for two years and was killed by a bear [44]. The Chronicon Compostellani records that “Fafila” reigned two years and six months [45]. Ibn-Khaldun records that, after the death of "
* b) '''ERMESENDA''' ([720/25] -, bur Santa María). The Chronicon Albeldense records that “Bermisindam, Pelagii filiam” married “Adefonsus… Petri, Cantabriæ ducis filius” who succeeded King Fáfila [50]. The Chronicle of Alfonso III names "the daughter of Pelayo Ermesinda" when recording her marriage to "Alfonso the son of Peter" [51]. Her birth date range is estimated from the birth of her first known child in [740]. Her marriage date is deduced from the Chronicle of Alfonso III recording that Alfonso "enjoyed many victories alongside his father-in-law" [52]. The Sebastiani Chronicon records that "Adefonsus… cum uxore sua Regina Ermesinda" was buried "in Cangas territory in Monastery S. Mariæ" [53]. m (before 737) ALFONSO [Duke of Cantabria], son of PEDRO [Duke of Cantabria] & his wife --- (-757, bur Santa Maria). He was elected in 739 to succeed his brother-in-law as ALFONSO I “el Católico” King of Asturias.

'''Peter''' (Latin: '''Petrus''', Spanish: '''Pedro'''; died 730) was the Duke of Cantabria. While various writers have attempted to name his parentage, (for example, making him son or brother of King Erwig), early sources say nothing more specific than the chronicle of 'Pseudo-Alfonso': that he was "ex semine Leuvigildi et Reccaredi progenitus" (descended from the bloodline of Liuvigild and Reccared I). He was the father of King Alfonso I and of Fruela of Cantabria, father of Kings Aurelius and Bermudo I.

* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peter_of_Cantabria

He was Duke of Cantabria, and Señor de Biscay. He was a Visigothic leader, associated with King Pelayo in founding Asturias (or alternatively, in reestablishing the Visigothic kingdom in a significantly reduced territory). According to a late tradition, he was descended from Leovigildo and Reccared, Visigothic kings of Toledo. Some sources call him a son of King Ervigio and his wife Liubigotona, others call him a step-son of Ervigio.

--------

http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pedro_de_Cantabria

Pedro de Cantabria (Latin: Petrus de Cantia-Brae) fue Duque de Cantabria. Probablemente nació en algún lugar de la Cordillera Cantábrica y murió el año 730. Su hijo, Alfonso I el Católico (yerno de Don Pelayo), y varios nietos suyos fueron elegidos reyes de Asturias por la nobleza asturiana.

Antepasados y descendientes [editar]

Hasta el siglo XIX, basándose en los antiguos cronistas, se creyó que fue hijo del rey visigodo Ervigio, pero algunos historiadores y genealogistas de hoy en día lo ponen en duda. Se desconoce el nombre de su o sus esposas.

El hijo mayor del Duque Pedro de Cantabria, Alfonso I el Católico, fue el tercer rey de Asturias y padre del rey Fruela I de Asturias. Su segundo hijo, Fruela, fue padre de los reyes Aurelio y Bermudo; y dio origen, a través de su hijo Bermudo, a uno de las principales linajes de los que provinieron los monarcas de los reinos de Asturias, León, Navarra, Castilla y Aragón, que posteriormente darían origen a los reinos de España y Portugal.

Actuación [editar]

Según antiguas crónicas musulmanas, en el año 714 Musa ibn Nusair toma y saquea por segunda vez Amaya, la capital del ducado de Cantabria, lo que obliga a Pedro y a los suyos a refugiarse tras la cordillera. Allí combina sus fuerzas con el líder astur Pelayo para combatir a los invasores musulmanes, a los que derrotan en la batalla de Covadonga. Es probable que, siguiendo la costumbre goda, Pedro enviase a su hijo a la corte real de Pelayo en Cangas de Onís. Según el fragmento transcrito a continuación de la Crónica Albeldense, el Duque Pedro y el Rey Pelayo acordaron fusionar sus dominios mediante el matrimonio de Alfonso (hijo de Pedro) con Ermesinda (hija de Pelayo):

Tras la muerte -el 14 de septiembre del año 739, durante una cacería- de Favila (quien había sucedido a su padre Pelayo como Rey de los astures), Alfonso es designado primer Rey de los unificados dominios que en lo sucesivo se conocerían con el nombre de Asturias. La posteridad lo conoce con el nombre de Alfonso I el Católico.

--------------------

Su filiación aquí consignada, está tomada de antiguos historiadores y genealogistas; los historiadores actuales la cuestionan.

FUENTES:

-http://www.abcgenealogia.com/Godos00.html

--------------------

Peter or Pedro (died 730) was the duke of Cantabria. While various writers have attempted to name his parentage, (for example, making him son or brother of King Erwig), early sources say nothing more specific than the chronicle of 'Pseudo-Alfonso': that he was "ex semine Leuvigildi et Reccaredi progenitus" (descended from the bloodline of Liuvigild and Reccared I). He was the father of King Alfonso I and of Fruela, father of Kings Aurelius and Bermudo I.

According to the Moslem chroniclers, in the year 714, Musa ibn Nusair sacked Amaya, capital of Cantabria, for the second time. Peter, the provincial dux, led his people into refuge in the mountains and then joined with Pelayo of Asturias against the invaders. After the Battle of Covadonga, in which Pelayo defeated an invading force, it seems likely that Peter sent his son to the court of Pelayo at Cangas de Onís. It had been a Visigothic practice to send noble children to the royal court, this was thus a tacit admission of Pelayo's regality. According to the Crónica Albeldense, the territories of the two leaders were united by marriage between Peter's son Alfonso and Pelayo's daughter Ermesinda:

Adefonsus, Pelagi gener, reg. an. XVIIII. Iste Petri Cantabriae ducis filius fuit; et dum Asturias venir Ermesindam Pelagii filiam Pelagio proecipiente, accepit.

Alfonso later succeeded to the Asturian throne and was the first to use the title of king. While Iberian Muslim scholars would call his descendants the Beni Alfons (Arabic: بن إذفنش‎ (Beni Iḍfunš)) after his son, some modern authors refer to the family as the Pérez Dynasty for Peter.

[source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peter_of_Cantabria]
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peter_of_Cantabria
--------------------
Peter or Pedro (died 730) was the duke of Cantabria. While various writers have attempted to name his parentage, (for example, making him son or brother of King Erwig), early sources say nothing more specific than the chronicle of 'Pseudo-Alfonso': that he was "ex semine Leuvigildi et Reccaredi progenitus" (descended from the bloodline of Liuvigild and Reccared I). He was the father of King Alfonso I and of Fruela, father of Kings Aurelius and Bermudo I.

According to the Moslem chroniclers, in the year 714, Musa ibn Nusair sacked Amaya, capital of Cantabria, for the second time. Peter, the provincial dux, led his people into refuge in the mountains and then joined with Pelayo of Asturias against the invaders. After the Battle of Covadonga, in which Pelayo defeated an invading force, it seems likely that Peter sent his son to the court of Pelayo at Cangas de Onís. It had been a Visigothic practice to send noble children to the royal court, this was thus a tacit admission of Pelayo's regality. According to the Crónica Albeldense, the territories of the two leaders were united by marriage between Peter's son Alfonso and Pelayo's daughter Ermesinda:

Adefonsus, Pelagi gener, reg. an. XVIIII. Iste Petri Cantabriae ducis filius fuit; et dum Asturias venir Ermesindam Pelagii filiam Pelagio proecipiente, accepit.

Alfonso later succeeded to the Asturian throne and was the first to use the title of king. While Iberian Muslim scholars would call his descendants the Beni Alfons (Arabic: بن إذفنش‎ (Beni Iḍfunš)) after his son, some modern authors refer to the family as the Pérez Dynasty for Peter.
--------------------
Peter of Cantabria

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Peter or Pedro (d. 730) was the duke of Cantabria. While various writers have attempted to name his parentage, (for example, making him son or brother of King Erwig), early sources say nothing more specific than the chronicle of 'Pseudo-Alfonso': that he was "ex semine Leuvigildi et Reccaredi progenitus" (descended from the bloodline of Liuvigild and Reccared I). He was the father of King Alfonso I and of Fruela, father of Kings Aurelius and Bermudo I.

According to the Moslem chroniclers, in the year 714, Musa ibn Nusair sacked Amaya, capital of Cantabria, for the second time. Peter, the provincial dux, led his people into refuge in the mountains and then joined with Pelayo of Asturias against the invaders. After the Battle of Covadonga, in which Pelayo defeated an invading force, it seems likely that Peter sent his son to the court of Pelayo at Cangas de Onís. It had been a Visigothic practice to send noble children to the royal court, this was thus a tacit admission of Pelayo's regality. According to the Crónica Albeldense, the territories of the two leaders were united by marriage between Peter's son Alfonso and Pelayo's daughter Ermesinda:

Adefonsus, Pelagi gener, reg. an. XVIIII. Iste Petri Cantabriae ducis filius fuit; et dum Asturias venir Ermesindam Pelagii filiam Pelagio proecipiente, accepit.

Alfonso later succeeded to the Asturian throne and was the first to use the title of king. While Iberian Muslim scholars would call his descendants the Beni Alfons (Arabic: بن إذفنش‎ (Beni Iḍfunš)) after his son, some modern authors refer to the family as the Pérez Dynasty for Peter.
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peter_of_Cantabria
--------------------
Pedro, duque da Cantabria
* c. 0660 Padres Padre: Ervigio Favila * c. 0630 Madre: Liubigotona Baltes * c. 0630 Matrimonios c. 0690 N

Hijos

Alfonso I, rey de Asturias * c. 0690 Ermesinda de Asturias
Fruela, Duque de Cantabria * 0700 N

Titulos y Señorios

Duques de Cantábria

in: GeneAll.net <http://www.geneall.net/H/per_page.php?id=8164>
--------------------
Duque de Cantábria
--------------------
Hasta el siglo XIX, basándose en los antiguos cronistas, se creyó que fue hijo del rey visigodo Ervigio, pero algunos historiadores y genealogistas de hoy en día lo ponen en duda. Se desconoce el nombre de su o sus esposas.

El hijo mayor del duque Pedro de Cantabria, Alfonso I, fue el tercer rey de Asturias y padre del rey Fruela I de Asturias. Su segundo hijo, Fruela, fue padre de los reyes Aurelio y Bermudo; y dio origen, a través de su hijo Bermudo, a uno de las principales linajes de los que provinieron los monarcas de los reinos de Asturias, León, Navarra, Castilla y Aragón, que posteriormente darían origen a los reinos de España y Portugal.

--------------------
Pedro de Cantabria (Latin: Petrus de Cantia-Brae) fue Duque de Cantabria. Probablemente nació en algún lugar de la Cordillera Cantábrica y murió el año 730. Su hijo, Alfonso I el Católico (yerno de Don Pelayo), y varios nietos suyos fueron elegidos reyes de Asturias por la nobleza asturiana.

Antepasados y descendientes [editar]

Hasta el siglo XIX, basándose en los antiguos cronistas, se creyó que fue hijo del rey visigodo Ervigio, pero algunos historiadores y genealogistas de hoy en día lo ponen en duda. Se desconoce el nombre de su o sus esposas.

El hijo mayor del Duque Pedro de Cantabria, Alfonso I el Católico, fue el tercer rey de Asturias y padre del rey Fruela I de Asturias. Su segundo hijo, Fruela, fue padre de los reyes Aurelio y Bermudo; y dio origen, a través de su hijo Bermudo, a uno de las principales linajes de los que provinieron los monarcas de los reinos de Asturias, León, Navarra, Castilla y Aragón, que post...

--------------------
image: site of the medieval castle in Amaya, one of the two main cities in the Duchy of Cantabria. The walls that defended the castle at the top are the only vestiges of the imposing fortress. https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Pe%C3%B1aAmaya005.JPG

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Duchy_of_Cantabria

The Duchy of Cantabria was a march created by the Visigoths in northern Spain to watch their border with the Cantabrians and Basques. Its precise extension is unclear in the different periods, but seems likely that it included Cantabria, parts of Northern Castile, La Rioja, and probably western areas of Biscay and Álava.

The two main towns of Cantabria before its conquest by the Goths were Amaya, in northern Burgos and the City of Cantabria, believed to have been near modern Logroño. Both towns were destroyed in 574 by Liuvigild, who massacred many of their inhabitants. The legend of this destruction remained for long in the memory of the affected peoples. Bishop Braulio of Zaragoza, 631-651, wrote in his Life of St. Emilianus how the saint prophesied the destruction of Cantabria because of their alleged sins. It is held in popular belief that the converted refugees from the City of Cantabria founded the monastery of Our Lady of Codés in Navarre.

A Senate of Cantabria mentioned in the Saint Aemilianus' work bears witness to a local nobility and a governing diet that may have been of the last independent Hispano-Roman provincial authorities. Archaeological discoveries in the last decades around the millennium have brought to light that the cultural and economic influences, and even small groups of people in the near Basque territory once part of the duchy or limiting with it, came from way beyond the Pyrenees during this time gap of political vacuum or at the best, uncertain authority.

In 581, right before major Frankish expeditions against the Basques and the establishment of the Duchy of Vasconia in the Kingdom of the Franks, the count of Bordeaux Galactorius is cited by the poet Venantius Fortunatus as fighting both the Basques and the Cantabrians, while the Chronicle of Fredegar brings up a shadowy Francio duke of Cantabria ruling for a long period.

In the late Visigothic period, at a second stage after the 6th century Cantabrian defeat, the Duchy of Cantabria is attested as being a buffer zone during the continuous fighting between Visigoths and Basques. Notice of a certain duke Peter of Cantabria, father of Alfonso I of Asturias, is attested on 9th century Asturian documents for the first years of the Umayyad conquest of Hispania, from 711-718.
Otra admirable historia de mi numero #30 bisabuelito Pedro de Cantabria (Latin: Petrus de Cantia-Brae) fue Duque de Cantabria
Amalia Maria Rafaela Urioste Prudencio de Murillo G.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Umayyad_conquest_of_Hispania

http://dbe.rah.es/biografias/34424/pedro

Pedro. ?, s. m. s. VII – p. s. VIII. Duque de Cantabria. Magnate visigodo del que apenas se sabe nada, pero que debe su importancia a haber sido cabeza de la dinastía asturleonesa a través de sus dos hijos, Alfonso I y Fruela. Debió de desempeñar el gobierno de Cantabria en los últimos años del reinado de Rodrigo, pues aparece titulado con esta dignidad en la Crónica Albeldense. La de Alfonso III, en su versión Rotense, le hace de prosapia real, mientras que la versión Sebastiani añade que era descendiente de los reyes Leovigildo y Recaredo, aunque parece que esta última afirmación, como ha señalado Sánchez Albornoz, se debe más a un propósito deliberado de enaltecer a la dinastía entonces reinante.

Bibl.: “Crónica Sebastiani”, en A. Huici, Las Crónicas Latinas de la Reconquista, Valencia, Hijos de F. Vives Mora, 1913, pág. 214; M. Gómez Moreno (ed.), “Crónica Albeldense”, en Boletín de la Academia de la Historia, t. C (1932), pág. 601; A. Ubieto (ed.), Crónica Rotense, en Crónica de Alfonso III, Valencia, Anubar, 1971 (col. Textos Medievales 3), pág. 35; C. Sánchez Albornoz, “Pelayo antes de Covadonga”, en Los Orígenes de la Nación española. El reino de Asturias, Oviedo, Instituto de Estudios Asturianos, 1974-1975, 3 vols., pág. 80, nota 31.

Jaime de Salazar y Acha


=Links=

* http://dbe.rah.es/biografias/34424/pedro
* https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Asturian_monarchs
* https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Astur-Leonese_dynasty
* https://www.miteco.gob.es/en/biodiversidad/servicios/banco-datos-naturaleza/cantabria_tcm38-281074.pdf
* https://es.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ducado_de_Cantabria

=Sources=

* Evidence of Pre-Roman Tribal Genetic Structure in Basques from Uniparentally Inherited Markers - https://academic.oup.com/mbe/article/29/9/2211/1077096
*The Granada Venegas Family, 1431-1643: Nobility, Renaissance and Morisco Identity By Elizabeth ... - Spotlight exhibits at the UC Berkeley Library - University of California, Berkeley - https://digitalassets.lib.berkeley.edu/etd/ucb/text/Terry_berkeley_0028E_15426.pdf
* Ruins of the City of Cantabria Archived on October 30, 2004 at the Wayback Machine . In the background, the current town of Logroño.
* González Echegaray, 1976 , pp. 61-94.
* Barbero and Vigil Pascual, 1974 , pp. 87-89.
* Zurita and Iglesias Gil, 2000 , pp. 60-61.
* Zurita and Iglesias Gil, 2000 , p. 65.
* Larramendi, 1736 .
* Godoy Alcántara, 1868 , pp. 267 and following.
* Rivero Sierra, 2011 , p. 43.
* A b Gutiérrez Coronel, 1785 .
* Cossío and Celis, 1688 .
* Aja Sánchez et al, 2008 , p. 254.
* Zurita and Iglesias Gil, 2000 , pp. 43-46.
* A b Del Rivero Sierra, Borja (2011). "Heraldry and genealogy (false) of the Dukes of Cantabria". ASCAGEN 5 : 43-44.
* Zurita and Castro, Gerónimo (1999). Iglesias Gil, José Manuel, ed. Cantabria, description of its true limits . Santander: PUbliCan. p. 68. ISBN 978-84-8102-247-6 .
* Rivero Sierra, 2011 , pp. 43–49.
* Marroquín, Armando Besga (January 1, 2006). "Cantabria in the VIII century" . Apocalypse: the historical cycle of Beato de Liébana: exhibition catalog, Santillana del Mar, Casas del Aguila y la Parra, June 30 to September 3, 2006, 2006, ISBN 84-87616-96-8 , pp. 91-106 (Ministry of Culture, Tourism and Sports, Government of Cantabria): 91-106. ISBN 8487616968 . Retrieved January 7, 2017 .

----

Pedro da Cantábria Duque da Cantábria

Ducado da Cantábria Nome completo Pedro da Cantábria

Cantábria Morte c. 730

Cantábria

Pedro da Cantábria (m. ca. 730) foi dux de Cantábria.[1] Naquela época, o título de duque não era necessariamente hereditário e designava qualquer pessoa que comandasse tropas. Na Crónica de Afonso III o termo duque tinha o significado de duque territoriais e de chefe.[2] Pedro era o governante de uma das oito províncias do Reino Visigótico de Toledo[3]

Biografia

Até ao século XIX, com base nos cronistas antigos, acreditava-se ser o filho de Ervígio rei visigodo, no entanto, não existe nenhuma prova documentada. Segundo a Crónica Albeldense e a versão Rotensis da Crónica de Afonso III Pedro era de exregni prosapiem, ou seja, de estirpe real visigoda.[3]

Em 711-712, Tárique e seu exército omíada conquistou Amaya, a capital do ducado da Cantábria. Depois da vitória das tropas lideradas por Pelágio na batalha de Covadonga no verão de 722, o conde Pedro enviou a seu filho Afonso para colaborar com o chefe militar asturiano.[4]

Descendência

Peña Amaya, antiga capital do ducado da Cantábria. Não se sabe o nome de sua ou suas esposas somente de Munia Gonsendes, sua amante. Pedro teve dois filhos e uma filha:[5]

Afonso I das Astúrias (ca. 693 - 757) "o Católico" foi Rei das Astúrias por seu matrimónio com Ermesinda, a filha de Pelágio das Astúrias.[6] Com outra mulher desconhecida teve:

Fruela da Cantábria ou Fruela Perez (m. ca. 758). Foi um Duque da Cantábria [7][8] Com a amante Munia Gonsendes teve:

Menina Gonsendes da Cantábria (ca. 710 - 767) que morreu solteira e sem descendentes

Referências ↑ Martínez Díez 2004, p. 25. ↑ Besga Marroquín 2000, p. 189. ↑ Ir para: a b Martínez Díez 2004, p. 66. ↑ Martínez Díez 2004, p. 68. ↑ Besga Marroquín 2000, p. 190. ↑ Martínez Díez 2004, p. 65. ↑ Martínez Díez 2004, p. 108. ↑ Besga Marroquí 2000, p. 190.

Bibliografia Besga Marroquín, Armando (2000). Orígenes hispanogodos del Reino de Asturias (em espanhol). Oviedo: Real Instituto de Estudios Asturianos. ISBN 8489645418

Martínez Díez, Gonzalo (2004). El Condado de Castilla(711-1038): la historia frente a la leyenda (em espanhol). Valladolid: Junta de Castilla y León. ISBN 84-89718-275-8 Verifique |isbn= (ajuda)

https://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pedro,_duque_da_Cantábria

----

Pedro Balhes was one of the sons of King Ervigio of the Visigoths of Spain, boasted of having many chroniclers, by Salazar y Castro, Author of the Genealogical Table of Kings of Spain, Another source is the Contemporary Chronicles of King D.Alfonso III, the Great where his ancestry was refried.

----
===Research notes

https://thesignsofthetimes.com.au/31/69906.htm


[http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/ASTURIAS,%20LEON.htm#PedroDuqueCantabria '''Project Medlands''', '''ASTURIAS & LEON, KINGS'''] v4.0 Updated 28 February 2019. Chapter 1. KINGS of ASTURIAS 718-914


'''PEDRO''', son of [ERVIGIO King of the Visigoths & his wife Liubigotona].

Salazar y Castro, in his genealogical table of the Visigothic kings, shows "Veremundo Duque de Cantabria" and "Pedro Duque de Cantabria" as the sons of King Ervigio. The primary sources on which these statements are based are not specified. The table includes numerous errors and the information should therefore be viewed with caution. The Chronicle of Alfonso III describes Pedro´s son, Alfonso I King of Asturias, as "of the royal line" without specifying his ancestry. The Historia Silense names "Petrus ex Recaredi…Gotorum principis progenie", although Pedro's descent from King Recaredo I cannot be established. When recording the succession of "roi Alphonse, fils de Pedro", Ibn-Khaldun states that, according to Ibn-Haiyan, he descended "des Goths" but that "à mon avis cette opinion est erronée". '''It is possible that this alleged family relationship with the Visigoths was an invention by later genealogists wishing to fill information gaps left by the primary sources.''' His name suggests Greek, and by extension Roman, origin.

[Duque de Cantabria]: the Chronica Albeldense records him as “Petri Cantabriæ ducis”. .The historical basis for supposing that there was a "Dukedom of Cantabria" under the Visigoths is unclear.

The name of Pedro's wife is not known. An indication of her family is provided by the charter dated 11 Nov 741 under which [her son] “Aldefonsus rex et uxor mea Hermesendis regina” donated various churches to “Adulfo abbati...domino meo et avunculo meo...qui in monasterio Beatæ Mariæ de Covadonga”, although this charter is classified as “faux” by Barrau-Dihigo. The family origin of Abbot Adaulf has not otherwise been traced. 1


[Duque] Pedro & his wife had [two] children:
* 1. ALFONSO ([705/10]-[757], bur Santa María). … The Chronicle of Alfonso III states that, after the death of Fáfila (his brother-in-law, in 739), he was elected to succeed as ALFONSO I "el Católico" King of Asturias[68]. … m (before 737) ERMESINDA de Asturias, daughter of PELAYO King of Asturias & his wife Gaudiosa ---.
* 2. FRUELA (-[765]). The Historia Silense records that "Petrus ex Recaredi…Gotorum principis progenie" had "duos filios…Adefonsum…et Froylam"[131]. The Chronicle of Alfonso III names "Fruela" as brother of Alfonso, when recording that they "took many cities in battle"[132]. m ---. The name of Fruela's wife is not known. Fruela & his wife had [three] children: …

----


SOURCES:

Álvarez Palenzuela, Vicente A. (2002). Historia de España de la Edad Media. Ariel. p. 38. ISBN 9788434466685.

Álvarez Palenzuela, Vicente A. (2002). Historia de España de la Edad Media. Ariel. p. 39. ISBN 9788434466685.

Bronisch, Alexander Pierre (2011). «Precisiones sobre algunas informaciones históricas en la "Crónica de Alfonso III"». Edad Media: revista de historia (Universidad de Valladolid: Servicio de Publicaciones) (12). ISSN 1138-9621.

Fouracre, Paul (2005). The New Cambridge Medieval History, c.500 - c.700 (in English) 1. Cambridge University Press. P. 362. ISBN 9780521853606.

[http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/VANDALS,%20SUEVI,%20VISIGOTHS.htm#ErvigiosonofArdabastodied687B '''Project MedLands, VANDALS, SUEVI and VISIGOTHS'''] 1. '''ERVIGIO''' ([643]-Toledo 15 Nov 687). … married ([662]) LIUBIGOTONA, daughter of ---. Ervigio & his wife had [three or more] children: … d) ['''PEDRO'''. Salazar y Castro, in his genealogical table of the Visigothic kings, shows "Veremundo Duque de Cantabria" and "Pedro Duque de Cantabria" as the sons of King Ervigio[377]. The primary sources on which these statements are based are not specified. The table includes numerous errors and the information should therefore be viewed with caution. The Chronicle of Alfonso III describes his son, Alfonso I King of Asturias, as "of the royal line" without specifying his ancestry[378]. The Historia Silense names "Petrus ex Recaredi…Gotorum principis progenie"[379], although Pedro's descent from King Recaredo I cannot be established. It is assumed that this alleged family relationship with the Visigoths is another example of an invention by later genealogists wishing to fill the information gaps left by the primary sources. Duque de Cantabria[380].]

Duque de Cantabria

Durante el reinado de Ervigio (680-687) se constituye el Ducado de Cantabria, a cuyo frente esta un "dux" o duque. La capital debió situarse en la ciudad de Amaya (hoy Palencia) y las dimensiones probablemente abarcaban un teritorio mucho mayor.
De la escasa implantación que tuvo el reino visigodo en la región cántabra, cabe destacar como personaje más importante a Pedro, gobernador del ducado de Cantabria.
Durante aquel ducado tendría continuidad la introducción del cristianismo en Cantabria que ya había penetrado tímidamente durante el dominio del Imperio Romano.
Amaya es destruida en el año 714 durante la conquista musulmana, lo que motivó que los nobles visigodos, con el duque Pedro al frente, huyeran al norte, donde se asentaron. Con la victoria de Pelayo, noble visigodo astur,sobre los musulmanes en la batalla de Covadonga en el año 722 comienza la Reconquista de la Península.
Pelayo y Pedro mediante un acuerdo fusionan sus territorios, contrayendo matrimonio Alfonso, hijo de Pedro y Ermesinda, hija de Pelayo. De esta manera Alfonso se convierte en el primer Rey de Asturias.

Duque de Cantabria

Durante el reinado de Ervigio (680-687) se constituye el Ducado de Cantabria, a cuyo frente esta un "dux" o duque. La capital debió situarse en la ciudad de Amaya (hoy Palencia) y las dimensiones probablemente abarcaban un teritorio mucho mayor.
De la escasa implantación que tuvo el reino visigodo en la región cántabra, cabe destacar como personaje más importante a Pedro, gobernador del ducado de Cantabria.
Durante aquel ducado tendría continuidad la introducción del cristianismo en Cantabria que ya había penetrado tímidamente durante el dominio del Imperio Romano.
Amaya es destruida en el año 714 durante la conquista musulmana, lo que motivó que los nobles visigodos, con el duque Pedro al frente, huyeran al norte, donde se asentaron. Con la victoria de Pelayo, noble visigodo astur,sobre los musulmanes en la batalla de Covadonga en el año 722 comienza la Reconquista de la Península.
Pelayo y Pedro mediante un acuerdo fusionan sus territorios, contrayendo matrimonio Alfonso, hijo de Pedro y Ermesinda, hija de Pelayo. De esta manera Alfonso se convierte en el primer Rey de Asturias.

SOURCE NOTES:
www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal10112

RESEARCH NOTES:
Duke of Cantabria. 2 Children

Also known as Pedro, Peter, Pero, Peres. Brother of King Ervigor, (Ervigio).
The Perez dynasty is named after this Peres. He ruled Asturias, Galicia and Leon from the succession of Alfonso the Catholic, (Vimara), the son of Pero, Duke of Cantabria. The dynasty died with, Bermudo II of Leon, born 1025, ruled from 1050 through 1071. He died at Braga at the battle of Pedroso. (Peres, Pedro's land.)
Sources:
1: Collins, Roger. Visigothic Spain, 409-711.
Blackwell publishing 2004.
2: King, P.D., King Chindasuinth and the first territorial law code of the Visigothic kingdon.
Edward James-Oxford-Clarendon Press 1980, PP. 131-157.

Apontado como filho de Ervígio Favila e Liubigotona Balthes pelas pela Genealogia de Ricardo Luchin, entretanto há uma referência na Wikipédia espanhola que diz que até o sec XIX, baseando-se em antigos cronistas, se acreditava que ele era filho de Ervígio, mas alguns historiadores e genealogistas de hoje em dia (fim sec XX e início sec XXI) colocam esse dado em dúvida. Se desconhece o nome de sua ou suas esposas. A wikipédia em inglês vai um pouco além, apontando para o fato dele ser "ex semine Leuvigildi et Reccaredi progenitus" (descendente da linha de sangue de Luivigild e Reccared I) mas não dando informações adicionais.

He lived about 700.

1 NAME the Visigoth //
2 GIVN the Visigoth
2 SURN
2 NICK the Visigoth

1 NAME the Visigoth //
2 GIVN the Visigoth
2 SURN
2 NICK the Visigoth

1 NAME the Visigoth //
2 GIVN the Visigoth
2 SURN
2 NICK the Visigoth

Visgothic leader

Visgothic leader

Visgothic leader

On 15 Dec 1997, Todd Farmerie posted the ancestry of TERESA ALFONSO (RIN 2401) based on the latest research. This generation is confirmed in that posting. Farmerie refers to Pedro as Duke of Calabria.

"Todd A. Farmerie" posted to soc.genealogy.medieval on 20 Nov 1996: Subject: Re: Descendants of Don Pelayo? "Let me first address the link with the Visigoths. PELAYO (RIN 4930) and Pedro were cousins and members of the Visigoth nobility. Beyond that is speculation. That either was grandson or nephew of one of the Kings is unlikely. One source does call PELAYO a son of Fafila, majordomo, which is not unlikely considering the name of his son (but we must be careful that it is not a case of invention, chosing the known name of his son for his father). There is one document (undated but 6th/7th century in style) in the collection of the monastery of Liebana (which the Asturian royals patronized) that has attracted attention. It allows a pedigree to be compiled which shows a Fafila as uncle of a Pedro (matching the tradition of Pedro and PELAYO being cousins if Fafila was PELAYO's father), and also including several other names later found in the royal family (Silo, Gutina, etc.). This may enable Pelayo and Pedro to be traced back three additional generations (probably not all in the male line) to a Benedict, patron of Liebana (Pedro having two lines, his parents being first cousins - another tradition the Spanish royals maintain). Now, to address the possible descent from PELAYO, let me first say that the pedigrees of several noble families trace them to various members of this family, such as Silo, son-in-law of Alf I, and Mauregato, bastard of ALFONSO I, and younger brothers of VERMUDO I or Pedro. All of these are invented, and should be rejected. The only possible descent is through the royals, and there was general acceptance that the descent ran similar to what you have described - RAMIRO I, son of VERMUDO I, son of DUKE FRUELA, son of DUKE PEDRO. However, this has recently been questioned. A reexamination of the original sources shows two that provide a relationship for VERMUDO. They agree that he was son of the brother of King Alfonso, but which King Alfonso. In fact, the older of the two calls VERMUDO son of FRUELA, brother of Alfonso II, but older historians chose the later source, which identifies the uncle as ALFONSO I. The chronology of this solution has always been problematic, as has mention of the nephew of ALFONSO I as a monk. Szabolcs de Vajay, in his recent charts summarizing the connections of the spanish royalty and nobility, discusses it briefly, and returns to the earlier source, showing the descent as:

Pelayo Ermesinda = Alfonso I (son of Pedro) Fruela I Fruela (brother of Alfonso II) Vermudo I Ramiro

My only complaint with this is that it would represent the only example that I have seen in these early families of a son being named after his father, but with Alfonso II a minor at the death of his father, this brother could have been posthumous, which in other contemporary cultures (Old English and Scandinavian) explains most of the documented examples. The chronology is definitely better than the alternative. Let me just add that ALFONSO III (who holds a position as a scholar and historian king equal to that of ALFRED THE GREAT), grandson of RAMIRO I, described Alfonso II by a term which would fit the brother of an ancestor but not someone so distant as a second cousin, which would be the case were FRUELA brother of ALFONSO I rather than II."

Ronald F. Malan in "The Ancestry of Dhuoda, Duchess of Septimania" in the Spring 1997 issue (vol. 11, no. 1) of The Genealogist, identifies Pedro as the father of FRUELA.

Pedro fue Duque de Cantabria en 700 y padre de
Fruela I y
Alonso "El Católico", Rey de Asturias y yerno de Pelayo
Del libro de Armando Cotarelo sobre Alfonso III El Magno (Oviedo, 1ª edición del año 1914 y reeditado en 1991) con prólogo de Manuel Fraga Iribarne, del que recojo estas conclusiones:

"El verdadero tronco de los antiguos monarcas de la Reconquista, fue Pedro, duque de Cantabria... En tiempos de los Reyes Egica y Witiza ejerció el cargo de capitán general de la milia, en el 687 ascendió a Duque al frente de la provincia de Cantabria; ayudó poderosamente a Pelayo en sus empresas y, por último, estrechó con él su parentesco mediante el matrimonio de sus hijos, realizándose así la unión de Cantabria con el naciente reino cristiano" (pág. 31).

Rootsweb Feldman
URL: http://worldconnect.genealogy.rootsweb.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=:3044567&id=I01081
# ID: I01081
# Name: Duke Of Cantabria PEDRO 1 2 3 4 5
# Sex: M
# Birth: 650 1 2 3 4 5
# Change Date: 15 JAN 2004 5
# Change Date: 25 DEC 2001 2 3 4 5
# Note:

[Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED]

2 SOUR S332582
3 DATA
4 TEXT Date of Import: 14 Jan 2004


[daveanthes.FTW]

#Générale# Duc de Cantabrique en 700.

DATE 5 MAY 2000


NSFX ; Visigothic leader descended from the ings of Toledo, Leovigildo and Ricaredo
TYPE Book
AUTH ESS
PERI Europaische Stammtafeln
EDTR Schwennicke, Detlev
TEXT ii:1984:49-50
TYPE Book
AUTH Stuart, Roderick W.
PERI Royalty for Commoners
EDTN 3d
PUBL Genealogical Publishing co., Inc, Baltimore, MD (1998)
ISB 0-8063-1561-X
TEXT 276-43
DATE 29 MAY 2000[Spare.FTW]

Father: King Of The Visigoths ERVIK b: 610
Mother: Princess Of The Visigoths LIUBIGOTONA b: 615

Marriage 1 Princess Of Asturias HERMESINDA b: 680

Children

1. Has Children Alphonse Ier Le Catholique DE CANTABRE b: ABT 695
2. Has Children Duke Of Cantabria FRUELA I b: 720


Sources:

1. Title: daveanthes.FTW
Note: ABBR daveanthes.FTW
Note: Source Media Type: Other
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Book
Text: Date of Import: 14 Jan 2004
2. Title: daveanthes.FTW
Note: ABBR daveanthes.FTW
Note: Source Media Type: Other
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Book
Text: Date of Import: Jan 13, 2004
3. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Jan 18, 2004
4. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: 21 Jan 2004
5. Title: Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Feb 6, 2004

Name Prefix:<NPFX> Duke Name Suffix:<NSFX> of Cantabria

Name Prefix:<NPFX> Duke Name Suffix:<NSFX> of Cantabria

-- MERGED NOTE ------------

Wikidata: https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q2192525 | Geni: https://www.geni.com/people/6000000003742102823

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]