== Notes for [[Item:Q99672|Q99672]] ==

Natronai was essential to the success of Charles Martel at the Battle of Poitiers. The Caliph of al-Andalus, an Arab named Yusuf ibn Abd al-Rahman, assisted Charles Martel in the battle against Berbers. This afforded great freedoms for Jews aligned with Yusuf ibn Abd al-Rahman. After the Battle of Poitiers, Yusuf ibn Abd al-Rahman was appointed governor of Narbonne according to the Chronicle of Moissac, where he was in command of military operations. During four years he is said to have raided and pillaged the Lower Rhone, and in 735 he took Arles.

According to Yehudah ben Barzilai (Sefer ha’Ittim), “it was Natronai ben Hakhinai who wrote down the Talmud from memory” using no text as a “master” copy. To clarify, Natroani ben Hakhina, according to Yehudah ben Barzilai recalled the entire Talmud from memory. Yehudah does not disclose whether it was Talmud Bavli or Talmud Yerushalmi – yet this writer presumes Talmud Bavli since Yehuday “Natronai” ben Naḥman Gaon used Talmud Bavli.

During the time of Natronai ibn Hakhinai’s emergence as leader in Carcassonne/Narbonne, the Syrian Junds arrived to fight under Balj ibn Bishr al-Qushayri who was a Syrian Arab military commander in North Africa and Iberia, and briefly ruler of al-Andalus in 742 in order to “Orientalize” southern Spain – from Cordoba. Shortly after control of al-Andalus was turned over to the Syrian Balj ibn Bishr al-Qushayri, Arabian Umayyah bin Abdul Malik and Qatn bin Abdul Malik (both sons of Abdul Malik ibn Qatn Fahr) started making secret plans against Balj ibn Bishr al-Qushayri. Yusuf bin Abdur Rahman, the Governor of Narbonne along with the Arabized Berbers all agreed join the two sons to battle against Balj ibn Bishr al-Qushayri. Two enormous Muslim armies of over 10,000 men each, went to war. Balj ibn Bishr al-Qushayri was seriously injured and died shortly thereafter. The Syrian named Balj ibn Bishr al-Qushayri ruled al-Andalus for eleven months. After his death, Syrians, Berbers and Arabs jointly agreed upon a Yemenite, Thalba bin Salamah, as new ruler of al-Andalus. This didn’t work out well for either Arabs of Yemenites. Thalba bin Salamah was deposed within a year.

Yusuf bin Abdur Rahman Fihri, the Governor of Narbonne, was appointed Ruler of al-Andalus in 751 CE. He split al-Andalus into four provinces while the French Territories became the fifth province:

1. Andalusia Corbova, Carmona, Seville, Sidonia, Malaga, Ilbira, Jaen 2. Toledo Ubeda, Boeza, Marbella, Villena, Valencia 3. Merida Merida, Lisbon, Badajoz, Salamanca 4. Saragossa Saragossa, Tarragona, Barcelona, Lerida 5. Arbonia Narbonne, Tolousse, Pamplona, Lugo

This marked the rise of Abassids over Syrians. But please note that a Syrian presence in Nasrid controlled Granada, al-Andalus, is documented until expulsion in 1492.

The Father of Natronai, ''''Habibai' ben Natronai, Exilarch of Pumbeditha & Carcassonne''' was born abt 683 in Pumbedita, Babylon, yet died 775 CE in Saint Etienne, Loire, Rhone-Alpes, France. Habibai was elected leader of the Jews of Carcassone. When Nasrids attacked Carcassone, Habibai contacted the Duke of Marseilles for help – none was offered. Habibai contacted Charles Martel and enlisted his help thus pledging organized Jewish support for Charles Martel to destroy Marseilles and stop the advance of Syrian Yusuf bin Abdar Rahman; later, in preparation for the Battle of Poitiers in the Loire Valley of France, Habibai would perform the same function for Charles Martel. So begins the allegiance between Jews of Narbonne and the Carolingian Empire – and opposition to both by Muslims and Jews of Arab lands (Syria notably). This event set the stage for later relations between the Jews of Andalusia (of arab lands) and Jews of Catalonia, France and Germany (of christian lands).

“The History of Islam, Volume 3” By Akbar Shāh K̲h̲ān Najībābādī, Ṣafī al-Raḥmān Mubārakfūrī, Abdul Rahman Abdullah

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD7E4E531EFBBFA9822EF79916C1A87
geni:6000000025756153315

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]