== Notes for [[Item:Q111676|Q111676]] ==

----

===Origins

https://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/Galicia.htm#ElviraAriasMMunioGutierrez

2. ARIAS Menéndez (-before 924). … m ERMESINDA, daughter of ---. Her marriage is confirmed by the charter dated 11 Jun 962 under which “Giloyra” donated property inherited “inter germanos meos” from “genitoris et genitricis mee Ariani ducis et Hermesinde auctrix cometisse” to Celanova[326]. same person as …? ERMESINDA Gundesíndez, daughter of GUNDESINDO Eriz & his wife Enderquina Menéndez. This co-identity is proposed by Mattoso[327]. ….

Arias & his wife had [three or more] children:



b) ELVIRA Arias (-after 11 Jun 962). Her parentage and marriage are confirmed by the charter dated 11 Jun 962 under which “Giloyra” donated property inherited “inter germanos meos” from “genitoris et genitricis mee Ariani ducis et Hermesinde auctrix cometisse” to Celanova for the soul of “viri mei Munnionis”, confirmed by “Arias episcopus” who names the donor “mee genitricis”[330]. m her first cousin, conde MUNIO Gutiérrez, son of conde GUTIERRE Menéndez & his wife Ilduara Eriz (-[959/60]).

===Family

https://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/Galicia.htm#MunioGutierrezdied959

Gutierre Menéndez & his wife had five children:

1. MUNIO Gutiérrez (-[959/60]). Conde 911-955. … m his first cousin, ELVIRA Arias, daughter of conde ARIAS Menéndez & his wife Ermesinda Gundesíndiz (-after 11 Jun 962).

Munio & his wife had six children:

* a) GUTIERRE Muñoz (-[999]). … m ---. The name of Gutierre's wife is not known.
* b) ARIAS Muñoz (-973). Conde. … Bishop of Dumio 948/956
* c) GOTO Muñoz (-after 1 Mar 963). … m (before 927) SANCHO Ordóñez, son of ORDOÑO II King of León & his first wife Elvira Menéndez ([890/93] or later-929).
* d) ERMESINDA Muñoz (-after 962).
* e) ELVIRA Muñoz (-after 986).
* f) GONZALO Muñoz (-[982/84]). … m his first cousin, MUNIADOMNA Fróilaz, daughter of conde FRUELA Gutiérrez & his wife Sarracina ---.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]