== Notes for [[Item:Q88748|Q88748]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shammuramat

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semiramis

The historical Assyrian queen Shammuramat (Semiramis), wife of Shamshi-Adad V of Assyria, certainly existed. After her husband's death, she served as regent from 810 - 806 BC for her son, Adad-nirari III. Shammuramat would have thus been briefly in control of the vast Neo Assyrian Empire, which 150 years later stretched from the Caucasus Mountains in the north to the Arabian Peninsula in the south, and western Iran in the east to Cyprus in the west. ￼

Georges Roux speculated that the later Greek and Indo-Iranian (Persian and Median) flavoured myths surrounding Semiramis stem from successful campaigns she waged against these peoples, and the novelty of a woman ruling such an empire.

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per02158.htm#0

RESEARCH NOTES:
Queen of Assyria; ruled (w/son after husband's death) 811-808 BCE

Sammuramat
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Sammuramat was Queen of Assyria 811 BC–808 BC.
Contents
[hide]

* 1 Legend
* 2 Historical View
* 3 Other Views
* 4 Legacy

[edit]

Legend

Legend tells that she was born in the desert and raised by doves. Sammuramat, or Semiramis, was the Queen of Assyria and the legendary wife of Nimrod. She was famed for her beauty, and even more so for her military insight that won many battles and conquered many cities. Some believe her to have begun goddess worship, with herself as the original Ishtar. Legend and truth are hard to distinguish.

Other legends have it that she was born of the goddess Atargatis, that her army attacked and killed the sun-god Er, or that she was born because a vengeful Astarte caused the goddess Derceto (a mermaid-goddess) to fall in love with a Syrian boy named Caystrus, so that Derceto abandoned the child to the doves in shame.
[edit]

Historical View

All of these things aside, historical fact mentions that the widow of King Shamshi-Adad V reigned for three years on the throne of Babylon. Everything else is based in Greek lore and historically unreliable.

The way the Greeks have it, Semiramis was the wife of Biblical Nimrod of Assyria/Sumeria, and was astoundingly beautiful. She always wore around her neck a silver charm in the shape of a very arrow-like dove, given to her by her first husband, and men were driven to madness by the sight of her beauty. She was discovered by shepherds after being raised by the doves, and the Kin'’s advisor, Menos, passing through for inspections, noticed her charms and took her and married her. In some versions, they have twins, Hyapate and Hydaspe.

After Menos had one day sent for her on the battlefield, Semiramis displayed her military genius by attacking the flank of the besieged city with mountaineers, therefore winning the city for the king. King Ninus was so impressed that he first coaxed and then coerced Menos to give Semiramis to him, after which he committed suicide. With Ninus she had a son named Ninyas. Ninus was much older and extremely jealous, and after many years under his roof, Semiramis, the apple of his eye, asked permission to rule for just one day. After Ninus agreed and Semiramis was crowned over him, she had him executed and continued to rule forcefully and intelligently for the next 42 years.
[edit]

Other Views

In other versions, after Sammuramat had an illegitimate son whom she named Damu (Dammuzi, Tammuz, Adonis) and was enstranged from her husband Nimrod (Ninus), she was nonetheless given permission to oversee a religious festival of a cult that she herself had started. In the ceremony, a ram was traditionally torn to pieces at the bare hands of high (read: drugged-out) priesthood, however Sammuramat slyly switched Nimrod for the ram, and he was killed instead. She then crowned her infant son and reigned as his regent for 42 years.
[edit]

Legacy

During her reign she is credited with both numerous military conquests and the hanging gardens of Babylon. Her life ended when her son (either Ninyas or Damu, depending on the legend) came against her and killed her, taking over the throne. The mythology of Queen Semiramis is so intertwined with that of her husband, Alexander the Great, future and previous rulers of Babylon and other great people, that it is difficult to determine how much the Greeks made up for our enjoyment. Whatever the case, it is possible to discern that Semiramis/ Sammu-ramat was an Angel of Light, described in many legends as both exceedingly beautiful and exceedingly cruel. She was deified by the ancient Chaldeans, and led them down a path increasingly dark and corrupt. The Queen of Babylon did a good imitation of the Woman of Babylon, found it Revelation 17:5 (KJV) “And upon her forehead was a name written, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH.” She became regent after the death of her husband, King Shamshi-Adad V and left a powerful impression of splendor and prosperity. She is credited with rebuilding the city of Babylon and many monuments and personal inscriptions.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]