== Notes for [[Item:Q91455|Q91455]] ==

'''שמעון התרסי''' (או שמעון הַתַּסִּי לפי ספר החשמונאים וגם שמעון התטי לפי יוסף בן מתתיהו בספר קדמוניות היהודים; ? - 134 לפנה"ס) היה כהן גדול ונשיא היהודים החל משנת 143 לפנה"ס. הוא היה בן לשושלת החשמונאים, בנו השני של מתתיהו הכהן.

--------------------------

[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simon_Thassi '''Simon Thassi'''] (died 135 BCE) was the second son of Mattathias and thus a member of the Hasmonean family. The name "Thassi" has an uncertain meaning ("the Director", "the Guide", "the Man of Counsel", and "the Zealous" are all possible meanings of the term)

He took part in the Jewish revolt against the Seleucid Empire led by his brothers, Judas Maccabaeus and Jonathan Maccabaeus. He became the first prince of the Hebrew Hasmonean Dynasty. He reigned from 142 to 135 BC.

The Hasmonean Dynasty was founded by a resolution, adopted in 141 BCE, at a large assembly "of the priests and the people and of the elders of the land, to the effect that Simon should be their leader and high priest forever, until there should arise a faithful prophet" (1 Maccabees xiv. 41).

Recognition of the new dynasty by the Roman Republic was accorded by the Senate about 139 BCE, when the delegation of Simon was in Rome. Simon made the Jewish people semi-independent of the Seleucid Empire.

In February 135 BCE, he was assassinated at the instigation of his son-in-law Ptolemy, son of Abubus. Simon was followed by his third son, John Hyrcanus, whose two elder brothers, Mattathias and Judah, had been murdered, together with their father.

[http://he.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D7%A9%D7%9E%D7%A2%D7%95%D7%9F_%D7%94%D7%AA%D7%A8%D7%A1%D7%99 '''שמעון התרסי]'''

--------------------

[http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I64694 '''Simon Thassi''' rootsweb]

--------------------
Simon III (Thassi) Hasmonean Birth: estimated between 260BCE and 200BCE Immediate Family: Husband of Rabbi Yossel ben Yohanan Father of Yohanan (John) I Hyrcanus Added by: Gerene Mae JENSEN on August 23, 2015 Managed by: Gerene Mae Mason (Jensen)

Mihály László FARKAS (08-10-2015): I disconnected from his "male spouse"

--------------------
'''
=Simon Thassi=
'''

Simon Maccabeus (also referred to as Simon Thassi, Hebrew: שמעון התרסי; died 135 BC) was the second son of Mattathias and thus a member of the Hasmonean family. The name "Thassi" has an uncertain meaning ("the Director", "the Guide", "the Man of Counsel", and "the Zealous" are all possible meanings of the term)

'''History'''

He took a prominent part in the Jewish revolt against the Seleucid Empire led by his brothers, Judas Maccabaeus and Jonathan Maccabaeus. The successes of the Jews rendered it expedient for the pretenders to the throne of Syria to show them special favor, and therefore Antiochus VI. appointed Simon strategus, or military commander, of the coast region from the Ladder of Tyre to Egypt. As strategus Simon conquered the cities of Beth-zur and Joppa, garrisoning them with Jewish troops, and built the fortress of Adida in the plain.

After the capture of Jonathan, Simon was elected leader by the people, assembled at Jerusalem; he at once completed the fortification of the capital, and made Joppa secure by expelling its Gentile inhabitants and filling it with Jews (I Macc. xiii. 8, 10, 11; "Ant." xiii. 6, § 4). At Hadid he blocked the advance of the treacherous Trypho, who was attempting to enter the country and seize the throne of Syria. Since Trypho could gain nothing by force, he demanded a ransom for Jonathan and the surrender of Jonathan's sons as hostages. Although Simon was fully aware that Trypho would deceive him, he acceded to both demands, so that the people might see that he had done everything possible for his brother. Jonathan was nevertheless treacherously assassinated, and the hostages were not returned. Simon thus became the sole leader of the people.

As the opponent of Trypho, Simon had every reason to side with Demetrius II., to whom he sent a deputation requesting freedom from taxation for the country. The fact that his request was granted implied the recognition of the political independence of Judea.

He became the first prince of the Hebrew Hasmonean Dynasty. He reigned from 142 to 135 BC.

The Hasmonean Dynasty was founded by a resolution, adopted in 141 BCE, at a large assembly "of the priests and the people and of the elders of the land, to the effect that Simon should be their leader and high priest forever, until there should arise a faithful prophet"

Recognition of the new dynasty by the Roman Republic was accorded by the Senate about 139 BCE, when the delegation of Simon was in Rome. Simon made the Jewish people semi-independent of the Seleucid Empire.

In February 135 BC, he was assassinated at the instigation of his son-in-law and rival Ptolemy, son of Abubus. Simon was followed by his third son, John Hyrcanus, whose two elder brothers, Mattathias and Judah, had been murdered, together with their father.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simon_Thassi

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per01356.htm#0

RESEARCH NOTES:
King and high priest of Judea; Ruled 144-135 BCE

Bible Dictionary page 701 - Herod

See note for Herod Rin 7802

Bible Dictionary page 701 - Herod

See note for Herod Rin 7802

OR "SIMON MACCABEAUS"; HIGH PRIEST 142 BC-134 BC

Simon Tharsi (Thassi) Maccabeaus ben Mattathias ben Johanan

Simon Maccabaeus
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.

Simon Maccabaeus (died 135 BCE) was a son of Mattathias Maccabaeus and thus a member of the Maccabees family.

He took part in the Jewish revolt against the Seleucid Empire led by his brothers, Judas Maccabaeus and Jonathan Maccabaeus. He became the first king of the Hebrew Hasmonean Dynasty. He reigned from 142 to 135 BC.

The Hasmonean Dynasty was founded by a resolution, adopted in 141 BCE, at a large assembly "of the priests and the people and of the elders of the land, to the effect that Simon should be their leader and high priest forever, until there should arise a faithful prophet" (1 Maccabees xiv. 41).

Recognition of the new dynasty by the Roman Republic was accorded by the Senate about 139 BC, when the delegation of Simon was in Rome. Simon made the Jewish people semi-independent of the Seleucid Empire.

In February 135 BC, he was assassinated at the instigation of his son-in-law Ptolemy. Simon was followed by his third son, John Hyrcanus, whose two elder brothers, Mattathias and Judah, had been murdered, together with their father.

Preceded by:
Jonathan Hasmonean Ruler and High Priest of Judaea
142–135 BC Succeeded by:
John Hyrcanus I

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]