== Notes for [[Item:Q112533|Q112533]] ==

No tenia aun treinta y cinco años, quando junto con su muger Doña Argilo, dió fueros á su Villa de Brañosera, estableciendo en ella un gobierno sabio, que después influyó infinito en el general de Castilla, y le sirvió á él mismo como de norma en el desempeño de su famosa judicatura.

--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nu%C3%B1o_Rasura

Nuño Rasura

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Nuño Rasura and Laín Calvo in fresco at Arco de Santa María of Burgos.

Statue of Nuño Rasura at Arco de Santa María of Burgos.

Wikisource has original text related to this article:

Nuño Núñez Rasura in the Retrato de Españoles ilustres

Nuño Rasura was one of two legendary judges of Castile, the other being his son-in-law Laín Calvo. According to the Mocedades de Rodrigo, Nuño gained the nickname "Rasura" because "he took from Castile equal measures of wheat" to offer as a gift to Church of Saint James.[1] English medievalist Richard A. Fletcher writes that "the legend of the judges has more to tell us of the Castilians' self-image at a later date than of the realities of the ninth century: they liked to think of themselves as sturdy, independent, resourceful, democratic."[2]

The twelfth-century Liber regum and the Poema de Fernán González report that at the end of the ninth century reign of Alfonso II of Asturias (died 842),[3] two judges were named to administer and defend the newly repopulating region that would become Castile. Nuño and Laín are described by the Poema as ancestors, respectively, of Castilian heroes Fernán González of Castile and El Cid. The fullest account of the judges is given in Lucas de Tuy (writing c.1236), who makes Nuño Rasura come from Catalonia. A prudent man, he convinced all the nobles of Castile to send him their sons that he might educate them. He ruled as far as the river Pisuerga. His supposed son, Gonzalo Núñez, was elected to succeed him on his death, and was given the title count. He is said to have married Jimena, daughter of Nuño Fernández, and to have been by her the father of Fernán González.[4] Gonzalo was a just man and a good soldier, who waged many wars with the "tyrannical" Kings of León and the Moors.[5]

It has been suggested that Nuño Rasura is to be identified with a historical Munio Núñez (named as Nuño Núñez in older histories), the early ninth century repoblador who along with wife Argilo in 824 granted certain fueros (charters of privileges) to the village of Brañosera. These grants were confirmed by the later Counts of Castile, the claimed descendants of Rasura. Munio and Argilo are thought to have been grandparents (or more distant ancestors) of Castilian counts Munio Núñez of Castrogeriz and Roa, Gonzalo Fernández of Lara and Nuño Fernández of Amaya, as well as of Muniadomna Núñez, queen to García I of León.

[edit] Notes

1. ^ Matthew Bailey, trans. (2007), Las mocedades de Rodrigo (Toronto: University of Toronto Press), 65. Rasura is akin to Spanish rasar, "to make even".

2. ^ R. A. Fletcher (1989), The Quest for El Cid (New York: Alfred A. Knopf), 59.

3. ^ The Chronicon de Cardeña and Lucas de Tuy narrate that it was during the reign of "King Froila" that Castilians chose judges to govern them. It is unclear if Fruela I of Asturias or Fruela II of León is intended, but neither seems to fit chronologically.

4. ^ This genealogy is at variance with the documentary record. Fernán González was son of count Gonzalo Fernández of Lara by his wife countess Muniadona. Count Gonzalo was apparently brother (not son-in-law) of count Nuño Fernández of Amaya.

5. ^ Lucas's account of Nuño's reign is translated into Spanish in Gonzalo Martínez Díez (2005), El condado de Castilla, 711–1038: La historia frente a la leyenda (Marcial Pons Historia), 284.

This page was last modified on 17 July 2009 at 04:13.

-----------------------------------------------------------

Wikipedia:

http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Haus_Kastilien

Haus Kastilien

aus Wikipedia, der freien Enzyklopädie

Wechseln zu: Navigation, Suche

Das Haus Kastilien ist die Familie der Grafen von Kastilien von Ende des 9. Jahrhunderts bis zum Jahr 1029. Es handelt sich dabei um die relativ kurzlebige Dynastie, die um 925 die Unabhängigkeit vom Königreich León erreichte. Mit dem Tod des Grafen Garcia II. Sanchez 1029 ging Kastilien an den König von Navarra, der seinen Besitz unter seine Söhne verteilte und damit Kastiliens unabhängig nicht antastete. Einer Nebenlinie der Familie entstammt das Haus Lara.

Stammliste [Bearbeiten]

1. Nuño Núñez „Rasura“ el de Branosera, wohl 824 bezeugt, † nach 860; ∞ Argilo

1. Nuño Núñez, 882 el de Castrojeriz genannt, 899/909 Conde de Castilla; ∞ NN, wohl Schwester von Diego Rodriguez, Conde de Castilla (Haus Kantabrien)

1. Nuño Núñez, genannt el de Roa, 914/915 Conde de Castilla

2. Muniadomna, † nach 5. August 935 ; ∞ vor 912 Gonzalo Fernández Conde de Castilla, † 932 (siehe unten)

2. Fernando Núñez Niger (der Schwarze), genannt el de Castrosiero; ∞ Gutina, wohl Tochter von Rodrigo, Conde de Castilla

1. Gonzalo Fernández de Lara, † 932, 910, 916, 930/932 Conde de Castilla, 920/929 verbannt, gründet 902 Lara und 912 Axa, begraben in Cereso de Río Tirón ; ∞ vor 912 Muniadomna, † nach 5. August 935, Tochter von Nuño Núñez, Conde de Castilla (siehe oben), begraben in Santa Maria de Lara

1. Fernán González, * wohl 910, † Juni 970, 929 Conde de Lara, 932/970 Conde de Castilla und Alava ; ∞ I um 932 Sancha Infantin von Navarra, † Dezember 959, Tochter von Sancho I. Garcés, König von Navarra (Haus Jiménez), Witwe von Ordoño II., König von León (Haus Kantabrien), und Alvaro Herrameliz Conde de Alava; ∞ II 960/962 Urraca Infantin von Navarra, † 12. Juli 1041, Tochter von García I. Sánchez, König von Navarra (Haus Jiménez), sie heiratete nach dem 14. Juli 972 Wilhelm (Guillén) I. Herzog von Gascogne, † wohl 997 (Haus Gascogne)

1. (I) Gonzalo Fernández, † nach 959, Conde ; ∞ vor 959 Fronilde Gomez, als Witwe Nonne in Sigüenza, Tochter von Conde Gome und Elduara

1. Sancho Sanchez, † vor 984

2. (I) Sancho Fernández, † nach August 956

3. (I) García I. Fernández, † 18. April/19. Juli 995, 970/995 Conde de Castilla, begraben in Cordoba, erst in der Kirche de los Tres Santos, später in San Pedro de Cerdaña, ∞ 958/961 Ava de Ribagorza, † nach 995, begraben in San Pedro de Cerdaña, Tochter von Raimundo II., Conde de Ribagorza, und Gersenda de Fézensac

1. Mayor Garcia; ∞ Raimundo III. Comte de Pallars (Pailhars), † 1047

2. Sancho García, * wohl 965, † 5. Februar 1017, 995/1017 Conde de Castilla, begraben im Kloster San Salvador de Oña ; ∞ um 994 Urraca Salvadores, † 20. Mai 1025, Tochter von Conde Salvador Perez (siehe unten)

1. Fernando Sanchez, † vor 999

2. Munia Mayor, * 995, † nach 1066 als Nonne ; ∞ um 1010 Sancho III. el Mayor, König von Navarra, † 18. Oktober 1035 (Haus Jiménez)

3. Trigida Sanchez, 1011/29 Äbtissin von San Salvador de Oña

4. Sancha Sanchez, † 26. Juni 1026, begraben in Santa Maria de Ripoll ; ∞ 1021 Berengar Raimund I. Graf von Barcelona, † 26. Mai 1035, begraben in Santa Maria de Ripoll (Haus Barcelona)

5. García II. Sanchez, * 1010, † ermordet 13. Mai 1029, 1026/29 Conde de Castilla, begraben in San Salvador de Oña

6. Jimena Sanchez, † nach 1063 als Nonne in Vega; ∞ 1028 Bermudo III., König von León, X September 1037 (Haus Kantabrien)

3. Urraca García, † ermordet 1039, 978 Señora del Infantado de Covarrubias

4. Gonzalo García, † vor 979

5. Elvira García, † Dezember 1017, 999/1017 Regentin von León, dann Nonne; ∞ 26./30. November 991 Bermudo II., König von León, † 999 (Haus Kantabrien)

6. Toda García, † nach 1031; ∞ wohl Diego Fernández Conde de Liébana

7. Oneca García, 1045 Äbtissin von San Salvador de Oña; ∞ 995 Abu Amir al-Mansûr (Almansor), † 10. August 1002

4. (I) Nuno Fernández, † nach 968, geistlich

5. (I) Munia Fernández, ∞ um 946 Gome Diaz Conde de Saldana y Carrión, † nach 986

6. (I) Urraca, † nach 1007, als Witwe geistlich; ∞ I 941 Ordoño III., König von León, † September 956 (Haus Kantabrien); ∞ II um 958 Ordoño IV., König von León, † 962 (Haus Kantabrien); ∞ III um 962 Sancho II. Abarca, König von Navarra, † Dezember 994 (Haus Jiménez)

7. (I) Fronilda Fernández, † nach 1014; ∞ Rodanio Conde de Asturias de Santillana

8. (II) Toda Fernández

9. (II) Pedro Fernández

1. Fernando Perez

2. Salvador Perez, Conde

1. Gonzalo Salvadores de Bureba, 1014 bezeugt – Nachkommen : das Haus Lara und die Condes de Bureba

2. Urraca Salvadores, † 20. Mai 1025 ; ∞ um 994 Sancho García Conde de Castilla, † 5. Februar 1017 (siehe oben)

3. Gonzalo Perez

4. Rodrigo Perez

2. Ramiro Gonzalez

2. Munio Fernández de Amaya, † nach 932, 921/927 Conde de Castilla

1. Muniadomna, 919/929 bezeugt ; ∞ I García I., König von León, † 19. Januar 914 (Haus Kantabrien) ; ∞ II nach 914 Fernándo Ansúrez, 916/920 und 927/930 Conde de Castilla

3. ? Flamula ; ∞ Gonzalo Tellez, 903 Conde de Castilla, † vor 24. November 929

Literatur [Bearbeiten]

* Detlev Schwennicke, Europäische Stammtafeln, Band II. (1984) Tafel 51, darin benutzt:

* Manuskript von Ricardo Mateos y Sáinz de Madrano (Barcelona) und Jaime de Salazar y Acha (Madrid)

--------------------
http://www.geneall.net/H/per_page.php?id=7919

wife: Tenda Urraques

is he? http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nuño_Rasura

is he? http://www.geni.com/people/Nuño-Rasura-Núñez/6000000015172687211?through=6000000001412873322

Juez de Castilla

SOURCE NOTES:
www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal11060

Juez de Castilla

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]