== Notes for [[Item:Q103664|Q103664]] ==

http://www.chuckxc.com/nodabyehuda/NOTEBOOK_with_your_messages_3

Date: 7/20/2001 9:04:04 AM

Name: Yisrael Asper

Email: yisraelasper@@msn.com

I Have the Following Information: Rabbi Yehuda son of Rabbi Natan was known as the Rivan *R for Rabbi, Y for Yehuda, V for Ben,and N for Nathan. R Yehuda of Paris was the paternal grandfather of Judah Sir Leon of Paris.In the introduction to the Noda Byehuda the Noda Byehuda himself writes that his mother was the daughter of Rabbi Elazar of Dubna or as commonly rendered in English Eleazer as opposed to Eliezer. He at least does not mention there his grandfather as being a Dayan. Rabbi Eliezer of Dubna was another person apparantly. Rabbi Elazar of Dubna been refered to as Eliezer but this has to be either a mistake or an added name. Sometimes like in my family history you could point to two people with the same name as anscestors but who were Machatunim. Here you have the names Eliezer and Elazar both from Dubna,it’s easy to picture how confusion could start there names are so similar and they were from the same place. R. Jacobke Landau writing in Kontras Divri Yedidut, that his grandfather was Judah Landau and his grandmother was the daughter of R. Eleazar and saying that "also both of them were descendants of the great luminary of the exile, R. Heschel, A.B.D. Cracow, who until this day is called Our Master Rebbi Heschel" was not irecoveribly vague.It seems to me we would assume if someone talked like that that he or she would mean that the grandparents are refered to because the main topic of conversation is them. It also seems improbable that he would’nt have rather have said more simply "my grandmother was the daughter of R. Eleazar a descendant of the great luminary of the exile, R. Heschel, A.B.D. Cracow, who until this day is called Our Master Rebbi Heschel."Also regarding Rabbi Nathanel Weil assuming that the Noda Byehuda knew he had common anscestry with him from being descended from Rabbi Heschel,and even assuming there’s no other explanation we can think of at the moment, maybe he had some closer kinship to him on his mother’s side, which could cause anyone to emphasize more his relationship through one side than another.The Noda Byehuda’s connection to the Weil family does go way back. Rabbi Heschel’s father was Rabbi Yaakov son of Rabbi Ephraim Naphtali Hirsch(soninlaw of Rabbi Yaakov son of Rabbi Moshe Halevi and husband of Buna daughter of the Maharam of Padua)son of Rabbi Yoseph Yonah(soninlaw of Rabbi Naphtali Hirsch known as Rabbi Hirsch Elzisher)son of Rabbi Klonymos Kalman(son of Rabbi Yonah son of Rabbi Klonymos Kalman son of Rabbi Yonah HaAshkenazi author of Issur V’Heter Ha’arukh)soninlaw of Rabbi Yaakov Weil son of Rabbi Yonah Weil son of Rabbi Yaakov Yokel Weil who was known because of his deeds as a Chasid, son of Rabbi Meir Weil son of Rabbi Yaakov ben Rabbi Yehudah Weil, descendant of the Maharam of Rottenberg.
--------------------

My 14th great grandfather.

To see the ultimate ancestors, go to Levi [no surname].

Bobov Tree Anaf Vav (Vavt)
Unbroken Chain pages 15 & 383


G2.2. Bonah, married R. Jacob, son of R. Moses HaLevi.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000000348795885

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]