== Notes for [[Item:Q113068|Q113068]] ==

*http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/Galicia.htm#MunioRodriguezdied1074

a) ''' RODRIGO Muñoz''' (-killed in battle Zalaca [Sagrajas] 23 Oct 1086). The Chronicon Regum Legionensium names "count Rodrigo Muñoz who was later slain at the battle of Sagrajas" as the child of "count Muño Rodríguez" and his wife[848]. A charter dated to [1077], under which "Aldefonsus tocius Yspanie rex" confirmed donations of property to the monastery of San Millán de la Cogolla, includes "Sagrero" which it states was the subject of dispute with "Roderico Munionis, fratre Fredinandi Munionis"[849]. Conde. “...Roderigo Monniz comes...” confirmed the charter dated 12 Mar 1079 under which King Alfonso VI confirmed the possessions of San Vicente de Oviedo[850]. "...Rodrico Monniz commes..." confirmed the charter dated 8 May 1080 under which King Alfonso VI decreed that no representative of the king could enter Sahagún[851]. "...Rudericus Monniz comes..." confirmed the charter dated 14 May 1080 under which King Alfonso VI granted freedoms and exemptions to Sahagún[852]. ["Roderico Monniz" donated property in Priaranza, Valdecañada, Ozuela, Dehesas, Salas to the monastery of San Pedro de Montes by charter dated 15 Oct 1084[853].] The Crónica del Obispo Pelayo records that Rodrigo Muñoz was killed at Zalaca[854].

'''m''' ---. The name of Rodrigo's wife is not known. Rodrigo & his wife had [one child]:

*i) [MAYOR Rodríguez . The primary source which confirms the parentage of Mayor Rodríguez has not been identified. Torres names “la condesa Mayor Rodríguez, mujer de Fernando Núñez” as daughter of Rodrigo Muñoz but does not cite the primary source on which this information is based[855]. The difficulty appears chronological: Fronilde Fernández, daughter of Mayor Rodríguez, is named 10 Feb 1187, which would suggest a long life if her mother had been born in or before 1086 (when Rodrigo Muñoz was killed). The primary source which confirms that her husband was “conde” has not been identified. Barton names Fronilde Fernández as daughter of Fernando Núñez and Mayor Rodríguez, but does not give the parentage of Mayor Rodríguez[856]. '''m''' FERNANDO Núñez, son of NUÑO Menéndez & his wife Sancha Viegas.]

----

También fue llamado Munión Rodríguez de Cangas por poseer gran hacienda en esa villa.

Murió en la batalla de Sacrolias en 1086.
--------------------
II '''Rodrigo Núñez''', que casó con Doña Urraca y murió en 1.086, dejando el reino a su hijo
>III Nuño Ruiz, quien falleció en 1.130 y estuvo casado con Doña Elvira de Manzaneda

''in: GENEALOGÍA DE LOS GUZMANES EN LEÓN Y EN VEGAS <http://www.vegasdelcondado.com/guzmanes.htm>''

----

----

===Origins

http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/Galicia.htm#JimenaOrdonez

7. JIMENA Ordóñez (-after 18 Sep 1042). m (before 1033) as his first wife, conde MUNIO Rodríguez Señor del Solar, son of conde RODRIGO Romániz & his wife Elvira Rodríguez (-[1074/75]).

http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/Galicia.htm#MunioRodriguezdied1074

Munio & his first wife had [four] children:

a) RODRIGO Muñoz (-killed in battle Zalaca [Sagrajas] 23 Oct 1086). m --. The name of Rodrigo's wife is not known.
b) SUERO Muñoz (-after 1094) m SANCHA Velaz, daughter of conde VELA Ovéquiz & his wife Ildonza Muñoz .
c) MUNIO Muñoz (-after 20 Oct 1086).
d) [FERNANDO Muñoz (-1103 or after).

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]