== Notes for [[Item:Q111664|Q111664]] ==

----

==Origins


GUTIERRE Menéndez, son of HERMENEGILDO Gutiérrez & his wife Ermesinda Gatóniz (-933). "…Gutier Menendiz, Arias Menendiz, Flaginus Didaz…" … Conde, he governed six counties in Galicia granted to him by Alfonso IV King of León[352]. …
''m'' ILDUARA Eriz, daughter of ERO Fernández & his first wife Adosinda --- (-958).

Gutierre Menéndez & his wife had five children:

1. ''' MUNIO Gutiérrez ''' (-[959/60]). Conde 911-955. He took part in the delimitation of the territories of Braga and Dume for Alfonso III "el Magno" King of León in 911[359]. …
'''m''' his first cousin, ELVIRA Arias, daughter of conde ARIAS Menéndez & his wife Ermesinda Gundesíndiz (-after 11 Jun 962).

===Family


https://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/Galicia.htm#MunioGutierrezdied959

1. ''' MUNIO Gutiérrez ''' (-[959/60]). Conde 911-955. … m his first cousin, ELVIRA Arias, daughter of conde ARIAS Menéndez & his wife Ermesinda Gundesíndiz (-after 11 Jun 962).

Munio & his wife had six children:
* a) GUTIERRE Muñoz (-[999]). … m ---. The name of Gutierre's wife is not known.

* b) ARIAS Muñoz (-973). Conde. … Bishop of Dumio 948/956
* c) GOTO Muñoz (-after 1 Mar 963). … m (before 927) SANCHO Ordóñez, son of ORDOÑO II King of León & his first wife Elvira Menéndez ([890/93] or later-929).
* d) ERMESINDA Muñoz (-after 962).
* e) ELVIRA Muñoz (-after 986).
* f) GONZALO Muñoz (-[982/84]). … m his first cousin, MUNIADOMNA Fróilaz, daughter of conde FRUELA Gutiérrez & his wife Sarracina ---.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]