== Notes for [[Item:Q1681|Q1681]] ==

{geni:about_me} Also known as Yuwaraja Bhre Kahuripan (or Bhre Jiwana), Dyah Hayam Wuruk.
<p>4th King of Majapahit, reigning from 1351 to 1389. </p>
<p>(Majapahit is pronounced mah-hah-PAH-heet)</p>
<p>--------------------</p>
<p>The name Hayam Wuruk means "learned (educated) chicken". </p>
<p>Hayam was the son of Tribhuwana Tunggadewi and Sri Kertawardhana alias Cakradhara.</p>
<p>His mother's father was Raden Wijaya the founder of Majapahit as a vassal king in Singhasari entitled ''Bhre Tumapel''. </p>
<p>Hayam Wuruk was born in 1334. The event of his birth began with an earthquake in Pabanyu TMove and the eruption of Mount Kelud. </p>
<p>In the same year of his birth, Gajah Mada Jirnnodhara took the Palapa Oath. Gajah was a powerful military leader and ''Majapatih'' of the Javanese empire of Majapahit in the 14th Century, and credited with bringing the empire to the peak of its Golden Age. The oath was, at the time, called ''Sumpah Palapa'', in which one vowed to live an ascetic lifestyle by not eating food containing spices until he had conquered all of the Southeast Asian Archipelago of Nusantara for Majapahit. Gaiah is therefore considered a national hero and symbol of patriotism.
<p>Hayam Wuruk has a younger sister named Dyah Nertaja alias Bhree Pajang, and an adopted sister named Indudewi alias Bhree Lasem, namely the daughter of Rajadewi, her mother's younger sister. Hayam Wuruk's consort named Sri Sudewi entitled Paduka Sori putri Wijayarajasa Bhre Wengker. From that marriage was born Kusumawardhani who married Wikramawardhana son of Bhre Pajang. Hayam Wuruk also had a son by a concubine who served as Bhre Wirabhumi, who married Nagarawardhani daughter of Bhre Lasem.
<p>http://id.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hayam_Wuruk</p>
<p>[translated by Dr. James Cunningham]</p>
<p>original text below:</p>
<p>Silsilah Hayam Wuruk</p>
<p>Nama Hayam Wuruk artinya "ayam yang terpelajar". Ia adalah putra pasangan Tribhuwana Tunggadewi dan Sri Kertawardhana alias Cakradhara. Ibunya adalah putri Raden Wijaya pendiri Majapahit, sedangkan ayahnya adalah raja bawahan di Singhasari bergelar Bhre Tumapel. Hayam Wuruk dilahirkan tahun 1334. Peristiwa kelahirannya diawali dengan gempa bumi di Pabanyu Pindah dan meletusnya Gunung Kelud. Pada tahun itu pula Gajah Mada mengucapkan Sumpah Palapa. Hayam Wuruk memiliki adik perempuan bernama Dyah Nertaja alias Bhree Pajang, dan adik angkat bernama Indudewi alias Bhree Lasem, yaitu putri Rajadewi, adik ibunya. Permaisuri Hayam Wuruk bernama Sri Sudewi bergelar Paduka Sori putri Wijayarajasa Bhre Wengker. Dari perkawinan itu lahir Kusumawardhani yang menikah dengan Wikramawardhana putra Bhre Pajang. Hayam Wuruk juga memiliki putra dari selir yang menjabat sebagai Bhre Wirabhumi, yang menikah dengan Nagarawardhani putri Bhre Lasem.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]