== Notes for [[Item:Q113252|Q113252]] ==

https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ram%C3%B3n_II_de_Ribagorza

http://genealogics.org/getperson.php?personID=I00120955&tree=LEO

Ramón II, conde Ribagorza y Pallars1

b. circa 925, d. circa 970

Father Bernard I, conde de Ribagorza y Pallars2 b. circa 885, d. after 950

Mother Toda Galíndez de Aragón3 b. before 890

Charts Descendants of Charlemage

Ramón II, conde Ribagorza y Pallars was born circa 925. He was the son of Bernard I, conde de Ribagorza y Pallars and Toda Galíndez de Aragón.2,3 Ramón II, conde Ribagorza y Pallars married Gersinde de Fézenzac, daughter of Guillaume, comte de Fézenzac, before 945.4,1 Count of Pallars at Provincia de Lérida, Catalonia, Spain, before 970. Count of Ribagorza at Provincia de Huesca, Aragón, Spain, before 970. Ramón II, conde Ribagorza y Pallars died circa 970.1

Family

Gersinde de Fézenzac b. circa 925

Child

Aba Raimúndez de Ribagorza+ b. c 945, d. a 9951,5

--------------------
Ribagorza is one of the historical Aragonese counties.
--------------------
Leo: Europäische Stammtafeln, J.A. Stargardt Verlag, Marburg, Schwennicke, Detlev (Ed.), Reference: III 119;II 51.

——————————

Raimundo II de Ribagorza (910 — 970) foi conde de Ribagorza de 955 a 970.

Relações familiares Foi filho de Bernardo I de Ribagorza (c. 880 - 955) também conhecido como Bernardo Unifredo conde de Ribagorza (880 — 955) e de Toda Galindes de Aragão, senhora de Sobrarbe (890 —?). Casou com Gersenda de Fézensac (910 —?), filha de Guilherme Garcês da Gasconha, conde de Fezensac e de Gracinda de Rouerge, de quem teve:

Ava de Ribagorza (930 - 995) casada com Garcia Fernandes, conde de Castela

Unifredo de Ribagorza (?- 979), conde de Ribagorza.

Arnau de Ribagorza (?-990), conde de Ribagorça.

Isern de Ribagorza (?-1003), conde de Ribagorça.

Toda de Ribagorza (?-1011), condessa de Ribagorza, casada Sunyer I de Pallars.

Odisent de Ribagorza, Bispo de Roda de Ter.

Conde

RESEARCH NOTES:
Count of Riborgaza

SOURCE NOTES:
www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal11089

Name Suffix:<NSFX> II

Name Suffix:<NSFX> II

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]