== Notes for [[Item:Q88099|Q88099]] ==

Stratonice of Syria

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

"Antiochus I and Stratonice", a painting by Jacques-Louis David (1774). For other persons with the same name, see Stratonice

Stratonice (in Greek Στρατoνίκη της Συρίας) of Syria was the daughter of king Demetrius Poliorcetes and Phila, the daughter of Antipater. In 300 BC, at which time she could not have been more than seventeen years of age, her hand was solicited by Seleucus, king of Syria, and she was conducted by her father Demetrius to Rhosus, on the Pierian coast (in Macedonia), where her nuptials were celebrated with the utmost magnificence.[1] Notwithstanding the disparity of their ages, she appears to have lived in perfect harmony with the old king for some years, and had already borne him one child, a daughter called Phila, when it was discovered that her stepson Antiochus was deeply enamoured of her, and Seleucus, in order to save the life of his son, which was endangered by the violence of his passion, in 294 BC gave up Stratonice in marriage to the young prince, whom he at the same time constituted king of the eastern provinces.[2] The union seems to have been a prosperous one, but we find little subsequent mention of Stratonice. She bore five children to Antiochus: Seleucus (he was executed for rebellion), Laodice, Apama II, Stratonice of Macedon and Antiochus II Theos, who succeeded his father as king. The city of Stratonikeia in Caria was named after her by Antiochus.[3] [1]

Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Stratonice of Syria

[edit] References
Smith, William (editor); Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology, "Stratonice (3)", Boston, (1867)

[edit] Notes

1.^ Plutarch, Parallel Lives, "Demetrius", 31, 32
2.^ Plutarch, 38; Appian, The Foreign Wars, "The Syrian Wars", 59
3.^ Strabo, Geography, xiv. 2; Stephanus of Byzantium, Ethnica, s.v. "Stratoniceia

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stratonice_of_Syria

Stratonice, Queen Consort of the Seleucids, was born circa 283 BC. Stratonice first married Seleucus, but when Seleucus determined that his son was deeply in love with his step mother, she was given in marriage by him to his son, Antiochus I Soter, King of the Seleucids circa 294 BC.
--------------------
Queen of Upper Asia Stratonike I Antigonid married King of Syria Antiochos I Soter Seleucid , son of King of Syria Seleucus I Nicator of Macedonia and Apama II of Bactria , 0294 B.C; His 1st. Her 2nd. Step-mother.1,3,2 She married King of Syria Seleucus I Nicator of Macedonia, son of Antiochus of Macedonia and Laodice (?) , 0297 B.C; Her 1st.1,4,2 She was born 0317 B.C.. She was the daughter of King of Phrygia and Macedonia Demetrius I Poliorcetes Antigonid and Phila I Antipatrid.5 She was the daughter of Demetrius I by Phila.2 Sources: 1. Hammond, N.G.L. and Walbank, F.W. 'A History of Macedonia.'

Children of Queen of Upper Asia Stratonike I Antigonid and King of Syria Antiochos I Soter Seleucid :

King of Syria Antiochos II Theos Seleucid + b. 0287 B.C., d. 0246 B.C.

Apama Seleucid+ b. 0293 B.C.

Children of Queen of Upper Asia Stratonike I Antigonid and King of Syria Seleucus I Nicator of Macedonia :

Phila II Seleucid+ b. 0296 B.C.

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, Royalty for Commoners: The Complete Lineage of John of Gaunt, Son of Edward III, Kings of England, and Queen Philippa (.: ., 3rd Ed., 1998), 427-79. Hereinafter cited as RfC.

[S931] A.H. Clough, editor, Plutarch's Lives (Champaign, IL: Project Gutenberg, October 1996), DEMETRIUS. Hereinafter cited as Plutarch's Lives.

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 415-79.

[S669] M. B. Sakellariou, Macedonia, 4000 Years of Greek History and Civilization, Greek Lands in History (8, Philadelphias Street, Athens, Greece: Ekdotike Athenon S.A., 1983/1988), pg. 147. Hereinafter cited as Sakellariou.

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 427-80.

--------------------
'''
=Stratonice of Syria=
'''

Stratonice (Greek: Στρατoνίκη) of Syria was the daughter of king Demetrius Poliorcetes and Phila, the daughter of Antipater. In 300 BC, at which time she could not have been more than seventeen years of age, her hand was solicited by Seleucus, king of Syria, and she was conducted by her father Demetrius to Rhosus, on the Pierian coast (in Macedonia), where her nuptials were celebrated with the utmost magnificence. Notwithstanding the disparity of their ages, she appears to have lived in perfect harmony with the old king for some years, and had already borne him one child, a daughter called Phila, when it was discovered that her stepson Antiochus was deeply enamoured of her, and Seleucus, in order to save the life of his son, which was endangered by the violence of his passion, in 294 BC gave up Stratonice in marriage to the young prince, whom he at the same time constituted king of the eastern provinces. The union seems to have been a prosperous one, but we find little subsequent mention of Stratonice. She bore him five children. The city of Stratonikeia in Caria was named after her by Antiochus.

'''Stratonice's children'''

By Seleucus I Nicator:

# Phila, who later married her brother Antigonus II Gonatas.

By Antiochus I Soter:

# Seleucus, who he was executed for rebellion.
# Laodice
# Apama II, who married Magas of Cyrene and was mother of Berenice II of Egypt.
# Stratonice, who married her nephew/cousin Demetrius II Aetolicus (Phila's son by Antigonus II).
# Antiochus II Theos, who succeeded his father as king.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stratonice_of_Syria

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per00572.htm#0

RESEARCH NOTES:
Queen of Syria

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]