== Notes for [[Item:Q114061|Q114061]] ==

'''Teresa Alfonso''' (1135-?), en algunas genealogías aparece como hija de Elvira Gálter, ​ y en otras como hija de Chamoa Gómez. Se casó en primeras nupcias con Sancho Núñez de Barbosa de quien tuvo a Urraca Sánchez, la esposa de Gonzalo Méndez de Sousa, padre del conde Mendo González de Sousa llamado el «Sousaõ».​ Después volvió a contraer matrimonio con el ricohombre Fernando Martins Bravo, señor de Braganza y de Chávez de quien no tuvo sucesión.

*https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfonso_I_de_Portugal

--------

Tereza Afonso de Portugal

(Tereza Afonso de Bourgogne) Nascida cerca 1134 Pais

D. Afonso I, rei de Portugal 1109-1185 Ne N Casamentos e filhos

Casada com D. Sancho Nunes, conde de Celanova ca 1080-1163, tiveram Fruilhe Sanches ca 1150 Casada cerca 1154 com D. Fernão Mendes «o Bravo» de Bragançãos, senhor de Bragança ca 1096-ca 1161 (sem geração) Notas

O conde D. Pedro diz que D. Afonso Henriques teve esta filha D. Tereza Afonso em D. Elvira Galtér e que, portanto, era irmã inteira de D. Urraca Afonso, casada com D. Pedro Afonso de Lumiares. Mas esta D. Urraca é bem mais tardia, ainda se documentando casada em 1212. D. Tereza Afonso foi certamente a primeira das filhas naturais de D. Afonso Henriques e seria irmã inteira de D. Afonso, nascido em 1135, que foi grão-mestre da Ordem de S. João de Jerusalém (1203-6).

Muito se tem escrito sobre esta D. Tereza Afonso, a célebre filha que o Livro Velho, o Livro do Deão e o conde D. Pedro dizem que D. Afonso Henriques tirou ao conde D. Sancho Nunes de Celanova, seu marido, para dar em casamento a D. Fernão Mendes de Bragançãos. Alguns estranham esta história, algo anedótica de facto, esquecendo-se, talvez, que D. Fernão Mendes tinha o poder suficiente para retirar ao domínio português praticamente Trás-os-Montes inteiro, entregando-o a Leão e Castela. E que D. Afonso Henriques pode, de facto, ter sido obrigado a usar a sua filha para impedir isso mesmo, conseguindo ao mesmo tempo, com a doação em dote, manter de vez o território no domínio nacional. Isto mesmo, de resto, diz Mattoso.

Fontes:
Manuel Abranches de Soveral (Origem dos Avelar e dos Soveral)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

One of the Illegitimate children of Afonso Henriques I. Not to be confused with Infante Teresa.

dona TERESA Afonso de Portugal . The Nobiliario of Pedro Conde de Barcelos names "D. Elvira Gualtar" as the mother of "D. Urraca Alonso, D. Teresa Alonso" daughters of "D. Alonso Enriquez", and

in a later passage records that “D. Fernan Mendez el Bravo Bragançon” married “D. Teresa Alonso”, adding that the king separated her from her previous husband “don Sancho Nuñez” with whom he had fought, and that she brought “la tierra de Bragança” to her second husband but that it reverted to the crown because she died childless.

As discussed more fully above, this passage echoes the marriages of the sisters of King Afonso I and is probably inaccurate as written. It is not known whether this also means that the king´s illegitimate daughter named Teresa never existed.

http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/PORTUGAL.htm


----

https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfonso_I_de_Portugal

Alfonso I of Portugal (Portuguese: Afonso Henriques; Guimarães or Viseo, July 25, 1109b - Coimbra, December 6, 1185),3 was the second count of the Portucalense County of the house of Burgundy and the first king of Portugal.

The extramarital offspring by Elvira Gálter were:

* Urraca Alfonso.41 In 1185 his father donated Avô to him. In the donation it stipulates that the lordship could only pass to the children had with her husband Pedro Alfonso de Ribadouro (also called Pedro Alfonso Viegas) grandson of Egas Moniz, "el Ayo."42 which may indicate another marriage, before or after being widowed to Pedro Alfonso. In 1187 he changed this lordship of Avô to that of Aveiro with his half-brother, King Sancho I of Portugal. He died after 1216 since in January of that year the couple made a donation to the monastery of Tarouca.43 A daughter of Urraca and her husband Pedro Alfonso de Ribadouro was Sancha Pérez de Lumiares who married Pedro Rodríguez Girón.44
* Teresa Alfonso (1135-?), in some genealogies she appears as the daughter of Elvira Gálter,45 and in others as the daughter of Chamoa Gómez. He first married Sancho Núñez de Barbosa from whom he had Urraca Sánchez, the wife of Gonzalo Méndez de Sousa, father of Count Mendo González de Sousa called the "Sousaõ".46 Then he remarried the rich man Fernando Martins Bravo, lord of Braganza and Chávez from whom he had no succession.46

Fonte: https://arquivos.azores.gov.pt/viewer?id=1351578&FileID=2291&recordType=Description

----

Favor mostrar a referencia! Maior jeito de perfil fake!

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]