== Notes for [[Item:Q112497|Q112497]] ==

===Biography

< [https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jimeno_de_Pamplona Wikipedia] > '''Jimeno''' or '''Ximeno''', called the Fort1 or Pamplona, (ca. 745-805?) was a character who appears in the chronicles at the end of the seventh century (c. 781) as a tycoon or military chief of Navarre.

In the later Arab chronicles he is identified as Mothmin el-Akra or Maximino Garcea the Maple or the Arga, protector of the Deyo area with a fortress in Monjardín next to the territory dominated by Malduthun al-Atlal or Baldowin of Atalarico, and both faced Abd al-Rahman I in his Rogue Frankish Chronicles report the campaign of the Frankish king in the highlands of the Ebro on the way to Zaragoza - specifically the siege and seizure of the stronghold of Pamplona to cover his rearguard - and the capture of hostages during the occupation, among which was a possible brother of Jimeno: the Hispano-Roman caudillo Furio or Fortunio.

Some sources report that he had two children (other sources cite them as grandchildren or great-grandchildren): Íñigo Jiménez and García Jiménez. Another theory proposes that the real name of García Jiménez was García Íñiguez - which should not be confused with García Íñiguez I, the legendary 2nd king of Sobrarbe or with king García Íñiguez of Pamplona, son of king Íñigo Arista. Some sources cite him as the initiator of the Jimena dynasty, although he lived in a time before the origins of the dynasty of King Íñigo Arista. Other authors consider him the possible common ancestor of both dynasties.



----

His name is indicated only by the patronymic accorded to his sons in the Codex de Roda. No direct information has been found relating to Jimeno. However, the Chronicon Fontanellensis records that ambassadors from "Induonis et Mitionis Ducum Naverrorum" attended Charles II "le Chauve" King of the West Franks "in Vermeria Palatio" with gifts and agreed peace, dated to 851[19]. A footnote in the edition consulted notes that Marca, in his Historiæ Bearniæ, corrects the apparent reference to two individuals in this edition to "Inniconis Eminonis Duc. Navarr"[20]. Jaurgain records that Oïhenart suggests that the names should in fact be "Iniconis et Ximinonis", adding that they should be identified with "Eneco-Garcia et Semen-Garcia, neveux du souverain de Pamplone"[21]. This hypothesis is not acceptable from a chronological point of view. It is more likely that, if the passage intends to refer to two individuals, they were Íñigo Iñíguez and Jimeno, father of García Jiménez. The Libro de Regla of Leire Monastery, compiled in 1076, records that "filius eius Eximinus Enecones" succeeded "rex Enneco Garseanes", adding that his wife was "Munia" and that he died "era DCCLXXV"[22]. This source is confused and contradicted by numerous other primary sources in many of the details which it records. It is not certain that it can be assumed that this passage refers to the father of Íñigo Jiménez. m ---. The name of Jimeno's wife is not known. The Libro de Regla of Leire Monastery, compiled in 1076, records that "filius eius Eximinus Enecones" succeeded "rex Enneco Garseanes", adding that his wife was "Munia" and that he died "era DCCLXXV"[23]. This source is confused and contradicted by numerous other primary sources in many of the details which it records. It is not certain that it can be assumed that this passage refers to the father of Íñigo Jiménez. It has been decided not to include "Munia" as the wife of "Jimeno", considering the number of uncertainties in the text.

SOURCE NOTES:
www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal11179

Jimeno Sanches El Fuerte: brings us more controversy. This time it has to do with his name,
El Fuerte. If you speak and read and write Spanish you know that El Fuerte means, "The Strong" or one who is strong. But again, historians like to waste a lot of their time because some say "El Fuerte" translates into "The Cruel". You make your own choice.
Some more history: The Romans tried to conquer the Basques, they couldn't so they were forced to trade with them.

The Romans show up in the year 75 BC and they established Pamplona which was named after Pompey the Great.

Jimeno also goes by the name, Ximeno. I place him as being the founder of the Jimenez line.
According to relationship caculator he is my 34th great grandfather.

Soruce: Codex de Roda
Ayes.

Name Prefix:<NPFX> Count Name Suffix:<NSFX> of Navarre

[Wikipedia, "Jimeno I of Pamplona", retrieved 5 Oct 07]
Jimeno I (Ximeno)(d. (it is said) 860) is known directly only from a single historical record. In 850, the French court received envoys from Induo and Mitio, "dukes of the Navarrese". These names are thought to represent Íñigo Arista and Jimeno, father of García Jiménez. The Códice de Roda lists García Jiménez as ruler of "another part of the kingdom" of Pamplona, and the above record has led to the speculation that Jimeno too held a role of regional co-king or sub-king. The location of this principality has been suggested to have been around Álava, where a count Vela Jiménez, traditionally thought to have been his son, held sway.

He has sometimes been described as Jimeno the Strong, but this results from confusion with a much earlier man of that name. Likewise, he sometimes appears as Jimeno Garcés due to hypotheses about his origins. The belief that he was kinsman of Íñigo I Arista has led to various reconstructed pedigrees, filling the gaps with otherwise unknown or chronologically misplaced individuals, the most common version making him son of a García Jiménez, and thereby making Garcés Jimeno's patronymic.

He was apparently succeeded in his principality by son García Jiménez. In the 10th century, Jimeno's house?the Jiménez?completely displaced the line of Arista and reigned in Navarre until 1234.

No record of his wife remains, although historian Justo Pérez de Urbel has suggested he was the unnamed prince of Pamplona to whom princess Leodegundia Ordoñez of León married. The following children have been suggested for Jimeno:

García Jiménez, who apparently succeeded him as co-king and was regent during the captivity of Fortún Garcés
Íñigo Jiménez, named as brother of García Jiménez in the Códice de Roda.
Vela Jiménez, founder of the Vela clan, the connection is not directly attested, but based primarily in his patronymic, geography and chronology.
Oneca, wife of Galician count Diego Fernandez, having children Jimeno and Leodegundia, this identification is linked to the hypothesis that Leodegundia Ordoñez was wife of Jimeno I.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]