== Notes for [[Item:Q104639|Q104639]] ==

Lorenzo Suarez de LONGORIA Salazar688,1690,1788 was born about 1629 in Monterrey ?, , New Spain. He died before 1678 at the age of 49. Lorenzo Suarez de Longoria (the Second) was the natural son of Lorenzo Suarez de Longoria (the First) and Ana de Salazar. He lived in either Saltillo or Monterrey, or perhaps in both cities at different times. Lorenzo (the Second) had several children by Antonia Rodriguez (citizen of Monterrey) and at least one child (Nicolas Suarez de Longoria) by Beatriz Gonzalez. His father mentioned only two grandchildren (Maria de Longoria and Jose de Longoria) in his will; there is no mention of Pedro Rodriguez Longoria, Francisco Rodriguez Longoria, or Nicolas Suarez de Longoria.

The Marriage Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara indicate that Pedro and Francisco were natural children (i.e., Lorenzo and Antonia were not married by the Catholic Church). In all likelihood, all his children were natural children. Parents: Capt. Lorenzo Suarez de LONGORIA and Ana de SALAZAR.

Spouse: Antonia Perez RODRIGUEZ. Antonia Perez RODRIGUEZ and Lorenzo Suarez de LONGORIA Salazar were married about 1650. They were not married by the Catholic Church. Children were: Fernando LONGORIA, Maria de LONGORIA Rodriguez, Pedro LONGORIA Rodriguez, Ana de LONGORIA Rodriguez, Francisco de LONGORIA Rodriguez, Jose Jacinto LONGORIA Rodriguez.

Spouse: Beatriz GONZALES. Beatriz GONZALES and Lorenzo Suarez de LONGORIA Salazar were married. Children were: Nicolas Suares de LONGORIA.

http://www.raullongoria.net/Genealogy/FamilyTree/b138.html#P27

=======================================

Lauro LONGORIA895 was born (date unknown). Parents: Diego LONGORIA and Esmergilda LONGORIA.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Leandro LONGORIA269 was born in 1847.34 He died on 21 July 1916 at the age of 69.34 Parents: Juan Miguel LONGORIA and Maria Silvera RUIZ.

Spouse: Maria Gertrudes LOYA. Maria Gertrudes LOYA and Leandro LONGORIA were married. Children were: Damacio LONGORIA, Antonia LONGORIA, Guadalupe LONGORIA, Melquiares LONGORIA, Jose Geronimo LONGORIA, Clemente LONGORIA, Juliana LONGORIA, Concepcion LONGORIA, Anastacio LONGORIA, Abran LONGORIA.
=====================================
Lorenzo Suarez de LONGORIA Salazar688,1690,1788 was born about 1629 in Monterrey ?, , New Spain. He died before 1678 at the age of 49. Lorenzo Suarez de Longoria (the Second) was the natural son of Lorenzo Suarez de Longoria (the First) and Ana de Salazar. He lived in either Saltillo or Monterrey, or perhaps in both cities at different times. Lorenzo (the Second) had several children by Antonia Rodriguez (citizen of Monterrey) and at least one child (Nicolas Suarez de Longoria) by Beatriz Gonzalez. His father mentioned only two grandchildren (Maria de Longoria and Jose de Longoria) in his will; there is no mention of Pedro Rodriguez Longoria, Francisco Rodriguez Longoria, or Nicolas Suarez de Longoria.

The Marriage Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara indicate that Pedro and Francisco were natural children (i.e., Lorenzo and Antonia were not married by the Catholic Church). In all likelihood, all his children were natural children. Parents: Capt. Lorenzo Suarez de LONGORIA and Ana de SALAZAR.

Spouse: Antonia Perez RODRIGUEZ. Antonia Perez RODRIGUEZ and Lorenzo Suarez de LONGORIA Salazar were married about 1650. They were not married by the Catholic Church. Children were: Fernando LONGORIA, Maria de LONGORIA Rodriguez, Pedro LONGORIA Rodriguez, Ana de LONGORIA Rodriguez, Francisco de LONGORIA Rodriguez, Jose Jacinto LONGORIA Rodriguez.

Spouse: Beatriz GONZALES. Beatriz GONZALES and Lorenzo Suarez de LONGORIA Salazar were married. Children were: Nicolas Suares de LONGORIA.

http://www.raullongoria.net/Genealogy/FamilyTree/b138.html#P27

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Leandro LONGORIA1453,2358 was born on 20 May 1868 in La Grulla, Starr County, TX, USA.2359 He died on 23 December 1929 at the age of 61 in La Grulla, Starr County, TX, USA.2359 The death certificate verifies that his parents were Ponciano Longoria and Nicolasa Longoria. The cause of death is shown as "Suddenly death". Oral history indicates that Ponciano fathered an illegitimate child named Leandro, in La Grulla. This oral history has been confirmed by Leandro's death certificate which shows Ponciano and Nicolasa as his parents. Ponciano fathered this child before he was married, when he was not quite 16 years old. Parents: Ponciano LONGORIA Villarreal and Nicolasa LONGORIA.

Spouse: Florencia DIAZ. Florencia DIAZ and Leandro LONGORIA were married on 21 November 1904.1484 Children were: Samuel LONGORIA, Bernarda LONGORIA, Clemencia LONGORIA, Pedro LONGORIA, Anita LONGORIA, Elisa LONGORIA, Nicolasa LONGORIA, Jesus Fidel LONGORIA, Margarita LONGORIA, Eulalio LONGORIA, Maria Luisa LONGORIA.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Leandro LONGORIA207 was born on 30 January 1937.2360 He died on 30 May 1997 at the age of 60 in La Grulla, Starr County, TX, USA.294 Parents: Pedro LONGORIA and Francisca ALANIZ.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Leocadia LONGORIA379 was born (date unknown). Parents: Jose Agapito LONGORIA and Nicolasa LONGORIA.

Spouse: Carlos DANACHE. Leocadia LONGORIA and Carlos DANACHE were married. Children were: Carlos DANACHE, Santos DANACHE, Leocadia DANACHE, Adelaida DANACHE.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Leocadia LONGORIA34,204,379 was born on 14 December 1824. Parents: Jose Maria LONGORIA and Florentina GARCIA.

Spouse: Francisco LONGORIA. Leocadia LONGORIA and Francisco LONGORIA were married on 6 January 1846 in Matamoros, Tamaulipas, Mexico. Children were: Emilio LONGORIA, Felipa LONGORIA, Joaquin LONGORIA, Maria Angela LONGORIA, Jose Adelino LONGORIA, Maria Luisa LONGORIA, Rafaela LONGORIA.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Leocadia LONGORIA1032 was born on 11 August 1869 in Mier, Tamaulipas, Mexico.2361 She died on 18 February 1943 at the age of 73 in San Antonio, Bexar County, TX, USA.2361 Parents: Octaviano LONGORIA and Francisca GARCIA.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Leonarda LONGORIA733 was born (date unknown). Parents: Jose Ramon LONGORIA Hinojosa and Maria Josefa GARCIA.

Spouse: Damacio DE LA GARZA. Leonarda LONGORIA and Damacio DE LA GARZA were married on 25 May 1801 in Matamoros, Tamaulipas, New Spain.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Leonarda LONGORIA died on 17 June 1791.2362 Parents: Jose Miguel LONGORIA Hinojosa and Encarnacion de la GARZA.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Leonarda LONGORIA289 was born about 1845. The 1860 Census listed this person as a male, named Leonardo, age 15. I am assuming the Census taker made an error in writing her name and sex. Parents: Eugenio LONGORIA Flores and Gregoria YBARRA.

Spouse: Rafael YBARRA. Leonarda LONGORIA and Rafael YBARRA were married.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Leonardo LONGORIA2250 was born (date unknown). He was a twin to Margarita. Parents: Juan LONGORIA and Elvira TAMAYO.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Leonardo LONGORIA895 was born (date unknown). Parents: Diego LONGORIA and Esmergilda LONGORIA.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Leonardo LONGORIA died on 20 May 1837.2363,2364 He may be the Leonardo Longoria de la Garza who received the "El Rincon del Grullo" land grant consisting of 28,642 acres in present day Kleberg County, Texas. The land grant was made by the State of Tamaulipas on April 11, 1848. The Bourland and Miller Report notes that "Juliana Lopez de Longoria applies for herself and the other heirs of her deceased husband Leonardo Longoria de la Garza for 6 leagues of land originally granted by the State of Tamaulipas to the said Garza, decd.; said tract of land is called "El Rincon del Grullo". Parents: Jose Miguel LONGORIA Hinojosa and Encarnacion de la GARZA.

Spouse: Feliciana Juliana LOPEZ. Feliciana Juliana LOPEZ and Leonardo LONGORIA were married on 18 May 1812 in Matamoros, Tamaulipas, Mexico.133,2365 Children were: Maria Vicenta LONGORIA Lopez, Maria Catarina LONGORIA Lopez, Perfecta LONGORIA Lopez, Maria Melchora LONGORIA Lopez, Agapito LONGORIA Lopez, Maria Candida LONGORIA, Jose Encarnacion LONGORIA Lopez, Jose Santiago LONGORIA Lopez, Maria Guadalupe LONGORIA Lopez, Maria Francisca LONGORIA Lopez, Maria Guadalupe LONGORIA Lopez, Esteban LONGORIA Lopez, Jacobo LONGORIA Lopez.

Spouse: Marcela SALINAS Lopez. Marcela SALINAS Lopez and Leonardo LONGORIA were married on 12 May 1827 in Matamoros, Tamaulipas, Mexico.499,2366,2367 Ancestry.com shows a marriage date of May 2, 1827 for Leonardo Longoria and Marcela Salinas; the Indice de Casamientos from the Frank Cushman Pierce Collection shows the marriage date as May 12, 1827. However, there is reason to believe both sources are in error. Leonardo Longoria and Juliana Lopez had at least 6 children after April 1827, and Juliana Lopez in the 1850's referred to herself as the widow of Leonardo Longoria de la Garza. The Church would not have sanctioned a second marriage if the first wife were still alive.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Leonardo LONGORIA979 was born on 9 July 1798 in Camargo, Tamaulipas, New Spain. He died about 1833 at the age of 35 in Matamoros, Tamaulipas, Mexico. Parents: Alejandro LONGORIA and Maria Teresa GARCIA.

Spouse: Ana Maria CHAPA. Ana Maria CHAPA and Leonardo LONGORIA were married. Children were: Manuela LONGORIA, Ignacio LONGORIA, Felipe LONGORIA, Nicolasa LONGORIA, Jose Alejandro LONGORIA Chapa, Roberto LONGORIA, Rosalia LONGORIA.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Leonardo LONGORIA204 was born on 6 November 1860 in Rancho Los Ochoas. Parents: Isidro LONGORIA and Clemencia GALLARDO.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Leonel Eugenio LONGORIA Jr. (private). Parents: Leonel Eugenio LONGORIA Treviño and Rosenda YBARRA.

Spouse: Maria del Rosario OBREGON. Children were: Gianise Orlene LONGORIA, Israel Omar LONGORIA.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Leonel Eugenio LONGORIA Treviño was born on 11 April 1910 in La Grulla, Starr County, TX, USA. He died on 27 August 1982 at the age of 72 in Corpus Christi, Nueces County, TX, USA. He was buried in Eugenio Longoria cemetery, Brooks County, TX, USA. Parents: Eugenio LONGORIA Villarreal and Ana Luzgarda TREVIÑO Vidaurri.

Spouse: Rosenda YBARRA. Rosenda YBARRA and Leonel Eugenio LONGORIA Treviño were married in 1930. Children were: Minerva LONGORIA, Albesa LONGORIA, Elia LONGORIA, Elma LONGORIA, Crisanta LONGORIA, Orlando LONGORIA, Amando LONGORIA, Omar LONGORIA, Cecilia LONGORIA, America LONGORIA, Roel LONGORIA, Leonel Eugenio LONGORIA Jr., Jose Lamar LONGORIA, Cecelia LONGORIA, Jesus Joel LONGORIA.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Leonides LONGORIA289 was born (date unknown). Leonides was the "padrino de bautismo", the baptismal godfather, of my mother, Zoila Villarreal Longoria. My mother also recalled that he was "guero"; i.e., light complexion and hair. Parents: Lucas LONGORIA and Romualda ALVARADO.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Leonor LONGORIA was born (date unknown).

Spouse: Ignacio de la GARZA. Leonor LONGORIA and Ignacio de la GARZA were married on 21 June 1832.870

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Leopoldo LONGORIA2230 was born (date unknown). Parents: Felix LONGORIA and Brigida VILLARREAL.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pfc. Leopoldo LONGORIA1741 was born on 17 July 1930 in Starr County, Texas. He died in action during the Korean War on 7 October 1951 at the age of 21 in "Heartbreak Ridge", North Korea. He was buried in La Grulla, Starr County, TX, USA. Pfc. Leopoldo Longoria was was a member of the 9th Infantry Regiment, 2nd Infantry Division during the Korean War. He was killed in action during a battle on what became known as Heartbreak Ridge. He died on October 7, 1951 at the age of 21; he was buried in the cemetery at La Grulla, Texas. Parents: Ambrocio LONGORIA and Felicitas RODRIGUEZ.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Leroy LONGORIA (private). Parents: Rene LONGORIA and Kathleen Margaret GOODJOHN.

Spouse: Sandra BULLARD.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Liana Marie LONGORIA (private). Parents: Jose Arturo LONGORIA Villarreal and Erika PEREZ.

Spouse: Michael Wood JENSEN. Children were: Kayli Marie JENSEN, Alexa Michelle JENSEN.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Librada LONGORIA204 was born on 3 October 1863 in Reynosa, Tamaulipas, Mexico.2283 Parents: Jose Eugenio LONGORIA and Maria Irinea ZAMORA.

Spouse: Florentino LONGORIA. Librada LONGORIA and Florentino LONGORIA were married on 30 December 1882 in Rio Grande City, Starr Co., Texas, USA.2283 Children were: Natalia E. LONGORIA, Rosa LONGORIA, German LONGORIA, Felicitas LONGORIA, Paula LONGORIA.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Librado LONGORIA289 was born (date unknown). Parents: Maria Concepcion LONGORIA.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lilia LONGORIA2292 was born (date unknown). Parents: Octaviano LONGORIA and Sara Hortencia THERIOT.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lillian LONGORIA (private).34 Parents: Jose Silverio LONGORIA and Dolores GAITAN.

Spouse: Gilberto BORJA. Children were: Diana BORJA, Sylvia BORJA, Yolanda BORJA.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lillie LONGORIA2368 was born (date unknown). Parents: Manuel LONGORIA Longoria and Catarina RODRIGUEZ.

Spouse: Frank Martin SANCHEZ. Lillie LONGORIA and Frank Martin SANCHEZ were married.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lino LONGORIA204 was born on 9 November 1851. Parents: Jose Eugenio LONGORIA and Maria Irinea ZAMORA.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lisa Michelle LONGORIA (private). Parents: Jose Arturo LONGORIA Villarreal and Erika PEREZ.

Spouse: Chad Edward MCMILLAN.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lisandro LONGORIA was born on 16 December 1920. He died on 17 June 2006 at the age of 85. Parents: Juan LONGORIA Villarreal and Maria LEAL.

Spouse: Olivia PEREZ. Olivia PEREZ and Lisandro LONGORIA were married. Children were: Sylvia LONGORIA.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lorenzo LONGORIA379 was born (date unknown). Parents: Jose Lorenzo LONGORIA Serna and Maria Gertrudis CHAPA.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lorenzo de LONGORIA2196 was born (date unknown). Parents: Pedro de LONGORIA and Catalina SUAREZ de Camuño y Llamas.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Capt. Lorenzo Suarez de LONGORIA2369,2370,2371,2372 was born in 1592 in Asturias, Spain.2373 I have deduced his birth year from ages he gave while testifying in two separate incidents in Monterrey. Lorenzo gave his age as 60 on April 12, 1653 and as 62 on July 30, 1654. Therefore, his birthdate would have to be between April 12, 1592 and July 30, 1592. He signed a will on 25 July 1665 in Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, New Spain.2369 He died about 1668 at the age of 76 in Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, New Spain. Lorenzo was buried about 1668 in Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, New Spain. Lorenzo Suarez de Longoria was born in Oviedo, Asturias, Spain. He came to the New World as a the servant boy for Pedro Suarez de Longoria, who was coming to assume his appointment as "oidor" in the Audencia de Mexico. Both of them arrived in New Spain in 1603, when Lorenzo was only about 11 years old.

On April 15, 1603, a proceeding was held in the village of Lorero, in th Concejo de Belmonte de Miranda, before a local judge, Domingo de Villanueva, to gather and document the information required for Lorenzo Suarez de Longoria to obtain the permit or license for travel to New Spain. Three witnesses (names transcribed as Diego Gutierre de Menes, Alonso de Lorero, and Andres de Mata) testified and answered the requisite questions about Lorenzo and his family. All three witnesses testified that Lorenzo Suarez de Longoria was the legitimate son of Alonso de la Pontiga and Inez Valdez, who had been married before the Church. All three witnesses also testified that Lorenzo's paternal grandparents were Pedro de Longoria and [Catalina] Suarez and that his maternal grandparents were Diego de [Codillero] and [Catalina Valdez]. Furthermore, they testified that Lorenzo was of "sangre limpia' (clean blood) and that he was not descended from Moors or Jews. To the question of whether Lorenzo was "17 years of age, more or less" they all responded in the affirmative. [My belief is that the key phrase here is "more or less" and that Lorenzo was actually only 11 years old at the time.] One of the witnesses [Andres de la Mata] did offer one interesting bit of information when he testified that Lorenzo was the seventh child of Alonso de la Pontiga and Inez Valdez; however, I have not yet identified any of Lorenzo's siblings.

The final permit or license (Contratacion, 5273,N.91) for Lorenzo to travel was signed on June 16, 1603, and Lorenzo Suarez de Longoria and his uncle Pedro Suarez de Longoria set sail for New Spain, arriving (probably in Vera Cruz) sometime later that summer.

Lorenzo lived in Mexico City with his uncle for some time, but nothing more is known about his life there. He is known to have lived in Mazapil, Zacatecas where he was a member in the brotherhood of the Santisimo Sacramento, or Holy Sacrament. Then, on January 9, 1616, Don Gaspar de Alvear Salazar, knight in the order of Santiago and Governor of Nueva Viscaya, signed a document commissioning Lorenzo Suarez de Longoria as Captain and "justicia mayor" de la villa de Santiago de Saltillo. Three days later, on January 12, 1616, Lorenzo appeared before the city officials of Saltillo and presented his commission from the Governor as Captain and "justicia mayor", which was accepted.

Lorenzo's tenure as alcalde mayor of Saltillo lasted until August 3,1617, when he was replaced by a new Governor after being charged by a local citizen of Saltillo with misconduct of his duties, for which Lorenzo was fined "mil pesos de oro comun", or 1000 pesos of common gold.

The next record I could find of Lorenzo was on March 4, 1618, when Captain Lorenzo Suarez de Longoria signed, at the Hacienda Santa Elena near Nieves, Zacatecas, a codicil to the will of Francisco de Urdinola, the father-in-law of his uncle Pedro Suarez de Longoria.

Sometime in the 1620's, Lorenzo moved to Monterrey where he served in several capacities of government. However, on October 23, 1629, Lorenzo was again back in Saltillo serving as "alferez real and alcalde mayor"; this term of office probably began sometime before October of 1629 and probably was mandated to be about a year in duration.

It is known that Lorenzo fathered at least one child, also named Lorenzo Suarez de Longoria, circa 1629. It is believed the child was born in Monterrey, but it could have been Saltillo.

Lorenzo eventually ended up back in Monterrey where he made his own last will and testament, dated July 25, 1665, before Second Lieutenant Nicolas de Ochoa, Mayor. In his will, Lorenzo declares that he was born in Oviedo, in Asturias, the legitimate son of Alonso de la Pontiga and Ines de Valdes, citizens of that city. His wish was that he be buried in the Convent of San Francisco in Monterrey. He is believed to have died in 1668.

He also states in his will that he was never married, but he nevertheless refers to two grandchildren: (1) a granddaughter, Maria de Longoria, daughter of Antonio (perhaps Antonia ?) Rodriguez, and (2) a grandson, Jose de Longoria. Lorenzo is apparently stating that he was never married before the Catholic Church but he also leaves no doubt that he fathered at least one child.

His will lists the following possessions: ● Two engravings of the "Limpia Concepcion y San Lorenzo", with frame of ebony wood, and silk curtains. ● One Holy Crucifix, small, made of "pasta", with a cross made of ebony wood, and the ends of the cross made of silver. ● One Holy Crucifix, about half a vara [or about 17 inches] in height, with a cross of ebony wood, joined with ivory, with a white veil and headdress. ● Arms. ● A mirror, which he left to his granddaughter, Maria de Longoria, daughter of Antonio [should be Antonia ?] Longoria. ● Two baskets of military papers. ● One old chest, empty. ● One saddle, very old. ● One saddle bridle with its attachments. ● One military saddle. ● One "hierro" [branding iron ?] and "algunas bestias" [some beasts], which he left to his grandson, Jose de Longoria.

Lorenzo made his declaration before Second Lieutenant Nicolas de Ochoa, mayor. His will was witnessed by Francisco de la Cruz, licentiate; Sebastian Garcia, priest and vicar of that kingdom; Second Lieutenant Agustin de Saldivar; Jose de Salcedo and Juan Bautista Chapa. Parents: Alonso de la PONTIGA and Inez MENENDEZ de Valdes.

Spouse: Ana de SALAZAR. Ana de SALAZAR and Capt. Lorenzo Suarez de LONGORIA were married. Children were: Lorenzo Suarez de LONGORIA Salazar.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--------------------
Lorenzo Suarez de Longoria (the Second) was the natural son of Lorenzo Suarez de Longoria (the First) and Ana de Salazar. He lived in either Saltillo or Monterrey, or perhaps in both cities at different times.

Lorenzo (the Second) had several children by Antonia Rodriguez (citizen of Monterrey) and at least one child (Nicolas Suarez de Longoria) by Beatriz Gonzalez. His father mentioned only two grandchildren (Maria de Longoria and Jose de Longoria) in his will; there is no mention of Pedro Rodriguez Longoria, Francisco Rodriguez Longoria, or Nicolas Suarez de Longoria.

The Marriage Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara indicate that Pedro and Francisco were natural children (i.e., Lorenzo and Antonia were not married by the Catholic Church). In all likelihood, all his children were natural children.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000018808378146

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]