== Notes for [[Item:Q87409|Q87409]] ==

Niece of THE Julius Caesar

-------------------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atia_Balba_Caesonia

------------

http://hu.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atia_Balba_Caesonis
--------------------
33740611072440471. Atia Balbus ROMAN EMPIRE,1601,1746 daughter of Marcus Atius Balbus ROMAN EMPIRE and Julia ROMAN EMPIRE, was born in , , Roma, Italy and died in 43 B.C..

http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.com/~mgholler/Caden/a55.htm#i547459236

67481222144880942. Marcus Atius Balbus ROMAN EMPIRE 1601,1746 was born in 148 B.C. in , , Roma, Italy and died in 87 B.C. in , , Roma, Italy at age 61.

Marcus married Julia ROMAN EMPIRE in 98 BC, , Roma, Italy. Julia was born in 83 B.C. in Roma, , Italy and died in 51 B.C. at age 32.

The child from this marriage was:

33740611072440471 i. Atia Balbus ROMAN EMPIRE (born in , , Roma, Italy - died in 43 B.C.)

67481222144880943. Julia ROMAN EMPIRE,1746 daughter of Praetor Caius Julius III ROMAN EMPIRE and Aurelia ROMAN EMPIRE, was born in 83 B.C. in Roma, , Italy and died in 51 B.C. at age 32.

Medical Notes:

Octavius, her grandson, delivered the eulogy at her funeral, which was his first public appearance as Emperor.

Julia married Marcus Atius Balbus ROMAN EMPIRE 1601 in 98 BC, , Roma, Italy. Marcus was born in 148 B.C. in , , Roma, Italy and died in 87 B.C. in , , Roma, Italy at age 61.

http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.com/~mgholler/Caden/a56.htm#i547458879

67481222144880943. Julia ROMAN EMPIRE,1746 daughter of Praetor Caius Julius III ROMAN EMPIRE and Aurelia ROMAN EMPIRE, was born in 83 B.C. in Roma, , Italy and died in 51 B.C. at age 32.

Medical Notes:

Octavius, her grandson, delivered the eulogy at her funeral, which was his first public appearance as Emperor.

Julia married Marcus Atius Balbus ROMAN EMPIRE 1601 in 98 BC, , Roma, Italy. Marcus was born in 148 B.C. in , , Roma, Italy and died in 87 B.C. in , , Roma, Italy at age 61.

http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.com/~mgholler/Caden/a56.htm#i547458925

134962444289761886. Praetor Caius Julius III ROMAN EMPIRE,1601,1746 son of Caius Julius II ROMAN EMPIRE and Marcia ROMAN EMPIRE, was born in 124 B.C. in Roma, Italy and died in 84 B.C. in Pisa, Roma, Italy at age 40.

General Notes:

Died suddenly "while putting on his shoes" at Pisa, 84 B.C.

Caius married Aurelia ROMAN EMPIRE 1601 in <, , Rome, Italy>. Aurelia was born in <124 BC, , Roma, Italy> and died in Y.

Children from this marriage were:

67481222144880943 i. Julia ROMAN EMPIRE (born in 83 B.C. in Roma, , Italy - died in 51 B.C.)

ii. Emperor Gaius Julius Caesar ROMAN EMPIRE was born in 100 B.C. in , , Rome, Italy, died on 15 March 44 B.C. in , , Rome, Italy at age 56, and was buried in , , Rome, Italy. The cause of his death was Assassinated.

134962444289761887. Aurelia ROMAN EMPIRE 1601,1746 was born in <124 BC, , Roma, Italy> and died in Y.

Aurelia married Praetor Caius Julius III ROMAN EMPIRE 1601 in <, , Rome, Italy>. Caius was born in 124 B.C. in Roma, Italy and died in 84 B.C. in Pisa, Roma, Italy at age 40.

http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.com/~mgholler/Caden/a57.htm#i547458863

269924888579523772. Caius Julius II ROMAN EMPIRE,1601,1746 son of Caius Julius I ROMAN EMPIRE and Unknown, was born in 149 BC, , Roma, Italy and died in 125 BC, , Roma, Italy.

Caius married Marcia ROMAN EMPIRE 1601 in <124 BC, , Roma, Italy>. Marcia was born in 147 B.C. in Roma, Italy. The child from this marriage was:

134962444289761886 i. Praetor Caius Julius III ROMAN EMPIRE (born in 124 B.C. in Roma, Italy - died in 84 B.C. in Pisa, Roma, Italy)

269924888579523773. Marcia ROMAN EMPIRE,1601,1746 daughter of Quintus Marcius ROMAN EMPIRE and Unknown, was born in 147 B.C. in Roma, Italy.

Marcia married Caius Julius II ROMAN EMPIRE 1601 in <124 BC, , Roma, Italy>. Caius was born in 149 BC, , Roma, Italy and died in 125 BC, , Roma, Italy.

http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.com/~mgholler/Caden/a58.htm#i547458855

539849777159047544. Caius Julius I ROMAN EMPIRE,1601,1746 son of Sextus Julius I ROMAN EMPIRE and Unknown, was born in 174 B.C. in Roma, Italy.

Caius married.

The child from this marriage was:

269924888579523772 i. Caius Julius II ROMAN EMPIRE (born in 149 BC, , Roma, Italy - died in 125 BC, , Roma, Italy)

539849777159047546. Quintus Marcius ROMAN EMPIRE 1601,1746 was born in 172 B.C. in Roma, Italy.

Quintus married.

The child from this marriage was:

269924888579523773 i. Marcia ROMAN EMPIRE (born in 147 B.C. in Roma, Italy)

http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.com/~mgholler/Caden/a59.htm#i547458951

and carried on...
--------------------
Atia Balbus ROMAN EMPIRE,daughter of Marcus Atius Balbus ROMAN EMPIRE. Marcus married Julia ROMAN EMPIRE in 98 BC, Roma, Italy. Julia was born in 83 B.C. in Roma,Italy and died in 51 B.C. at age 32. The child from this marriage was: Atia Balbus ROMAN EMPIRE (born in, Roma, Italy died in 43 B.C.) Julia ROMAN EMPIRE, daughter of Praetor Caius Julius III ROMAN EMPIRE and Aurelia ROMAN EMPIRE, was born in 83 B.C. in Roma, Italy and died in 51 B.C. at age 32. Octavius, her grandson, delivered the eulogy at her funeral, which was his first public appearance as Emperor
--------------------

ID: I62050

Name: Atia\Atila of Rome

Given Name: Atia\Atila

Surname: of Rome

Sex: F

_UID: 0239F5E6B4BBD342B2D9325C592218E72DEC

Change Date: 3 Oct 2005

Death: deceased

Father: Marcus Atius Balbus of Rome

Mother: Julia of Rome Caesar

Father: Marcus Atius Balbus of Rome

Mother: Julia of Rome

Marriage 1 Caius IV Octavius

Married:

Children

GAIUS @@ OCTAVIAN JULIUS CAESAR b: 23 SEP 63 BC

Octavia of Rome

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I62050

ld.még:

http://www.geni.com/family-tree/index/309889117970004648#309885929200003809

--------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atia_Balba

--------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atia_Balba_Caesonia

--------------------

Died : 43 BC

--------------------

Died : 43 BC

--------------------

Died : 43 BC

--------------------

http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per03879.htm
--------------------

Atia Balba Caesonia (85-43 f.Kr.) var systerdotter till Julius Caesar och mor till kejsare Augustus.

Hon gifte sig med provinsguvernören och senatorn Gajus Octavius. Deras barn var Octavia och den yngre Octavianus, senare Augustus. 59 f.Kr. avled Gajus Octavius på sin väg till Rom till sitt konsulat, och samma år gifte Atia om sig med en av Julius Caesars anhängare, Lucius Marcius Philippus, som blev konsul 56 f.Kr. Han älskade att uppfostra sina styvbarn vid sidan av sin son och dotter från ett tidigare äktenskap. Han arrangerade Octavias första bröllop med konsuln Gajus Claudius Marcellus.
--------------------
'''
=Atia Balba Caesonia=
'''

Atia Balba Caesonia (85-43 BC) was the daughter of Julius Caesar's sister Julia Caesaris, mother of the Emperor Augustus, step-grandmother of the Emperor Tiberius, great-grandmother of the Emperor Claudius, great-great grandmother of the Emperor Caligula and Empress Agrippina the Younger, and great-great-great-grandmother of the Emperor Nero.

The name Atia Balba was also borne by the other two daughters[citation needed] of Julia Caesaris and her husband praetor Marcus Atius Balbus. They were Atia’s older sister Atia Balba Prima, and her younger sister was Atia Balba Tertia. As a result, she was sometimes referred to as Atia Balba Secunda to differentiate her from her two sisters. In former portrayals of the ancient history the mother of Augustus, Atia, was still described as the elder of two sisters.

'''Life'''

In his Dialogus de oratoribus, Tacitus notes her to be exceptionally religious and moral, and one of the most admired matrons in the history of the Republic:

''In her presence no base word could be uttered without grave offence, and no wrong deed done. Religiously and with the utmost delicacy she regulated not only the serious tasks of her youthful charges, but also their recreations and their games.''

Suetonius' account of Augustus mentions the divine omens she experienced before and after his birth:

''When Atia had come in the middle of the night to the solemn service of Apollo, she had her litter set down in the temple and fell asleep, while the rest of the matrons also slept. On a sudden a serpent glided up to her and shortly went away. When she awoke, she purified herself, as if after the embraces of her husband, and at once there appeared on her body a mark in colours like a serpent, and she could never get rid of it; so that presently she ceased ever to go to the public baths. In the tenth month after that Augustus was born and was therefore regarded as the son of Apollo. Atia too, before she gave him birth, dreamed that her vitals were borne up to the stars and spread over the whole extent of land and sea, while Octavius dreamed that the sun rose from Atia's womb.''

''The day he was born the conspiracy of Catiline was before the House, and Octavius came late because of his wife's confinement; then Publius Nigidius, as everyone knows, learning the reason for his tardiness and being informed also of the hour of the birth, declared that the ruler of the world had been born.''

Atia was so fearful for her son's safety that she and Philippus urged him to renounce his rights as Caesar's heir. She died during her son's first consulship, in August or September 43 BC. Octavian honored her memory with a public funeral. Another Philippus, consul suffectus in 38 BC and the son of her second husband from previous marriage, later married one of her sisters.

'''Marriage, offspring and descendants'''

Her first marriage was with Gaius Octavius, the praetor in 61 BC and then Macedonian governor. Her family lived close to Velitrae, ancestral home of the Octavii. They had two children: Octavia Minor, born in 69 BC, and the younger Gaius Octavius, born in 63 BC. Octavius died in 59 BC, when their son Gaius Octavius (future Roman emperor Augustus) was four years old. That same year Atia remarried to Lucius Marcius Philippus, consul in 56 BC. They had no known children.

Many of her children's descendants became major figures of the Julio-Claudian dynasty, among them were the emperors Caligula, Claudius and Nero.

'''Atia Balba Caesonia in popular culture'''

''Television''

A fictionalised Atia of the Julii is portrayed by Polly Walker in the BBC-HBO-RAI television series Rome. There she is portrayed as shrewd, manipulative, sexually uninhibited, and extremely mindful of her family's advancement. The surname "of the Julii" is entirely imagined, as it was her mother's family name.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atia_Balba_Caesonia#Marriage.2C_offspring_and_descendants


Regarding Augustus' birth and Atia's dream:

XCIV. Having reached this point, it will not be out of place to add anaccount of the omens which occurred before he was born, on the very dayof his birth, and afterwards, from which it was possible to anticipateand perceive his future greatness and uninterrupted good fortune. Inancient days, when a part of the wall of Velitrae had been struck bylightning, the prediction was made that a citizen of that town would oneday rule the world. Through their confidence in this the people ofVelitrae had at once made war on the Roman people and fought with themmany times after that almost to their utter destruction; but at last longafterward the event proved that the omen had foretold the rule ofAugustus. According to Julius Marathus, a few months before Augustus wasborn a portent was generally observed at Rome, which gave warning thatnature was pregnant with a king for the Roman people; thereupon theSenate in consternation decreed that no male child born that year shouldbe reared; but those whose wives were with child saw to it that thedecree was not filed in the treasury, since each one appropriated theprediction to his own family. I have read the following story in thebooks of Asclepias of Mendes entitled Theologamena. When Atia had come inthe middle of the night to the solemn service of Apollo, she had herlitter set down in the temple and fell asleep, while the rest of thematrons also slept. On a sudden a serpent glided up to her and shortlywent away. When she awoke, she purified herself, as if after the embracesof her husband, and at once there appeared on her body a mark in colourslike a serpent, and she could never get rid of it; so that presently sheceased ever to go to the public baths. In the tenth month after thatAugustus was born and was therefore regarded as the son of Apollo. Atiatoo, before she gave him birth, dreamed that her vitals were borne up tothe stars and spread over the whole extent of land and sea, whileOctavius dreamed that the sun rose from Atia's womb. The day he was bornthe conspiracy of Catiline was before the House, and Octavius came latebecause of his wife's confinement; then Publius Nigidius, as everyoneknows, learning the reason for his tardiness and being informed also ofthe hour of the birth, declared that the ruler of the world had beenborn. Later, when Octavius was leading an army through remote parts ofThrace, and in the grove of Father Liber consulted the priests about hisson with barbarian rites, they made the same prediction; since such apillar of flame sprang forth from the wine that was poured over thealtar, that it rose above the temple roof and mounted to the very sky,and such an omen had befallen no one save Alexander the Great when heoffered sacrifice at the same altar. Moreover, the very next night hedreamt that his son appeared to him in a guise more majestic than that ofmortal man, with the thunderbolt, sceptre, and insignia of JupiterOptimus Maximus, wearing a crown begirt with rays and mounted upon alaurel-wreathed chariot drawn by twelve horses of surpassing whiteness.When Augustus was still an infant, as is recorded by the hand of GaiusDrusus, he was placed by his nurse at evening in his cradle on the groundfloor and the next morning had disappeared; but after long search he wasat last found lying on a lofty tower with his face towards the risingsun. As soon as he began to talk, it chanced that the frogs were making agreat noise at his grandfather's country place; he bade them be silent,and they say that since then no frog has ever croaked there. As he waslunching in a grove at the fourth milestone on the Campanian road, aneagle surprised him by snatching his bread from his hand, and afterflying to a great height, equally to his surprise dropped gently downagain and gave it back to him. After Quintus Catulus had dedicated theCapitol, he had dreams on two nights in succession: first, that JupiterOptimus Maximus called aside one of a number of boys of good family, whowere playing around his altar, and put in the fold of his toga an imageof Roma, which he was carrying in his hand; the next night he dreamt thathe saw this same boy in the lap of Jupiter of the Capitol, and that whenhe had ordered that he be removed, the god warned him to desist,declaring that the boy was being reared to be the saviour of his country.When Catulus next day met Augustus, whom he had never seen before, helooked at him in great surprise and said that he was very like the boy ofwhom he had dreamed. Some give a different account of Catulus' firstdream: when a large group of well-born children asked Jupiter for aguardian, he pointed out one of their number, to whom they were to referall their wishes, and then, after lightly touching the boy's mouth withhis fingers, laid them on his own lips. As Marcus Cicero was attendingGaius Caesar to the Capitol, he happened to tell his friends a dream ofthe night before---that a boy of noble countenance was let down fromheaven on a golden chain and, standing at the door of the temple, wasgiven a whip by Jupiter. Just then suddenly catching sight of Augustus,who was still unknown to the greater number of those present and had beenbrought to the ceremony by his uncle Caesar, he declared that he was thevery one whose form had appeared to him in his dream. When Augustus wasassuming the gown of manhood, his senatorial tunic was ripped apart onboth sides and fell at his feet, which some interpreted as a sure signthat the order of which the tunic was the badge would one day be broughtto his feet. As the Deified Julius was cutting down a wood at Munda andpreparing a place for his camp, coming across a palm tree, he caused itto be spared as an omen of victory. From this a shoot at once sprangforth and in a few days grew so great that it not only equalled theparent tree, but even overshadowed it; moreover many doves built theirnests there, although that kind of bird especially avoids hard and roughfoliage. Indeed, it was that omen in particular, they say, that ledCaesar to wish that none other than his sister's grandson should be hissuccessor. While in retirement at Apollonia, Augustus mounted withAgrippa to the studio of the astrologer Theogenes. Agrippa was the firstto try his fortune, and when a great and almnst incredible career waspredicted for him, Augustus persisted in concealing the time of his birthand in refusing to disclose it, through diffidence and fear that he mightbe found to be less eminent. When he at last gave it unwillingly andhesitatingly, and only after many urgent requests, Theogenes sprang upand threw himself at his feet. From that time on Augustus had such faithin his destiny, that he made his horoscope public and issued a silvercoin stamped with the sign of the constellation Capricornus, under whichhe was born.

1 NAME /Attila/ 2 SOUR S033320 3 DATA 4 TEXT Date of Import: Jan 17, 2001


[De La Pole.FTW]

Source: Kraentzler 1770. K: Attila (Accia). K. has problems with this line. He indicates either Caius Octavius (RIN 3507) or Appius Claudius Nero was the father of Tiberius Claudius Nero II--with Attila being married to whichever wins out, apparently. Also, in line 1826 he leaves out this generation (chickened out apparently) and had Tiberius Claudius I the father of Tiberius Claudius II. Duran has charts alleging "Atia Caesonia" married C. Octavius Caesar and they were the parents of Octavius Augustus Caesar.

1 NAME /Attila/ 2 SOUR S033320 3 DATA 4 TEXT Date of Import: Jan 17, 2001


[De La Pole.FTW]

Source: Kraentzler 1770. K: Attila (Accia). K. has problems with this line. He indicates either Caius Octavius (RIN 3507) or Appius Claudius Nero was the father of Tiberius Claudius Nero II--with Attila being married to whichever wins out, apparently. Also, in line 1826 he leaves out this generation (chickened out apparently) and had Tiberius Claudius I the father of Tiberius Claudius II. Duran has charts alleging "Atia Caesonia" married C. Octavius Caesar and they were the parents of Octavius Augustus Caesar.

AKA:
ATILA BULBUS DE ROME

OR "ATTA CAESONIA"; DIED 43 BC

1 NAME /Attila/ 2 SOUR S033320 3 DATA 4 TEXT Date of Import: Jan 17, 2001


[De La Pole.FTW]

Source: Kraentzler 1770. K: Attila (Accia). K. has problems with this line. He indicates either Caius Octavius (RIN 3507) or Appius Claudius Nero was the father of Tiberius Claudius Nero II--with Attila being married to whichever wins out, apparently. Also, in line 1826 he leaves out this generation (chickened out apparently) and had Tiberius Claudius I the father of Tiberius Claudius II. Duran has charts alleging "Atia Caesonia" married C. Octavius Caesar and they were the parents of Octavius Augustus Caesar.

Atia
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Atia Balba is the name of the three daughters of Julia (the second eldest sister of Julius Caesar) and Marcus Atius Balbus, one of whom was the mother of Augustus.

Contents [hide]
1 Atia Balba Prima
2 Atia Balba Caesonia
2.1 Popular culture
3 Atia Balba Tertia



[edit] Atia Balba Prima
Atia Balba Prima was the mother of Quintus Pedius, the suffect consul of 43 BC. Her grandson, also named Quintus Pedius, was a deaf painter beloved by Augustus (a portrait of the deaf painter, who died in 13, can be seen at [1].


[edit] Atia Balba Caesonia
Atia Balba Caesonia (85 BC-43 BC) married the Macedonian governor and senator Gaius Octavius. Their children were Octavia Thurina Minor and Gaius Octavius Thurinus, later Augustus. In 59 BC, Octavius died on his way to Rome to stand for the consulship, and Atia married Lucius Marcius Philippus, the consul of 56 BC and a supporter of Julius Caesar. He loved raising his stepchildren alongside his own son and daughter from a previous marriage and arranged Octavia's first marriage, to the consul and senator Gaius Claudius Marcellus Minor.

Atia was a religious and caring matron. Tacitus considered her as an ideal Roman matron. Suetonius' account of Augustus, mentions the divine omens she experienced before and after his birth:

When Atia had come in the middle of the night to the solemn service of Apollo, she had her litter set down in the temple and fell asleep, while the rest of the matrons also slept. On a sudden a serpent glided up to her and shortly went away. When she awoke, she purified herself, as if after the embraces of her husband, and at once there appeared on her body a mark in colours like a serpent, and she could never get rid of it; so that presently she ceased ever to go to the public baths. In the tenth month after that Augustus was born and was therefore regarded as the son of Apollo. Atia too, before she gave him birth, dreamed that her vitals were borne up to the stars and spread over the whole extent of land and sea, while Octavius dreamed that the sun rose from Atia's womb.
The day he was born the conspiracy of Catiline was before the House, and Octavius came late because of his wife's confinement; then Publius Nigidius, as everyone knows, learning the reason for his tardiness and being informed also of the hour of the birth, declared that the ruler of the world had been born.
Clause 94.

She had doubts about her son's legitimacy as Caesar's heir, and attempted to dissuade him from accepting his inheritance. She died during her son's first consulship, in August/September 43 BC. Octavian gave her the highest honours at her funeral. Philippus later married one of her sisters.

A portrait of Atia Balba Caesonia can be seen under Section 4. Parents at [2]


[edit] Popular culture
A highly fictionalized version of Atia is a major character in the HBO/BBC 2 television series Rome. Rather than a pious and loving individual, she is portrayed as a licentious, self-absorbed, and manipulative schemer whose sexual escapades included Mark Antony.


[edit] Atia Balba Tertia
Atia Balba Tertia was the mother of Lucius Pinarius.

Rootsweb Feldman
URL: http://worldconnect.genealogy.rootsweb.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=:3044567&id=I29936
# ID: I29936
# Name: Caius Octavius IV Roman Senator ROME 1 2 3 4 5 6
# Sex: M
# Birth: BEF 100 2 3 4 5 6
# Death: BEF 100 2 3 4 5 6
# Change Date: 15 JAN 2004 6
# Change Date: 15 OCT 2001 3 4 5 6
# Note:

[Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED]

2 SOUR S332582
3 DATA
4 TEXT Date of Import: 14 Jan 2004


[daveanthes.FTW]

Father: Caius Octavius III Roman Citizen ROME

Marriage 1 Atia Balbus ROME b: BEF 100

Children

1. Has Children Octavia the Elder ROME b: in 64 B.C.
2. Has No Children Augustus Octavius Caesar
3. Has No Children Gaius Octavius Augustus Rome Emperor ROME


Sources:

1. Title: 13143.GED
Note: ABBR 13143.GED
Note: Source Media Type: Other

ABBR 13143.GED

NS174433
Text: Date of Import: Apr 20, 2001
2. Title: daveanthes.FTW
Note: ABBR daveanthes.FTW
Note: Source Media Type: Other
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Book
Text: Date of Import: 14 Jan 2004
3. Title: daveanthes.FTW
Note: ABBR daveanthes.FTW
Note: Source Media Type: Other
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Book
Text: Date of Import: Jan 13, 2004
4. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Jan 18, 2004
5. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: 21 Jan 2004
6. Title: Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Feb 6, 2004


wtf 4:565

[4631] d 43 BC

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]