== Notes for [[Item:Q98262|Q98262]] ==

According to the Telmud Yerushalmi, Rab Abba bar Aibu was a descendant of Shimei, brother of King David (Kes. 62b) or Shephatai, the son of Avital and King David (TY Taan. 4:2, 68a)

Rab Abba Arika ben Aivu of Babylon was head of the rabbinic Academy between 210 and 250 in Sura, Babylonia. He was a Babylonian disciple of Judah the Prince who began to propagate the Mishna and related tannaitic literature as the yardsticks of normative practice. He began Babylonian Gemara. He was a co-founder of the Babylonian Talmud.

Rab travelled from Kafri, Babylon, to live with Rabbi Chyya in Eretz Israel as a youth in ordre to study. Rabbi Chiyya taught him and guided him...and took him to visit Judah HaNasi. Rabbi Chiyya explained some of the Nasi's customs to Rab; Rab later became a member of Rabbi Chiyya's Beit Din.

Rab Abba Arika ben Aivu of Babylon was the nephew of Chiyya (bar Abba), another disciple of Judah ha Nasi, head of the school in Tiberias 180-230, and compiler of the Tosefta. On the Name of the Messiah, Rab (Abba Arika) said: --"The world would not have been created except for David." On the The Kingdom of Heaven , Rabbi Judah (bar Ezekiel) said in the name of Rab (Abba Arika): -- "If one is saying the Shema when he is walking, he should stop to receive the kingdom of Heaven while standing. And what portion is called "the Kingdom of Heaven"? The LORD our God, the LORD is One!" (Deut 6:4b). --- Midrash, Siphre 'al Debarim 29.

The Gemara compiled at Sura---which refers to Abba Arika simply as Rab ["the Master"]--- was eventually expanded to include the rabbinic debates at rival Mesopotamian schools [especially Nehardea & Pum Beditha]. This inclusion of rival viewpoints gives the Babylonian Gemara a distinctive dialectical characteristic. On Living with God, a familiar (word) in the mouth of Rab (Abba Arika): --"In the world to come there is no eating and drinking, no propagating or multiplying, no bearing or giving / no envy, no hatred and no strife. But the righteous rest, wearing crowns on their heads, and share in the glory of the Presence [Shekinah], of which it is said: -- "And they saw God and ate and drank" (Exod 24:2). --- Babylonian Talmud, Berakoth 17a.

Rab Abba Arika ben Aivu of Babylon returned to his native Mesopotamia to found a rabbinic Academy in 219 at Sura, Babylonia. He died in 247 at age 87 years.

(Hebrew Sûrâ ). City in southern Babylonia on the Euphrates. According to Gaonic tradition ( Gaon ), in AD 219 after his years of study in Palestine (Palaestina) the Rabbinic scholar Abbâ Arîḵâ, commonly called Raḇ, established a kind of Jewish house of instruction there, in which he assembled a circle of pupils for the purpose of studying the Torah. With interruptions, even after the death of Rab in 254, the city remained - alongside and in competition with Pumbedita - a religious and cultural centre of Babylonian Judaism until the 10th cent. AD.

Ego, Beate (Osnabrück)

Bibliography

e. bashan, s. v. S., Encyclopaedia Judaica 15, 1972, 521-523

j. neusner, A History of the Jews in Babylonia, vol. 2, 1966, 232-234.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
6702EFBAAD68C1EFBBF89829A6488A4D1065
geni:6000000001043618868

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]