== Notes for [[Item:Q2003|Q2003]] ==

{geni:about_me} AJMENID HAD FOUR WIFES AND HE BEGAT ON THEM NUMEROUS (2400) SONS. BUT AMONGST THEM ALL, SAMVARANA BECAME THE PERPETUATOR OF THE DYNASTY.
<p>--------------------</p>
<p>THE LUNAR DYNASTY STARTS WITH THE SON OF CHANDRAMA, THE MOON-GOD. CHANDRAMA HAD ELOPED WITH TARA, THE WIFE OF BRIHASPATI FROM WHOM HE GOT A SON BUDH. BUDH CAME ADROSSILA, THE DAUDHTER OF VAIVASVAT MANU, WANDERING IN THE FORESTAND ENCHANTED BY HER BEAUTY, MARRIED HER..THEY BEGOT A MIGHTY SON PURURAVA OR YELA.
<p>--------------------</p>
<p> Puru, the youngest son succeeded the Yayati and inherited his kingdom in the Gangatic plain. He in turn gave rise to Puru Vansha and eventually Pauravas, whose King Porus fought with Alexander the Great in the Battle of the Hydaspes River in 326 BC. Another one of his descendants was King Bharat, son of King son of King Dushyanta and Shakuntala, and after whom, India's ancient named Bharatvarsha was kept. Further descendants were part of theKuru Kingdom including Shantanu, Dhritarashtra, Pandu, Arjuna, Abhimanyu and Parikshit. Puru The descendants of Puru included the famous Kauravas and Pandavas of Mahabharata. The Purus are tribe or a confederation of tribes mentioned in the Rigveda. RV 7.96.2 locates them at the banks of the Sarasvati River. They were defeated by king Sudas at the Battle of the Ten Kings. The descendants of Puru were called Pauravas. The Pauravas was the name given to the many petty kingdoms and tribes of ancient northwest India in the 5th and 4th centuries BCE. The Pauravas were all situated on or near the Indus river where their monarchs grew rich and prosperous through trade. The Persian kings Darius and Xerxes claimed suzerainty over many of the Pauravas, but this claim was loose at best. The most powerful tribes, the Ambhi and Porus, were cowed by the Macedonian conqueror Alexander the Great in 326 BCE, but he did not go on to conquer the entire area because his army simply refused to go any further. The region was eventually absorbed into the Mauryan Empire.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
6707A5D249B691EFBBFC9A22EF79916B3B8E


[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]