== Notes for [[Item:Q83384|Q83384]] ==

* Swore vengeance against [http://www.geni.com/people/Hazrat-Hamzah-bin-Imaam-Abd-al-Mu%E1%B9%AD%E1%B9%ADalib/4410812169090066711/ Hazrat Hamzah bin Imaam Abdul Muttalib] for the killing of her brother, father & uncle at Battle of Badr in 2 AH (624 AD).

* Concluded her revenge after [http://www.geni.com/people/Hazrat-Hamzah-bin-Imaam-Abd-al-Mu%E1%B9%AD%E1%B9%ADalib/4410812169090066711/ Hazrat Hamzah bin Imaam Abdul Muttalib]'s martyrdom in Battle of Uhud in 3 AH (March 625 AD) by eating his liver after his fall.

Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hind_bint_Utbah
--------------------
Hind bint ‘Utbah (هند بنت عتبة) was an Arab woman who lived in the late 6th and early 7th centuries CE; she was the wife of Abu Sufyan ibn Harb, a powerful man of Mecca, in western Arabia. She was the mother of Muawiyah I, the founder of the Umayyad dynasty, and of Hanzala, Juwayriya and Umm Hakam. Ramlah bint Abi Sufyan, who became one of Muhammad's wives, was her stepdaughter.

Both Abu Sufyan and Hind originally opposed the Islamic prophet Muhammad before their conversion to Islam in 630.

She was born in Mecca, daughter of one of the most prominent leaders of the Quraysh, Utbah ibn Rabi'ah, and of Safiya bint Umayya.[4] She had two brothers: Abu-Hudhayfah ibn 'Utbah and Walid ibn Utbah. Her father and her paternal uncle Shaibah ibn Rabī‘ah were among the chief adversaries of Islam who eventually were killed by 'Ali in the Battle of Badr.[5]

Her first husband was Hafs (or Al-Fakah) ibn Al-Mughira from the Makhzum clan, to whom she bore one son, Aban.[6] He owned a banqueting hall that the public were allowed to enter freely. One day he left Hind alone in the hall and returned home to see one of his employees leaving in a hurry. Assuming that his wife had a lover, he kicked her and asked her who the man had been. She replied that she had been asleep and did not know that anyone had entered; but Hafs did not believe her and he divorced her immediately.[7]

Hind then found herself the subject of gossip. Her father Utbah asked her to tell the truth about her divorce. "If the accusations are true, I will arrange to have Hafs murdered; and if they are false, I will summon him to appear before a soothsayer from Yemen." Hind swore by the gods that she was innocent, so Utbah called the soothsayer. Hind was sitting among a crowd of women; the soothsayer walked up, struck her on the shoulder and said, "Arise, you chaste woman and no adulteress. You will give birth to a King!" Hafs then took her hand, ready to accept her back as his wife; but Hind withdrew her hand and said, "Go away, for I shall try to bear him to some other man."

Hind refused another suitor in order to marry Abu Sufyan, who was her maternal first cousin and paternal second cousin, c.599. Her family borrowed the jewellery of the Abu'l-Huqayq clan in Medina so that she could adorn herself for the wedding.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]