== Notes for [[Item:Q102816|Q102816]] ==

Rabbi Judah the Prince had a student — and then colleague — by the name of Rabbi Chiya. He originally came from Babylon, where he was apparently well-established, and came to the Land of Israel along with his sons to study in the academy of Rabbi Judah. He was held in such esteem that when the Talmud lists a number of key individuals in history — including the likes of Ezra and Hillel – who were able to restore Jewish knowledge to its rightful place in their time it mentions “Rabbi Chiya and his sons.”

After the destruction following the failed Bar Kochba revolt (circa the year 140 CE and onward) the Jewish population in the Land of Israel diminished… and continued to diminish steadily, like a graph going downward in a straight line. Jews were moving from Israel to Babylon, not the other way around.

There were people that would come from Babylon to learn in Israel for a year or two, but then return to Babylon. These visiting scholars, so to speak, created an effective cross-pollination of ideas and differing viewpoints.

Nevertheless, most the traffic was one way: leaving the Land of Israel. This was especially true after the death of Judah the Prince. With his death the ascendancy of the Babylonian Jewish community over the community in the Land of Israel began in earnest.

Rabbi Chiya had a nephew who was called Rav, but whose real name was Abba (and who is sometimes called in the Talmud, Abba Aricha, “Abba the Tall”). He had come from Babylon to Israel to study in the academy with Rabbi Judah the Prince. Indeed, he made the trip between the two lands a number of times.

He was relatively unknown until he reached his sixties. He is the man who, more than anyone else, made Babylonian Jewry what it was. He settled in the city of Sura, one of the main cities in Babylon, the same city where the prophet Ezekiel lived when he came with the exiles of the First Temple era. Ezekiel had founded an academy which was then close to 700 years old by the time Rav became head of it and turned it into the foremost house of Jewish scholarship not only in Babylon but anywhere in the world. Indeed, it remained the “Harvard” of Jewish academies until around 1000 CE. From the time of Rav onward, the person who headed the academy in Sura was the spiritual head of the Jewish world.

Rav had a compatriot by the name of Shmuel, who was head of the Jewish community in Neharda, which means the “City of the River” (a reference to the Euphrates). Shmuel not only was an expert in all Jewish subjects, but an incredible astronomer well. The Talmud remarks about him that he was as familiar with the pathways of the stars in heaven as he was of the pathways of the streets of Neharda.

Shmuel was the father of the permanent Jewish calendar, even though it did not come into effective use for another two centuries. He formulated the calendar based on his vast knowledge of astronomy. He coupled that with an uncanny knowledge of mathematics, which we find evidence of all over the Talmud. Besides discussions of concepts in algebra, geometry, trigonometry, etc., the Talmud comes to the reckoning of pi. Most of these discussions in one way or another came through Shmuel. (This is not to suggest that these mathematical equations and concepts were not known before his time, but rather that he codified them, so to speak.)

While Rav headed the great academy in Sura, Shmuel headed the great academy in Neharda. They were the originators of the give-and-take in the Talmud, which is the hallmark of the Talmud. They had differing opinions on most subject matters. These opinions were recorded, discussed and analyzed.

When Shmuel died, Rav wept and said, “The man that I feared has died.” By that he meant to lament over the fact that now there was no one equal to him in Torah knowledge, no one whose opinion was a serious challenge to his own.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000018728238074

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]