== Notes for [[Item:Q90838|Q90838]] ==

''Do not confuse her with her sister, also named [http://www.geni.com/people/Iotapa-of-Commagene/6000000016143642011 Iotapa]. This Iotapa was the wife of her brother [http://www.geni.com/people/Antiochus-III-Epiphanes/6000000006101423094 Antiochus III Epiphanes].''

From Wikipedia:

'''[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iotapa#Daughter_of_King_Mithridates_III_of_Commagene Iotapa]''' was a princess from the Kingdom of Commagene, who lived between the 1st century BC and 1st century. She was the daughter of King Mithridates III of Commagene and Queen Iotapa of Commagene and was of Armenian, Greek and Medes descent.

Iotapa was most probably born, raised and educated in Samosata, the capital of the Kingdom of Commagene. Her brother was Antiochus III of Commagene, whom she married. When her father died in 12 BC, her brother succeeded their father as King of Commagene.

With Iotapa’s reign with Antiochus III, she was the last independent Queen of Commagene, as her brother ruled as the last independent King of Commagene. From her marriage to her brother, she had two children: a son, prince Antiochus IV of Commagene and a daughter, princess Iotapa.

Antiochus III died in 17, his death became unsettling for the kingdom. At the time of Antiochus’ death, Commagene was in political turmoil. The reasons for this development is unknown, however it appears at that time, their children were too young to succeed their father and there was no authority to prevent civil unrest and unite the citizens of Commagene.

--------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iotapa#Daughter_of_King_Mithridates_III_of_Commagene

Daughter of King Mithridates III of Commagene

Iotapa was a princess from the Kingdom of Commagene, who lived between the 1st century BC and 1st century. She was the daughter of King Mithridates III of Commagene and Queen Iotapa of Commagene and was of Armenian, Greek and Medes descent.

Iotapa was most probably born, raised and educated in Samosata, the capital of the Kingdom of Commagene. Her brother was Antiochus III of Commagene, whom she married. When her father died in 12 BC, her brother succeeded their father as King of Commagene.

With Iotapa’s reign with Antiochus III, she was the last independent Queen of Commagene, as her brother ruled as the last independent King of Commagene. From her marriage to her brother, she had two children: a son, prince Antiochus IV of Commagene and a daughter, princess Iotapa.

Antiochus III died in 17, his death became unsettling for the kingdom. At the time of Antiochus’ death, Commagene was in political turmoil. The reasons for this development is unknown, however it appears at that time, their children were too young to succeed their father and there was no authority to prevent civil unrest and unite the citizens of Commagene.

From the death of Antiochus III, two fractions had appeared. One fraction led by noblemen wanted Commagene to be placed under the rule of the Roman Empire and the another fraction led by the citizens wanted to retain the rule of the King.

The political fractions from Commagene peacefully had sent embassies to Rome, seeking the advice and assistance of the Roman Emperor Tiberius, to decide the future of Commagene. When the political fractions addressed the Emperor of the future of Commagene, they were in line, were with the political reality of Roman rule and were prepared to live with the decision that Tiberius made. They were also prepared to live in the rule of the Roman Empire. When the political fractions had sent embassies to Rome, this marked the end of the independence of Commagene.

Tiberius decided to make Commagene a part of the Roman province of Syria. The decision that Tiberius made was welcomed by many citizens by Commagene, however some, particularly those who were supporters of the royal family were unhappy with this outcome.

The whereabouts of Iotapa after the annexation of Commagene are unknown. Her children were raised and lived in Rome. In 38, the Roman Emperor Caligula restored the kingdom to her children.

--------------------
'''
=Iotapa=
'''

Iotapa (born around 20 BC), a daughter of King Mithridates III of Commagene, reigned as Queen of Commagene after marrying her King brother Antiochus III.

'''Biography'''

Iotapa was a princess from the Kingdom of Commagene, who lived in the second half of the 1st century BC and the first half of the 1st century. She was the daughter of King Mithridates III of Commagene and Queen Iotapa of Commagene and was of Armenian, Greek and Median descent.

Iotapa was most probably born, raised and educated in Samosata, the capital of the Kingdom of Commagene. Her brother was Antiochus III of Commagene, whom she married. When her father died in 12 BC, her brother succeeded their father as King of Commagene. With Iotapa’s reign with Antiochus III, she was the last independent Queen of Commagene, as her brother ruled as the last independent King of Commagene. From her marriage to her brother, she had two children: a son, prince Antiochus IV of Commagene and a daughter, princess Iotapa.

Antiochus III died in 17; his death became unsettling for the kingdom. At the time of Antiochus’ death, Commagene was in political turmoil. The reasons for this development are unknown, however it appears at that time, their children were too young to succeed their father and there was no authority to prevent civil unrest and unite the citizens of Commagene. From the death of Antiochus III, two factions had appeared. One faction led by noblemen wanted Commagene to be placed under the rule of the Roman Empire and the other faction led by the citizens wanted to retain the rule of the King.

The political factions from Commagene peacefully had sent embassies to Rome, seeking the advice and assistance of the Roman emperor Tiberius, to decide the future of Commagene. When the political factions addressed the Emperor of the future of Commagene, they were in line, were with the political reality of Roman rule and were prepared to live with the decision that Tiberius made. They were also prepared to live in the rule of the Roman Empire. When the political factions had sent embassies to Rome, this marked the end of the independence of Commagene.

Tiberius decided to make Commagene a part of the Roman province of Syria. The decision that Tiberius made was welcomed by many citizens by Commagene, however some, particularly those who were supporters of the royal family were unhappy with this outcome. The whereabouts of Iotapa after the annexation of Commagene are unknown. Her children were raised and lived in Rome. In 38, the Roman Emperor Caligula restored the kingdom to her children.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iotapa_(spouse_of_Antiochus_III)

RESEARCH NOTES:
Queen of Media. Unclear if Iotape is correct name. Not definitely daughter
of Antiochus I of Commagne.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]