== Notes for [[Item:Q88517|Q88517]] ==

[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cambyses_I Cambyses I, From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia]

ID: I62240

Name: Cambyses I of Persia

Prefix: King

Given Name: Cambyses I

Surname: of Persia

Sex: M

_UID: 2BE0ED759ACE5C4D9D4821702864E64DB3D1

Change Date: 18 Jun 2004

Note:

Cambyses I (flourished 6th century bc), Persian king of the Achaemenid dynasty who ruled (circa 600-559 bc) over Anshan (now Baghdad Province, Iraq) as a vassal of the Medes, then preeminent in Persia. Cambyses I was the son of Cyrus I (flourished 7th century bc), whom he succeeded, and the father of Cyrus the Great, who founded the Persian Empire. According to the Greek historian Herodotus, Cambyses I married the daughter of Astyages, king of the Medes (reigned about 584-550 bc).

© 1993-2003 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

Death: ABT 559 BC

Father: Cyrus I of Persia

Marriage 1 of Medes

Children

Cyrus of Persia b: ABT 600 BC

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I62240

--------------------

Birth: 630 B.C.

Death: 559 B.C.

--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cambyses_I
--------------------
•ID: I62240 •Name: Cambyses I of Persia •Prefix: King •Given Name: Cambyses I •Surname: of Persia •Sex: M •_UID: 2BE0ED759ACE5C4D9D4821702864E64DB3D1 •Change Date: 18 Jun 2004 •Note: Cambyses I (flourished 6th century bc), Persian king of the Achaemenid dynasty who ruled (circa 600-559 bc) over Anshan (now Baghdad Province, Iraq) as a vassal of the Medes, then preeminent in Persia. Cambyses I was the son of Cyrus I (flourished 7th century bc), whom he succeeded, and the father of Cyrus the Great, who founded the Persian Empire. According to the Greek historian Herodotus, Cambyses I married the daughter of Astyages, king of the Medes (reigned about 584-550 bc).

© 1993-2003 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

•Death: ABT 559 BC

Father: Cyrus I of Persia

Marriage 1 of Medes Children 1. Cyrus of Persia b: ABT 600 BC

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp%2Dfam&id=I62240

F.CA. 623 F.KR., KONGE AV PERSIA.

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Anshan

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per00541.htm#0

OR "KAMBYSES""CAMBYSES I"; GREAT KING; KING OF PARSA (ANSHAN); ca. 600-559 BC

Cambyses I (flourished 6th century bc), Persian king of the Achaemenid
dynasty who ruled (circa 600-559 bc) over Anshan (now Baghdad Province,
Iraq) as a vassal of the Medes, then preeminent in Persia. Cambyses I was
the son of Cyrus I (flourished 7th century bc), whom he succeeded, and the
father of Cyrus the Great, who founded the Persian Empire. According to
the Greek historian Herodotus, Cambyses I married the daughter of
Astyages, king of the Medes (reigned about 584-550 bc).

Cambyses I of Anshan
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.

Cambyses I the Elder (c. 600 – 559 BC) was King of Anshan from c. 580 to 559 BC and was the father of Cyrus II (Cyrus the Great. His name in Greek was ?aµß?s??, whence the Latin Cambyses.

Cambyses was an early member of the Achaemenid dynasty. He was apparently a great-grandson of its founder Achaemenes, grandson of Teispes of Anshan and son of Cyrus I of Anshan. His paternal uncle reigned as Ariaramnes of Persia and his first cousin as Arsames of Persia.

According to Herodotus, Cambyses was "a man of good family and quiet habits". He reigned under the overlordship of Astyages, King of Media. He was reportedly married to Princess Mandane of Media, a daughter to Astyages and Princess Aryenis of Lydia. His wife was reportedly a granddaughter to both Cyaxares of Media and Alyattes II of Lydia. The result of their marriage was the birth of his successor Cyrus the Great.

According to Herodotus, Astyages chose Cambyses as a son-in-law because he considered him to pose no threat to the Medean throne. This was not the case with Cyrus II who would grow to depose his grandfather.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------




Preceded by:
Cyrus I King of Anshan
580 – 559 Succeeded by:
Cyrus II the Great

[edit]
External links
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Anshan (or Anzan) (in (The language of Persia (Iran) in any of its ancient forms) Persian ?????) was also a city and small kingdom in (An empire in southern Asia created by Cyrus the Great in the 6th century BC and destroyed by Alexander the Great in the 4th century BC) Persia ( (A theocratic islamic republic in the Middle East in western Asia; Iran was the core of the ancient empire that was known as Persia until 1935; rich in oil; involved in state-sponsored terrorism) Iran) during the 1st millennium BC, ruled by the (Click link for more info and facts about Achaemenid dynasty) Achaemenid dynasty. Persian prince Teispes (675-640) captured the (A member of an ancient warlike people living in Elam east of Babylonia as early as 3000 BC) Elamite city of Anshan and called himself "King of the City of Anshan". Anshan embarked on a period of conquest in the 6th century BC and became the nucleus of the (An empire in southern Asia created by Cyrus the Great in the 6th century BC and destroyed by Alexander the Great in the 4th century BC) Persian empire.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]