== Notes for [[Item:Q113475|Q113475]] ==

[https://www.geni.com/people/Numabela-de-Cantábria/6000000000130938704?through=6000000000424646987 Numabela de Cantabria] is seen as the daughter of https://www.geni.com/people/Munia-Gundersindez/6000000004533589948?through=6000000013712771768 and [https://www.geni.com/people/Pedro-I-duque-da-Cant%C3%A1bria/6000000003742102823?through=6000000000130938704 Pedro l] and the wife of https://www.geni.com/people/Loup-II-duc-de-Gascogne/6000000000424646976?through=6000000013712771768. However, no name is given for the wife of Loup ll at https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lope_II_de_Vasconia or any source cited on that page.

----

[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lupus_II_of_Gascony Lupus II of Gascony] English Wikipedia retrieved January 2021

''Lupo II''[1] (died 778) is the third-attested historical duke of Gascony (dux Vasconum or princeps[2]), appearing in history for the first time in 769. His ancestry is subject to scholarly debate.[3]

He died probably in 778.[11] His relationship to the previous dukes of Aquitaine-Vasconia and his successors is unclear. If he is to be regarded as related to subsequent Gascon dukes, which seems reasonable on the basis of patronymics, a genealogy can easily be constructed.[12] '''He was the father of Sancho, Seguin, Centule, and García (Garsand).''' All of his sons ruled Gascony at one time or another except García, who died in battle with Berengar of Toulouse in 819.[13] He may have had another son named '''Adalric''', who was active in the reign of Chorso of Toulouse.

----

http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/GASCONY.htm

LOUP, son of [HATTO & his wife Vandrade ---] (-murdered [775]). The charter of Charles II "le Chauve" King of the West Franks dated 30 Jan 845 (probably spurious, as explained in the Introduction) names "Lupo Duci" as son of "Hattonis Ducis"[5]. His parentage has not been corroborated by other primary sources consulted. m ---. ''' The name of Loup's wife is not known'''.

Loup & his wife had [three] children:

1. ADALRIC . The name of Adalric's wife is not known. Adalric & his wife had [two] children:] ...

2. LOUP-SANCHO . The primary source which confirms his parentage has not yet been identified.]

3. ADELA . The charter of Charles II "le Chauve" King of the West Franks dated 30 Jan 845 (probably spurious, as explained in the Introduction) names "Adelæ…Ducis Lupi filiæ" as mother of "Lupus"[18]. Her parentage and marriage have not been corroborated by other primary sources consulted. m WAIFAR Duke of Aquitaine, son of HUNOALD Duke of Aquitaine & his wife --- (-killed in battle 2 Jun 768).]

----

https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Numabela_de_Cantabria

Numabela Cantabria was born around the year 755. Possible daughter of Fruela Perez de Cantabria and Menina Gosendes and therefore granddaughter of Pedro, duke of Cantabria. Had as children Centulus Lopiz Gascony and the Duke Sánctulus Lopis of Gascogne and supposedly Munia Alava .

(No citations given)

Fundó con su padre y el Obispo de Valentín, en 769, el monasterio de monjas del Pedroso.

_P_CCINFO 1-20792

Rootsweb Feldman
URL: http://worldconnect.genealogy.rootsweb.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=:3044567&id=I01091
# ID: I01091
# Name: Lupus II of GASCONY 1 2 3 4 5
# Sex: M
# Birth: ABT 755 1 2 3 4 5
# Death: AFT 778 1 2 3 4 5
# Change Date: 15 JAN 2004 5
# Change Date: 25 DEC 2001 2 3 4 5
# Note:

[Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED]

2 SOUR S332582
3 DATA
4 TEXT Date of Import: 14 Jan 2004


[daveanthes.FTW]

#Générale# Fils cadet.
Duc de Gascogne.

OCCU Duke of Gascony
SOUR http://misc.traveller.com/ge nealogy/gedhtml/kmilburn/d0002/g0000073.htm#I2023[Spare.FTW]

Father: Waifre of GASCONY b: ABT 730
Mother: Adèle GASCONY b: ABT 735

Marriage 1 ? DE CANTABRE b: ABT 755 in X

* Married: 770 1 2 3 4 5

Children

1. Has Children Loup Duke of GASCONY
2. Has Children Duke of Gascony ADELRICO
3. Has Children Sancho Ier Lupus of GASCONY b: ABT 775


Sources:

1. Title: daveanthes.FTW
Note: ABBR daveanthes.FTW
Note: Source Media Type: Other
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Book
Text: Date of Import: 14 Jan 2004
2. Title: daveanthes.FTW
Note: ABBR daveanthes.FTW
Note: Source Media Type: Other
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Book
Text: Date of Import: Jan 13, 2004
3. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Jan 18, 2004
4. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: 21 Jan 2004
5. Title: Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Feb 6, 2004

#Générale##Générale#Controversé : fille d'un Fruela, mais lequel ? Le frère oubien le filsd'Alphonse Ier le Catholique ?

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]