== Notes for [[Item:Q87162|Q87162]] ==

>Rubellius Blandus: From his grandfather Seneca says he was the first Roman knight, which taught rhetoric in Rome.Rubellius Blandus was a Roman, native of Tibur (Tivoli, Italy). He was the first Equestrian of Ancient Rome to teach rhetoric and thus made it more respectable . He was the teacher of Papirius Fabianus, who was in turn the teacher of Seneca the Younger. His grandson Gaius Rubellius Blandus was a suffect consul of 18 His father, Caius Rubellius Blandus was triumvir monetalis under Augustus.
>————————————————————
'''Drawn from:''' ''The Fragments of the Roman Historians''. Oxford University Press. 2013. pp. 624–. ISBN 978-0-19-927705-6. [https://www.worldcat.org/title/859181028 '''WorldCat.org'''].
>"Rubellius Blandus was a Roman, native of Tibur (Tivoli, Italy). He was the first Equestrian of Ancient Rome to teach rhetoric and thus made it more respectable (Sen., Controv. 2, praef. 5). He was the teacher of Papirius Fabianus, who was in turn the teacher of Seneca the Younger. His grandson Gaius Rubellius Blandus was a suffect consul of 18."



----

'''
=Rubellius Blandus=
'''

Rubellius Blandus was a Roman, native of Tibur (Tivoli, Italy). He was the first Equestrian of Ancient Rome to teach rhetoric and thus made it more respectable (Sen., Controv. 2, praef. 5). He was the teacher of Papirius Fabianus, who was in turn the teacher of Seneca the Younger. His grandson Gaius Rubellius Blandus was a suffect consul of 18.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rubellius_Blandus

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]