== Notes for [[Item:Q87532|Q87532]] ==

ID: I82406

Name: Antiochus VIII Philometer of Syria

Prefix: King

Given Name: Antiochus VIII Philometer

Surname: of Syria

Sex: M

_UID: 780E5E0BF3FBB644AA37646A0DFB89485F6C

Change Date: 26 Nov 2005

Death: Y

Marriage 1 Cleopatra Tryphaena of Egypt

Married:

Children

Laodike Thea Philadelphos

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I82406

--------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antiochus_VIII_Grypus

=Antiochus VIII Grypus=

==Antiochus VIII Epiphanes/Callinicus/Philometor, ''nicknamed Grypus''==

--------------------
'''
=Antiochus VIII Grypus=
'''

Epiphanes/Callinicus/Philometor, nicknamed Grypus (hook-nose), was crowned as ruler of the Greek Seleucid kingdom in 125 BC. He was the son of Demetrius II Nicator and Cleopatra Thea.

'''Biography'''

Antiochus Grypus was crowned as a teenager in 125 BC after his mother Cleopatra Thea had killed his elder brother Seleucus V Philometor, ruling jointly with her. After Antiochus defeated usurper Alexander II Zabinas in 123 BC his mother tried to poison him with wine, but the suspicious king forced her to drink the cup herself. (The story may have been inspired by the fact that Grypus was interested in toxicology; some poems about poisonous herbs believed to have been written by him are quoted by the famous physician Galen).

Either he or his half brother Antiochus IX Cyzicenus is probably identical with the ephemeral child ruler Antiochus Epiphanes, who was crowned by Cleopatra Thea after the death of Antiochus VII but before Demetrius II returned to Antioch. The child Antiochus Epiphanes, who is known from coins, was deposed—but not killed—when Demetrius II was restored in 129 BC.

Despite political shortcomings, Grypus was a popular king. His ugly, lazy appearance on coins (common among the last Seleucids), together with stories of his lavish banquets, made posterity believe his dynasty was degenerated and decadent. This was however a conscious image, an invocation of the Hellenistic idea Tryphe - meaning good life, which the last Seleucids strove to be associated with, as opposed to the exhausting civil wars and feuds which troubled their reigns in reality.

A story of his luxurious parties claims he sent food home with guests who attended banquets, complete with a camel as beast of burden, as well as a with attendant to carry the guest himself. This should certainly have caused some strain on the already depleted treasury.

'''Family'''

He married the Ptolemaic princess Tryphaena, but in 116 BC his half-brother and cousin Antiochus IX Cyzicenus (see Antiochus VII Sidetes) returned from exile and a civil war began. Cyzicenus' wife, also named Cleopatra, was a sister of Tryphaena and was eventually killed in a dramatic fashion in the temple of Daphne outside Antioch, on the order of Tryphaena. Cyzicenus eventually killed Tryphaena as revenge. The two brothers then divided Syria between them until Grypus was killed by his minister Heracleon in 96 BC.

Five of Grypus' sons later rose to kingship:

# Seleucus VI Epiphanes
# Antiochus XI Ephiphanes Philadelphus
# Philip I Philadelphus
# Demetrius III Eucaerus
# Antiochus XII Dionysus

This contributed to the confusion of civil war amid which the Seleucid empire ended.

He also had at least one daughter:

# Laodice VII Thea, married to king Mithridates I Callinicus of Commagene as part of a settlement by Mithridates' father Sames II Theosebes Dikaios to ensure peace between the Kingdom of Commagene and the Seleucid Empire. Laodice and Mithridates' son was king Antiochus I Theos of Commagene. This was a grandson to Grypus.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antiochus_VIII_Grypus

Antiochus VIII Philimeter Grypos av Syrien

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Syria 125-96 BC

PHILOMETOR (GRYPUS); KING OF SYRIA 125-96 BC; b. ca. 143, ASSASSINATED 96 BC

EUSEBES PHILOPATOR; KING OF SYRIA 115-95 BC

He was Great King of Syria from 125 BC to 96 BC.

He was Great King of Syria from 125 BC to 96 BC.

Birth: in 143 BC 1
Death: in 96 BC [assassinated] 1
Event: Ruled 124 - 121 BC, King of Syria [jointly with Cleopatra Theo] 1
Event: Ruled 115 - 96 BC, King of syria [jointly with Antiochus IX] 1
Event: Ruled 121 - 115 BC, King of Syria 1

Birth: in 143 BC 1
Death: in 96 BC [assassinated] 1
Event: Ruled 124 - 121 BC, King of Syria [jointly with Cleopatra Theo] 1
Event: Ruled 115 - 96 BC, King of syria [jointly with Antiochus IX] 1
Event: Ruled 121 - 115 BC, King of Syria 1

Birth: in 143 BC 1
Death: in 96 BC [assassinated] 1
Event: Ruled 124 - 121 BC, King of Syria [jointly with Cleopatra Theo] 1
Event: Ruled 115 - 96 BC, King of syria [jointly with Antiochus IX] 1
Event: Ruled 121 - 115 BC, King of Syria 1

Antiochus VIII Grypus
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.
Jump to: navigation, search

Antiochus VIII Epiphanes/Callinicus/Philometor, nicknamed Grypus (hook-nose) was son of Demetrius II Nicator and was crowned as a boy in 125 BC after his mother Cleopatra Thea had killed his elder brother Seleucus V Philometor, ruling jointly with her. After Antiochus defeated usurper Alexander II Zabinas in 123 BC his mother tried to poison him with wine, but the suspicious king forced her to drink the cup herself. (The story may have been inspired by the fact that Grypus was interested in toxicology; some poems about poisonous herbs believed to have been written by him are quoted by the famous physician Galen.)

He married the Ptolemaic princess Tryphaena, but in 116 BC his half-brother and cousin Antiochus IX Cyzicenus (see Antiochus VII Sidetes) returned from exile and a civil war began. Cyzicenus' wife, also named Cleopatra, was a half-sister of Tryphaena and was eventually killed in a dramatic fashion in the temple of Daphne outside Antioch, on the order of Tryphaena. Cyzicenus eventually killed Tryphaena as revenge. The two brothers then divided Syria between them until Grypus was killed by his minister Heracleon in 96 BC. Five of his sons succeeded him.

Despite political shortcomings, Grypus was a popular king. His ugly, lazy appearance on coins (common among the last Seleucids), together with stories of his lavish banquets, made posterity believe his dynasty was degenerated and decadent. This was however a conscious image, an invocation of the hellenistic idea Tryphe - meaning good life, which the last Seleucids strove to be associated with, as opposed to the exhausting civil wars and feuds which troubled their reigns in reality.

A story of his luxorious parties claims he sent food home with guests whom attended banquets, complete with a camel as beast of burden, as well as an with attendant to carry the guest himself. This should certainly have caused some strain on the already depleted treasury.

Preceded by:
Cleopatra Seleucid Ruler Succeeded by:
Antiochus IX

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]