== Notes for [[Item:Q100043|Q100043]] ==

Hizkiya's line fled to Northern Mesopotamia and remained in Mosul (present-day Iraq) until the Mongol invasion of 1270CE at which time it was extinguished. '''It is possible some escaped into the Khazars in the north'''

Source: ''“The Scribe - JOURNAL OF BABYLONIAN JEWRY PUBLISHED BY THE EXILARCH’S FOUNDATION ISSN 14 74 – 0230 ISSUE 74 - AUTUMN 2001” pg 59 - The Exilarch’s Tree of the middle ages appears in the Babylonian Haggadahpublished by the Exilarch’s Foundation''
--------------------

'''The son of Abū Saʿd, Ḥasan (Japheth), married the daughter of the Karaite nasi Hezekiah of Jerusalem''' sometime between 1040 and 1047. The Karaite linguist Abū l-Faraj Hārūn ibn al-Faraj of Jerusalem witnessed the proxy appointment drawn up in Fustat. After his marriage and his father’s assassination, Ḥasan took up some of his father’s responsibilities at court, and by 1064 he had converted to Islam to become superintendent of the fisc (Ar. ṣāhib bayt al-māl).

Fischel, Walter J. Jews in the Economic and Political Life of Medieval Islam (New York: Ktav, 1969).

Gil, Moshe. In the Kingdom of Ishmael, 4 vols. (Tel Aviv: Tel Aviv University; Jerusalem: Ministry of Defense and Bialik Institute, 1997) [Hebrew].

———. Jews in Islamic Countries in the Middle Ages, trans. David Strassler (Leiden: Brill, 2004), pp. 663–675, §§ 368–375 et passim.

———. PalestineDuring the First Muslim Period (634–1099), 3 vols. (Tel Aviv: Tel Aviv University, 1983) [Hebrew].

———. The Tustaris, Family and Sect (Tel Aviv: Institute for Diaspora Research, 1981) [Hebrew].

Margoliouth, George. “Ibn al-Hītī’s Chronicle of Karaite doctors,” Jewish Quarterly Review, o.s. 9 (1897): 429–443.

Rustow, Marina. Heresy and the Politics of Community: The Jews of the Fatimid Caliphate (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2008).

Schwarb, Gregor. “Sahl b. al-Faḍl al-Tustarī’s Kitāb al-īmāʿ,” Ginzei Qedem 2 (2006): 61–105.

Stern, S. M. “A Petition to the Fāṭimid Caliph al-Mustanṣir Concerning a Conflict Within the Jewish Community,” Revue des Etudes Juives 128 (1969): 203–222.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD7AFA541EFBBFA9822EF79916CB5EB
geni:6000000012418495675

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]