== Notes for [[Item:Q105328|Q105328]] ==

31. MARIA4 GUERRA-CANAMAR-MORALES (LEONOR3 DE MORALES, JUANA2 DE TREVINO-QUINTANILLA-Y-SALAZAR, PEDRO1 DE SALAZAR)
*died Aft. 26 May 1675 in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
*She married CAPTAIN ALONSO DE CARDENAS-PINILLAS, son of ALONSO DE CARDENAS and ANA LOPEZ-PINILLAS.
**He was born 1638 in Charcas, San Luis Potosi, Mexico, and
**died Bef. Jun 1672 in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
***Notes for MARIA GUERRA-CANAMAR-MORALES: Her last will and testament was signed on May 26, 1675. Source:Origen de los Fundadores de Texas, Nuevo Mexico, Coahulia, y Nuevo Leon, by Guillermo Garmendia Leal. Page 130.
***Notes for CAPTAIN ALONSO DE CARDENAS-PINILLAS: Source: Origen de los Fundadores de Texas, Nuevo Mexico, Coagulia y Nuevo Leon, Saltillo Tomo II by Guillermo Garmendia Leal. Page 104.
***Marriage Notes for MARIA GUERRA-CANAMAR-MORALES and ALONSO DE CARDENAS-PINILLAS: Marriage source:Origen de los Fundadores de Texas, Nuevo Mexico, Coahulia, y Nuevo Leon, by Guillermo Garmendia Leal. (page 130).

Children of MARIA GUERRA-CANAMAR-MORALES and ALONSO DE CARDENAS-PINILLAS are:
*1. i. PEDRO5 DE CARDENAS-PINILLAS.
*2. ii. JOSEPHA DE CARDENAS-PINILLAS,
**b. Charcas, S. L. P., Mexico;
**m. DOMINGO GIL-DE-LEIBA, Abt. 25 Feb 1659/60, Charcas, S.L.P., Mexico;
***b. Sombrerete, Zacatecas, Mexico;
***d. Abt. 17 Jan 1675/76, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
****Notes for DOMINGO GIL-DE-LEIBA: Source:Origen de los Fundadores de Texas, Nuevo Mexico, Coagulia y Nuevo Leon, Saltillo Tomo II by Guillermo Garmendia Leal. Page 103
*3. iii. ANTONIO DE CARDENAS-PINILLAS.
*4. iv. JOSEPH DE CARDENAS-PINILLAS,
**b. 1670, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico;
**m. PETRONILA DE VILLARREAL-DE-LA-GARZA, 18 Oct 1692, Sagrario Metropolitano, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico;
***b. Salinas Victoria, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.
*5. v. JUANA DE CARDENAS-PINILLAS.
*6. vi. MARSELA DE CARDENAS-PINILLAS,
**b. 1650;
**m. ALONSO DE-LA-BARRERA-NAVARRO.
*7. vii. ALFEREZ ALONSO PINILLAS-DE-CARDENAS,
**b. 1700;
**m. JUANA DE-LA-CERDA-DE-TREVINO;
***b. 1702.
***Notes for JUANA DE-LA-CERDA-DE-TREVINO: A.K.A. Juana de la Cerda.

http://www.somosprimos.com/inclan/salazar.htm

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000014429982183

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]