== Notes for [[Item:Q90298|Q90298]] ==

[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Aelius_Lamia_Plautius_Aelianus Lucius Aelius Lamia Plautius Aelianus (c. 45 - 81/96)] was a Consul Suffectus in 80.

Lamia was probably a son of Tiberius Plautius Silvanus Aelianus He married Domitia Longina, the daughter of Gnaeus Domitius Corbulo and Cassia Longina. Their son was probably Lucius Fundanius Laemia Aelianus.

He was executed by Emperor Domitian

======================================

.
[http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jwflank&id=I25600 Name: Lucius Aelius Plautius Lamia Aelianus 1 2]
* Sex: M
* Birth: in c 50 AD, Rome, Italy
* Death: in c 81 AD
* Note: L. aelius lamia aemilianus, belonged originally, as we see from the last name, to the gens Aemilia, and was adopted into the gens Aelia. He was consul suffectus in a. d. 80 in the reign of Titus, and was originally married to Do-mitia Longina, the daughter of Corbulo ; but dur­ing the lifetime of Vespasian he was deprived of her by Domitian, who first lived with her as his mistress and subsequently married her. [domitia longina.] Lamia was put to .death by Domitian after his accession to the throne. (Dion Cass. Ixvi. 3 ; Suet. Dom. 1,10 ; Juv. iv. 154.) Lamia's full name was L. Aelius Plautius Lamia. (Marini, Atti degli fratr. arv. i. tav. xxiii. 25, p. cxxx. and 22 [Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology II:714]
* Father: Tiberius Plautius Silvanus Aelianus b: in c 20 AD, Latium
* Marriage 1 Fabia Barbara b: in c 55 AD, Rome, Italy
* Children
* 1 Tundania Plautia b: in c 70 AD, Latium
* Marriage 2 Domitia Longina 52 AD, Rome, Italy
* Children Children
* 2 (Plautia) b: in c 68 AD, Latium
* Sources:
* 1.Title: Continuite Gentilice et Continuite Familiale Dans Les Familles Senatoriales Romaines; Christian Settipani
* 2.Title: Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology; William Smith, ed

[http://fabpedigree.com/s030/f002151.htm Pedigree]: Lucius Aelius Plautius Lamia Aelianus

--------------------
'''
=Lucius Aelius Lamia Plautius Aelianus=
'''

Lucius Aelius Lamia Plautius Aelianus (c. 45 - 81/96) was a Consul Suffectus in 80.

Lamia was probably a son of Tiberius Plautius Silvanus Aelianus He married Domitia Longina, the daughter of Gnaeus Domitius Corbulo and Cassia Longina. Their son was probably Lucius Fundanius Laemia Aelianus.

He was executed by Emperor Domitian.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Aelius_Lamia_Plautius_Aelianus

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]