== Notes for [[Item:Q100145|Q100145]] ==

Nethanel ben Mevorakh

Nicknamed Abu al-Barakāt, Nethanel ben Mevorakh was the middle son of Mevorakh ben Saʿadya, who served as ra'īs (or colloquially rayyis) al-yahūd (Ar. head of the Jewish community, i.e. nagid) of Fustat from ca. 1078 to 1082 and from 1094 to 1111. Nethanel seems to have been born around 1095. Unlike his father and his brother Moses, Nethanel did not ascend to the headship. On the other hand, he was an active participant in the culture of the political and economic elite of his community, and may well have served the Fatimid court, as perhaps is indicated by allusions to him in Geniza documents that style him sar ha-sarim (Heb. prince of princes) and beḥir ha-yeshiva (Heb. chosen one of the academy). He may also have been learned, as both a eulogy dedicated to his mother and another letter refer to him as ḥakham (Heb. sage).

Phillip Ackerman-Lieberman

Bibliography

Cohen, Mark R. Jewish Self-Government in Medieval Egypt (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1980).

Mann, Jacob. The Jews in Egypt and Palestine under the Fā ṭ imid Caliphs, 2 vols. in one, repr. ed. (New York: Ktav, 1970).

Citation Phillip Ackerman-Lieberman. " Nethanel ben Mevorakh." Encyclopedia of Jews in the Islamic World. Executive Editor Norman A. Stillman. Brill Online , 2013. Reference. Jim Harlow. 15 January 2013 <http://referenceworks.brillonline.com/entries/encyclopedia-of-jews-in-the-islamic-world/nethanel-ben-mevorakh-SIM_0016730>

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD7261F41EFBBFA9822EF79916CA6BD
geni:6000000019060045115

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]