== Notes for [[Item:Q107557|Q107557]] ==

The sacred mausoleum of Shahzadeh Hossein, the immediate son of Imam Reza (AS)- (death 816A.D.) has always been a religious place for pilgrims since the third century on, so that many of the scientists, eloquent speakers and great men of the city are buried there. The narration of Abdol Jalil Qazvini in the 13th century A.D. shows the respect of the people of this region for this tomb. It says "People of Qazvin both Sunnites and Shiites go on a pilgrimage in favor of Aboo Abdollah Al Hossein Ibn Reza." The glorious building of the mausoleum was totally damaged in Mogul invasion and conflicts of the Safavid era. After that the place was renovated again and except the precious wooden shrine- that is a masterpiece of inlaid works and reticular Gerehchini left from 1403 A.D. -the rest of the building is left from Safavid period (Shah Tahmasb and Shah Safi) and Qajar period (Naseroldin Shah). The precinct of Imamzadeh Hossein contains both two main entrances in the north and south and two secondary entries in east and west. The threshold of the north portal was renovated by Sadol Saltaneh, who was the governor of Qazvin in the period of Naseroldin Shah. The geometrical designs, tile ornaments of the beautiful entrance, eight sided vestibule, tall doors with six small minarets over them, have all offered a special personality to the building. The large precinct of Imamzadeh which along with its 52 small verandas has surrounded the tomb is an excellent example of tile work and architecture in Qajar period. There are four doors in the cardinal points of the shrine in which the east and the west doors are in lack of any noticeable ornaments but the south door is in marquetry and the north door which is decorated with beautiful inlaid work is a work left from Shah Tahmasb Safavi’s times. It also contains an inscription which bears the date of 1559A.D. The edifice in the middle of the precinct is a hexagon decorated both with mirror works and aigrette -shrub patterns and with an elliptical paneling in plaster and precious tile works. Two murals implemented by Qajar painters in the shrine and some inscriptions by famous calligraphers of the age on four small porticoes manifest themselves. A large octagonal public-drinking place in front of the tomb increases the beauty of the edifice. The special pattern of the portal of the main veranda and high quality of the ornaments of the internal spaces-specially the ceiling- Rasmibandi decoration of the internal space of the dome-house and its plaster works along with the mirror works, the elevation of the upper shell of the dome in tile-work decorations to catch the sight and to manifest itself better at the distance, the preciousness of the doors and shrine are all the significant characteristics of the mausoleum of Shahzadeh Hossein.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000007467596870

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]