== Notes for [[Item:Q118179|Q118179]] ==

https://www.heraldrysinstitute.com/cognomi/Aldana/Spain/idc/603906

Heraldic files - Aldana

>"There are different versions of this surname. The new version is that the A. family had its origin in those who originally used the surname A., along with the patronymic Arias, calling themselves Arias-A., which is claimed to have been their parent. to King Ariamiro or Artamiro, eighth Monarch of the Swabians of Galicia in the year 517. Gándara affirms that Ariamiro, Ariano and Arias are the same name, and hence the patronymic Arias with which the aforementioned family was last name. Ariamiro or Aramiro, eighth King of the Swabians of Galicia, was Count Argimiro Arias, Lord of the castle of Arias de Amaya, Deza and other vassals, who married Doña Arceriunda, daughter of Severiano, Count of Galicia, were parents of Melendo Arias , Lord of Deza and other States, who reached the times of the unhappy Gothic King Don Rodrigo, and died in the battle of Guadalete.He had married Doña Idaura Lucida, and from this union Suando or Sancho Méndez was born, from whom it is affirmed that he was Ayo del Rey Don Pelayo and who met him in Covadonga. This gentleman married Doña Reciberga Chérino, daughter of Evancio Chérino and granddaughter of Aurelio, the latter's brother of Queen Reciberga, wife of King Chindasvinto, and both sons of another Evancio, who was the brother of San Eugenio, Archbishop of Toledo. Suando or Sancho Méndez and his wife, Doña Reciberga, had as their son and successor Nuño Suández, Lord of A., Deza, Sande, Miñor and other States. ..."

Comment: https://www.geni.com/people/Arceriunda-se%C3%B1ora-de-Deza/6000000000494796825?through=6000000000494810751 is Not a known daughter of Severianus de Cartagena.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]