== Notes for [[Item:Q77939|Q77939]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Placidia

---------------------------------------------------------

ID: I86650

Name: Placidia of Rome

Given Name: Placidia

Surname: of Rome

Sex: F

_UID: 8E419C6B1CB7B946BC9E29488BF4A43FD5A2

Change Date: 18 Oct 2005

Birth: ABT 440

Death: deceased

Father: Flavius Valentinian III of Rome b: 2 JUL 419 in Ravenna, Italy

Mother: Lucinia Eudoxia of Constantinople b: ABT 422 in Constantinople, Byzantine Empire

Marriage 1 Olybrius b: ABT 420

Married:

Children

Anicia Juliana Olybrius b: ABT 467

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I86650


----
===References
* SOBRE ESTA RUÍNA EDIFICAI OS VOSSOS REINOS”: A IDENTIDADE VÂNDALA PARA AS NARRATIVAS ROMANAS DOS SÉCULOS V E VI Geraldo Rosolen Junior. (2021) < [https://repositorio.unifesp.br/xmlui/bitstream/handle/11600/61233/Disserta%C3%A7%C3%A3o-Geraldo-Rosolen-Junior-final.pdf?sequence=1 link] > Page 217

"THE YOUNGER"

Excerpt from 1911 ENCYCLOPEDIA BRITANNICA

GENESERIC, KING OF THE VANDALS


.........In 428 or 429 the whole nation set sail for Africa, upon an invitation received by their king from Bonifacius, count of Africa, who had fallen into disgrace with the court of Ravenna. Gunderic was now dead, and supreme power was in the hands of his bastard brother, who is generally known in history as Genseric, though the more correct form of his name is Gaiseric. This man, short of stature and with limping gait, but with a great natural capacity for war and dominion, reckless of human life and unrestrained by conscience or pity, was for fifty years the hero of the Vandal race and the terror of Constantinople and Rome. Probably in the month of May 428 he assembled all his people on the shore of Andalusia, and numbering the males among them from the greybeard down to the newborn infant found them to amount to 80,000 souls. The passage was effected in the ships of Bonifacius, who, however, soon returning to his old loyalty, besought his new allies to depart from Africa. They, of course, refused, and Bonifacius turned against them, too late, however, to repair the mischief which he had caused. Notwithstanding his opposition, the progress of the Vandals was rapid, and by May 430 only three cities of Roman Africa ­ Carthage, Hippo and Cirta ­ remained untaken. The long siege of Hippo (May 430 to July 431), memorable for the last illness and death of St. Augustine, which occurred during its progress, ended unsuccessfully for the Vandals. At length (30th January 435) peace was made between the emperor Valentinian III and Gaiseric. The emperor was to retain Carthage and the small but rich proconsular province in which it was situated, while Hippo and the other six provinces of Africa were abandoned to the Vandal. Gaiseric observed this treaty no longer than suited his purpose. On the 11th of October 439, without any declaration of war, he suddenly attacked Carthage and took it. The Vandal occupation of this great city, the third among the cities of the Roman empire, lasted for ninety-four years. Gaiseric seems to have counted the years of his sovereignty from the date of its capture. Though most of the remaining years of Gaiseric's life were passed in war, plunder rather than territorial conquest seems to have been the object of his expeditions. He made, in fact, of Carthage a pirate's stronghold, whence he issued forth, like the Barbary pirates of a later day, to attack, as he himself said, "the dwellings of the men with whom God is angry," leaving the question who those men might be to the decision of the elements. Almost alone among the Teutonic invaders of the empire he set himself to form a powerful fleet, and was probably for thirty years the leading maritime power in the Mediterranean. Gaiseric's celebrated expedition against Rome (455), undertaken in response to the call of Eudoxia, widow of Valentinian, was only the greatest of his marauding exploits. He took the city without difficulty, and for fourteen days, in a calm and business-like manner, emptied it of all its movable wealth. The sacred vessels of the Jewish temple, brought to Rome by Titus, are said to have been among the spoils carried to Carthage by the conqueror. Eudoxia and her two daughters were also carried into captivity. One of the princesses, Eudocia, was married to Hunneric, eldest son of Gaiseric; her mother and sister, after long and tedious negotiations, were sent to Constantinople.............

==============================================

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
66F29408DE6AF1EFBBE49822EF79916CDAD8
geni:6000000007150647331

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]