== Notes for [[Item:Q117951|Q117951]] ==

*http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/SPANISH%20NOBILITY%20LATER%20MEDIEVAL.htm#FernandoFernandezLimiaMSanchaVasquez

b) FERNANDO Fernández de Limia . The Livro Velho names "D. João Fernandes e D. Fernão Fernandes e Ruy Fernandes, Urraca Fernandes e Mayor Fernandes" as children of "Fernando Annes de Lima filho de João Fernandes o bom de Lima" and his wife[1816]. The Nobiliario of Pedro Conde de Barcelos names "D. Juan Fernandez de Lima, D. Fernan Fernandez de Lima Pancenteno, D. Urraca Fernandez, D. Ines Fernandez" as the children of "D. Fernandeannez de Lima" and his wife "D. Teresaannez"[1817].

'''m''' SANCHA Vásquez, daughter of VASCO Gil de Soverosa & his wife Froile Fernández. The Livro Velho records that "D. Fernão Fernandes" married "D. Sancha Velasques filha de D. Vasco Gil de Souerosa e de D. Froilhe Fernandes"[1818]. The Nobiliario of Pedro Conde de Barcelos names "D. Gil Vazquez, D. Elvira Vazquez, D. Sancha Vazquez" as the children of "D. Vasco Gil" and his wife "D. Froile", and in another passage that "D. Fernan Fernandez de Lima Pancenteno" married "D. Sancha Vazquez"[1819].

Fernando & his wife had two children:

----------

D. FERNÃO FERNANDES DE LIMA fº. de D. Fernão Annes de Lima N 3 chamaram-lhe o pão centeio foi Rico Homem do Rei D. Afonso o Sábio e o seguiu sempre como também seu pai, e seu primo filho do Arcebispo de S. Tiago D. João de Lima, achou-se também com o Rei D. Fernando o 4º o Emprezado, e com a Rainha sua mãe quando se viram com o Rei D. Diniz, e se fizeram os casamentos, e as pazes casou com D. Sancha Vasques filha de D. vasco Gil de Savroza, e sua m.er D. Frolle Fernandes fls 147 N 6

5 D. João Fernandes de Lima o pão centeio casado com D. Maria Annes filha de D. João de Aboim s.g.

5 D. Rui Fernandes d Lima

5 D. Maria Fernandes m.er de Gonçalo Viegas '''[sem geração indicada]'''

(Gayo, tit. LIMAS, $ 1 N 4).
--------------------
Conselheiro de rei Alfonso X El Sabio.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]