== Notes for [[Item:Q116534|Q116534]] ==

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ermesinda_of_Bigorre

Ermesinda of Bigorre (Aragonese: Ermisenda de Bigorra), born Gerberga or Gisberga (1015 – 1 December 1049), was a Queen of Aragon, a daughter of Bernard-Roger, Count of Bigorre and his wife Garsenda, Heiress of Bigorre. She was a member of the House of Foix, the sister of Bernard II, Count of Bigorre, Roger I, Count of Foix, and perhaps of Stephanie who married García Sánchez III of Navarre.

Gerberga married on 22 August 1036 to King Ramiro I of Aragon. After her wedding Gerberga changed her name to Ermesinda. The couple were married for thirteen years, in which time her husband elevated himself from a vassal holding scattered lands around Jaca into a de facto ruler of pocket-kingdom spanning the former counties of Aragon, Sobrarbe and Ribagorza, and is thereby credited with being the first King of Aragon. They had the following children:

Sancho Ramírez (c. 1042 – 4 June 1094), succeeded his father. García, Bishop of Jaca (d. 17 July 1086) Teresa (b. 1037), married William Bertrand of Provence, no issue. Sancha (d. 1097), possibly married firstly to Pons, Count of Toulouse, and secondly to Ermengol III, Count of Urgell Urraca (d. 1077), a nun.

All of Ermesinda's children lived to adulthood. She died on 1 December 1049 and she was buried at the Monastery of San Juan de la Peña.[5] Her husband remarried four years later to Agnes.http://genealogics.org/getperson.php?personID=I00093519&tree=LEO

=============================
Gisberga fue la primera reina de Aragón, esposa de Ramiro I.

Era hija de Bernardo Roger de Foix, conde de Foix, y al contraer matrimonio cambió su su nombre por Ermesinda. Gobernó el reino a la muerte de su esposo, que pereció en una batalla en 1063 y compartió después el poder con su hijo Sancho. Fue enterrada el monasterio de San Juan de la Peña.

--------------------

Gilberga de Couserans1

b. circa 1016, d. 1054

Father Bernard Roger I, comte de Couserans, de Foix et de Bigorre b. circa 990, d. circa 1038

Mother Gersinde, comtesse de Bigorre b. circa 995, d. after 1038

Also called Gisberga of Bigorre.2 Also called Hermesenda. Gilberga de Couserans was the daughter of Bernardo Roger, count of Couserans, and Garsenda, countess of Bigorre.1 She was born circa 1016. She was the daughter of Bernard Roger I, comte de Couserans, de Foix et de Bigorre and Gersinde, comtesse de Bigorre. Gilberga de Couserans married Ramiro I, rey de Aragón, son of Sancho III "el Mayor", rey de Pamplona y conde de Aragón and Sancha Garcia de Aybar, on 22 August 1036 at Jaca, Huesca Province, Aragón, Spain.2,1 Gilberga de Couserans died in 1054.1

Family

Ramiro I, rey de Aragón b. circa 1015?, d. 8 May 1063

Child

Sancho I, rey de Aragón y de Pamplona+ b. 1043, d. 6 Jul 10942

Citations

[S438] Theroff's Royal Genealogies, online http://pages.prodigy.net/ptheroff/, Foix.txt.

[S270] C. W. Previté-Orton sCMH II, pg. 825, genealogy table 22, the Castile and Aragon, 1033-c. 1300, (b) the House of Aragon, 1033-1327.

Ramiro I of Aragon

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Ramiro wed his first wife, Gisberga, daughter of Bernard Roger of Bigorre, on 22 August 1036. She changed her name to Ermesinda on marrying him. Together the couple had five children:

Sancho Ramírez, his successor

García, Bishop of Jaca

Sancha, married Armengol III of Urgel

Urraca, nun in Santa Cruz de la Serós

Theresa, married William Bertrand
--------------------
En mi nuevo libro LA SORPRENDENTE GENEALOGÍA DE MIS TATARABUELOS, encontrarán a este y muchos otros de sus ancestros con un resumen biográfico de cada uno. El libro está disponible en: amazon.com barnesandnoble.com palibrio.com. Les será de mucha utilidad y diversión. Ramón Rionda

In my new book LA SORPRENDENTE GENEALOGÍA DE MIS TATARABUELOS, you will find this and many other of your ancestors, with a biography summary of each of them. The book is now available at: amazon.com barnesandnoble.com palibrio.com. Check it up, it’s worth it. Ramón Rionda

Alias:<ALIA> Gilberga Hermesinda de Conserans

SOURCE NOTES:
www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal10767

AKA: Gisberga. Changed her name upon marrying Ramiro.

867789497. Grevinne Gerberga (Gilberga) BARNHRDSDTR av Bigorre, Varacasona og Foix(20678) was a Grevinne in Bigorre, Varacasona og Foix.(20679) Hun var en sjelden skjønnhet

Grevinne av Bigorre, Carcasona og Foix.
Gerberga (Gilberga) var en sjelden skjønnhet.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]