== Notes for [[Item:Q86234|Q86234]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cornelia_(wife_of_Aemilius_Paullus)

--------------------

Cornelia (wife of Aemilius Paullus)

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Cornelia (around 46 BC-16 BC) was the daughter of Scribonia and consul Publius Cornelius Scipio Salvito. She was married twice. Her first husband was Sextus Julius Caesar III. Together they had one son born in 32 BC, named Sextus Julius Caesar IV. Her second husband was the censor Lucius Aemilius Paullus. Their first son Lucius Aemilius Paullus married his cousin Julia the Younger and their second son Marcus Aemilius Lepidus was consul in 6. She also had a daughter called Aemilia Paulla born in 22 BC who married Publius Memmius Regulus.

Cornelia was the sister of Cornelius Scipio, and was the elder half-sister of Julia the Elder. Cornelia died in the same year of her brother's consulship; if this brother is identified as P. Cornelius Scipio, the date was 16 BC Emperor Augustus, her stepfather, grieved her death as he found her a worthy elder sister to his daughter, Julia. The poet Propertius wrote an elegy of Cornelia for her funeral, praising her virtue and family, including Scipio and Scribonia.

Forrás / Source:

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cornelia_(wife_of_Aemilius_Paullus)

--------------------

Cornelia (wife of Aemilius Paullus)

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

(Redirected from Cornelia Scipio)

This article does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2009)

Cornelia (around 46 BC-16 BC) was the daughter of Scribonia and consul Publius Cornelius Scipio Salvito. She was married twice.

Her first husband was Sextus Julius Caesar III. Together they had one son born in 32 BC, named

-1. Sextus Julius Caesar IV.

Her second husband was the censor Lucius Aemilius Paullus. Their first son

-1. Lucius Aemilius Paullus married his cousin Julia the Younger and their second son

-2. Marcus Aemilius Lepidus was consul in 6.

She also had a daughter called

-3. Aemilia Paulla born in 22 BC who married Publius Memmius Regulus.

Cornelia was the sister of Cornelius Scipio, and was the elder half-sister of Julia the Elder. Cornelia died in the same year of her brother's consulship; if this brother is identified as P. Cornelius Scipio, the date was 16 BC Emperor Augustus, her stepfather, grieved her death as he found her a worthy elder sister to his daughter, Julia. The poet Propertius wrote an elegy of Cornelia for her funeral, praising her virtue and family, including Scipio and Scribonia.

Forrás / Source:

Cornelia (wife of Aemilius Paullus)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cornelia_Scipio

----


----
Cornelia was the daughter of Scribonia and her second husband. She was stepdaughter to Octavian (later the Emperor Augustus) through her mother's third marriage and half-sister to Julia the Elder, Augustus' only biological child.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cornelia_(stepdaughter_of_Augustus)


Based on Scheid's arguments, Cornelia was probably born between 50 and 40 BC and attained child-bearing age around 30 BC. Since her brother Cornelius Marcellinus served consul for the entire year of 18 BC, she must have died in that year before her husband Lepidus. Her stepfather Augustus supposedly grieved her death as he found her a worthy elder sister to his daughter Julia.[9]

Family

Cornelia was married only once, to the Paullus Aemilius Lepidus mentioned above who was censor in 22 BC.[10] Their children were:

# Lucius Aemilius Paullus (b. before 29 BC), consul in AD 1; married his first cousin Julia the Younger.[11]
# Marcus Aemilius Lepidus (b. before 24 BC), consul in AD 6.
# Aemilia Paulli filia (b. 22 BC)

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]