== Notes for [[Item:Q113977|Q113977]] ==

https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sancha_de_Le%C3%B3n

http://genealogics.org/getperson.php?personID=I00093525&tree=LEO

Sancha de León, a veces llamada Sancha I de León (1013 - 1067) fue infanta de León, reina consorte de Castilla y heredera de los derechos al trono del León por ser hija del rey Alfonso V de León que transmitió a sus hijos.

Estuvo prometida con García Sánchez, conde de Castilla, pero este fue asesinado el 13 de mayo de 1029 cuando iba a conocerla.

Fue esposa del rey Fernando I el Magno de Castilla y madre de los reyes Sancho II de Castilla, Alfonso VI de León y García de Galicia, así como de las infantas Urraca y Elvira, señoras de Zamora y Toro respectivamente.

La Iglesia Católica la venera como beata. Junto a su esposo ordenó la construcción de la Colegiata de San Isidoro, en la ciudad de León, donde se depositaron las reliquias del Doctor Hipalense, que habían sido traídos desde Sevilla.
--------------------

Sancha de León, o Sancha Alfónsez,[1] a veces llamada Sancha I de León (1013 - 1067) fue infanta y reina de León, convirtiéndose su marido, el conde de Castilla Fernando I, en rey consorte pero con poder efectivo a la muerte de Bermudo III tras la Batalla de Tamarón.

Sancha era la heredera de los derechos al trono del Reino de León como hija del rey Alfonso V y hermana de Bermudo III, derechos que transmitió a sus hijos. Sin embargo fue su marido Fernando el que fue ungido rey de León un año después de la muerte de Bermudo, debido a que en aquellos tiempos no se reconocía a las mujeres como reinas con poder efectivo. Esto no ocurrió hasta la coronación de su nieta Urraca I de León, primera reina de Hispania.

Abadesa seglar del monasterio de San Juan y San Pelayo,[2] estuvo prometida con García Sánchez, conde de Castilla. Cuando iba a conocer a la infanta, éste fue asesinado por la familia Vela en las calles de León el 13 de mayo de 1028.

Fue madre de los reyes Sancho II de Castilla, Alfonso VI de León y García de Galicia, así como de las infantas Urraca y Elvira, señoras de Zamora y Toro respectivamente.

La Iglesia Católica la venera como beata. Junto a su esposo ordenó la construcción de la Colegiata de San Isidoro, en la ciudad de León, donde se depositaron las reliquias del Doctor Hipalense, que habían sido traídos desde Sevilla.
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sancha_of_León
--------------------
Sancha of León From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sancha of León (1013 – 27 November 1067) was a daughter of Alfonso V of Leon by Elvira Mendes and Queen consort of Castile. She married Ferdinand I of León in 1032. She was a devout Catholic. [edit]Children

She had five children: Urraca of Zamora, Infanta of Castile. Ruler of the city Zamora. Sancho II of Castile (1040s - 1067). First son. Elvira of Toro, Infanta of Castile. Ruler of the city Toro. Alfonso VI of Castile (1040s - July 1, 1109). Second son. García II of Galicia and Portugal (1040s - 1090s). Third son.
--------------------
Sancha of León (1013 in Leon, Spain-1067 in Leon, Spain) was a daughter of Alfonso V of Leon by Elvira Mendes and Queen consort of Castile. She married Ferdinand I of León in 1032. She was a devout Catholic.

[edit] Children

She had five children:

* Sancho II of Castile (1040s - 1067). First son.
* Alfonso VI of Castile (1040s - July 1, 1109). Second son.
* García II of Galicia and Portugal (1040s - 1090s). Third son.
* Elvira of Toro. Ruler of the city Toro.
* Urraca of Zamora, Infanta of Castile.

--------------------
Sancha of León (1013 – 27 November 1067) was a daughter of Alfonso V of Leon by Elvira Mendes and Queen consort of Castile. She married Ferdinand I of León in 1032. She was a devout Catholic.

She had five children:

Urraca of Zamora, Infanta of Castile. Ruler of the city Zamora. Sancho II of Castile (1040s - 1067). First son. Elvira of Toro, Infanta of Castile. Ruler of the city Toro. Alfonso VI of Castile (1040s - July 1, 1109). Second son. García II of Galicia and Portugal (1040s - 1090s). Third son.
--------------------
Sancha of León (1013 – 27 November 1067) was a daughter of Alfonso V of Leon by Elvira Mendes and Queen consort of Castile. She married Ferdinand I of León in 1032. She was a devout Catholic.

She had five children:

Urraca of Zamora, Infanta of Castile. Ruler of the city Zamora.

Sancho II of Castile (1040s - 1067). First son.

Elvira of Toro, Infanta of Castile. Ruler of the city Toro.

Alfonso VI of Castile (1040s - July 1, 1109). Second son.

García II of Galicia and Portugal (1040s - 1090s). Third son.
--------------------
Sister of Bermudo III, King of Leon (1016-37), and heiress to the throne of León.
--------------------
13ª RAINHA DE LEÃO, Espanha.
--------------------
'''Sancha I de Leão''' (1016 - 7 de Novembro de 1067) foi rainha de jure de Leão de 1037 até 1065, e rainha consorte de Castela de 1035 até 1065.

Sancha era filha de Afonso V de Leão e de sua primeira esposa Elvira Mendes, sendo a irmã mais nova do rei Bermudo III. Em 1032 casou com um dos príncipes herdeiros do reino de Navarra, Fernando, como solução de paz entre Leão e Navarra, que mantinham acesas disputas fronteiriças. Em 1035, pela morte do pai de Fernando, Sancho Ximenez, o reino de Navarra foi repartido pelos três filhos, e a Fernando coube em herança o reino de Castela - por conseguinte, Sancha tornava-se sua rainha consorte.

Fernando, porém, entendia ter direitos à coroa de Leão, não só devido à política expansionista de seu pai, como também devido ao seu casamento com uma princesa leonesa; Bermudo reage, pois também não via com bons olhos a perda definitiva de Castela, agora erigida de condado em reino. Fere-se batalha no vale do rio Tamaron, acabando Bermudo por ser morto no combate. Desta forma, o trono leonês ficava vago; sucedeu-lhe como soberana a sua irmã Sancha, o que, evidentemente, ditou a unificação das duas coroas, embora mantendo privilégios separados e os próprios monarcas distintos - com efeito, Sancha reinava (e assim o comprovam os vários documentos do seu reinado) como rainha de Leão de jure e consorte de Castela; Fernando, como rei de Castela e consorte de Leão.

Com Sancha findava a varonia de Pelágio das Astúrias na linhagem dos reis de Leão; do seu casamento com Fernando Magno teve cinco filhos: Sancho, Afonso, Garcia, Urraca e Elvira. Aquando da morte do marido, segundo as diposições testamentárias, a Sancho caberia em sorte Castela, a Afonso Leão, a Garcia a Galiza, e às infantas Urraca e Elvira o senhorio de vários mosteiros do reino e o título de rainhas.

Sancha sobreviveu até 1067, abafando as lutas entre os seus herdeiros; depois do seu desaparecimento, aumentaram de intensidade as lutas fratricidas entre Sancho, Afonso e Garcia, que acabariam por ditar a reunificação dos três reinos sob a coroa de Afonso, apenas alguns anos volvidos.

A Igreja Católica venera-a como beata.

--------------------
Birth: 1013 Death: Nov. 27, 1067 León Castilla y León, Spain

She was a daughter of Alfonso V of León by his wife, Elvira Mendes. She became a secular abbess of the Monastery of San Pelayo.

In 1029, a political marriage was arranged between her and count García Sánchez of Castile. However, having traveled to León for the marriage, García was assassinated by a group of disgruntled vassals. In 1032, Sancha was married to García's nephew and successor, Ferdinand I of León and Castile.

At the Battle of Tamarón in 1037 Ferdinand killed Sancha's brother Bermudo III of León, making Sancha the heir and allowing Ferdinand to have himself crowned King of León and Castile, Sancha thereby became Queen. Following Ferdinand's 1065 death and the division of her husband's kingdom, she is said to have played the futile role of peacemaker among her sons.

She was a devout Catholic, who, with her husband, commissioned the crucifix that bears their name as a gift for the Basilica of San Isidoro. She has been beatified and is venerated by the Catholic Church.

Family links:
Parents:
Alfonso V De Leon (____ - 1028)
Elvira Mendes DeLeon (____ - 1022)

Spouse:
Fernando I King Of Castile And Leon (1017 - 1065)

Children:
Urraca Of Zamora (1034 - 1101)*
Sancho II King Of Castile (1036 - 1072)*
Elvira De Toro (1039 - 1101)*
Alfonso VI King Of Castile And Leon (1039 - 1109)*
Garcia De Galicia (1042 - 1090)*

Sibling:
Sancha de León (1013 - 1067)
Bermudo De Leon (1017 - 1037)*

*Calculated relationship

Burial: Basilica Of San Isidoro León Provincia de León Castilla y León, Spain

Created by: Brett Williams Record added: Dec 27, 2012 Find A Grave Memorial# 102722691

Infanta de León

Infanta de León

SOURCE NOTES:
www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal10135

She was bethrothed to Garcia II Sanchez de Castile. On the way to the church, San Juan Bautista, where he was to marry her he was assassinated.
She was later forced to marry, Fernando I El Magno.

Sancha of León (1013 - 27 November 1067) was a daughter of Alfonso V of Leon by Elvira Mendes and Queen consort of Castile. She married Ferdinand I of León in 1032. She was a devout Catholic.

Children
She had five children:
Urraca of Zamora, Infanta of León. Ruler of the city Zamora.
Sancho II of Castile (1040s - 1067). First son.
Elvira of Toro, Infanta of León. Ruler of the city Toro.
Alfonso VI of León (1040s - July 1, 1109). Second son.
García II of Galicia and Portugal (1040s - 1090s). Third son.

"OF LEON"

867789477. Dronning Sancha (Beata) ALFONSDTR av Leon og Kastiljen (20631) was born in 1016. She died on 13 Dec 1071.(20632) She was a Dronning in Leon og Kastiljen.(20633) Hennes foreldr lot henne ekte infanten don Carcia, men på selve bryllupsdagen ble denne drept av misfordøyde adelsmenn. De spanske kronister roser henne meget for hennes dyder, klokskap, redelighet og rettferdighet og for hennes kjerlighet til sine udersåtter. Da hun påny ble enke, trekk hun seg tilbake til klostret San Isidro i Leon og føte her et ærbart liv til sin død.

Name Prefix:<NPFX> Princess Name Suffix:<NSFX> Of Leon

Sancha of León
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Sancha of León (1013 in Leon, Spain-1067 in Leon, Spain) was a daughter of Alfonso V of Leon by Elvira Mendes and Queen consort of Castile. She married Ferdinand I of León in 1032. She was a devout Catholic.


[edit] Children
She had five children:

Sancho II of Castile (1040s - 1067). First son.
Alfonso VI of Castile (1040s - July 1, 1109). Second son.
García II of Galicia and Portugal (1040s - 1090s). Third son.
Elvira of Toro. Ruler of the city Toro.
Urraca of Zamora, Infanta of Castile.

[edit] References
The Royal Ancestry Bible, Royal Ancestors of 300 Colonial American Families Vol. 3 (chart 2186) by Michel L. Call ISBN 1-933194-22-7
Preceded by
New Creation Queen Consort of Castile
1037-1065 Succeeded by

Alberta (Consort of Sancho II) 1071-1072
Agnes of Aquitaine
Preceded by
Jimena of Castile Queen Consort of León
1037-1065 Succeeded by
Agnes of Aquitaine

Sister of Bermudo III, King of Leon

Sister of Bermudo III, King of Leon

Sister of Bermudo III, King of Leon

Sister of Bermudo III, King of Leon

Sancha (Beata) var dronning av Leon og Castilla.
Hennes foreldre lot henne ekte infanten don Garcia, men på selve bryllupsdagen ble
han drept av misfornøyde adelsmenn.
De spanske kronister roser henne meget for hennes dyder, klokskap, redelighet og
rettferdighet og for hennes kjærlighet til sine undersåtter. Da hun igjen ble enke, trakk hun seg
tilbake til klosteret San Isidro i Leon og førte her et ærbart liv til sin død.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]