== Notes for [[Item:Q87417|Q87417]] ==

Laodice VII Thea Philadelphus (Greek: Λαοδίκη ἡ Θεά καὶ Φιλάδελφος, "Laodice the goddess and brother-loving", born after 122 BC-?), was a Greek–Syrian princess of the Seleucid Empire and future queen of Commagene. She was the daughter of Greek–Syrian King Antiochus VIII Grypus and Greek Ptolemaic Princess Tryphaena, a daughter of Ptolemy VIII. Laodice married Mithridates I Callinicus, a prince and future king of Commagene. The fathers of Laodice and Mithridates had arranged for them to marry as a part of a peace alliance between their kingdoms. Mithridates embraced the Greek culture. Laodice bore Mithridates, a son Antiochus I Theos of Commagene (c. 86 BC–38 BC). Antiochus became a prince and future king of Commagene

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laodice_VII_Thea

--------------------
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laodice_VII_Thea
--------------------
'''
=Laodice VII Thea=
'''

Laodice VII Thea Philadelphus (Greek: Λαοδίκη ἡ Θεά καὶ Φιλάδελφος, "Laodice the goddess and brother-loving", born after 122 BC–?), was a Greek–Syrian princess of the Seleucid Empire and future queen of Commagene. She was the daughter of Greek–Syrian King Antiochus VIII Grypus and Greek Ptolemaic Princess Cleopatra Tryphaena (see Cleopatra VI of Egypt), a daughter of Ptolemy VIII Physcon.

Laodice married Mithridates I Callinicus, a prince and future king from the Kingdom of Commagene. The fathers of Laodice and Mithridates had arranged their marriage as part of a peace alliance between their kingdoms. Mithridates embraced the Greek culture. Laodice bore Mithridates, a son Antiochus I Theos of Commagene (c. 86 BC–38 BC). Antiochus became a prince and future king of Commagene.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laodice_VII_Thea

RESEARCH NOTES:
Princess of Syria, Queen of Commagene

PHILADELPHUS

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]