== Notes for [[Item:Q87118|Q87118]] ==

==Lucius Scribonius Libo==
'''From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia''': [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Scribonius_Libo]

Several men of plebeian status were named Lucius Scribonius Libo during the Roman Republic and Roman Empire; they were members of the gens Scribonia.

'''L. Scribonius Libo (praetor 204 BC)'''

Lucius Scribonius Libo was a tribune of the plebs in 216 BC, during the Second Punic War. A question arose pertaining to the ransoming of Roman captives; he referred the matter to the Senate.[1] He was one of the three men appointed triumviri mensarii, a commission created by a Lex Minucia, possibly to deal with a shortage of silver;[2] the full range of their financial activities is unclear.[3] He was praetor peregrinus in 204 and sent to Cisalpine Gaul.[4]

'''L. Scribonius Libo (tribune 149 BC)'''

Lucius Scribonius Libo (tribune of the plebs 149 BC) was a member of a Roman Senatorial family. He accused Servius Sulpicius Galba for the outrages against the Lusitanians. He might have been the Scribonius who consecrated the Puteal Scribonianum often mentioned by ancient writers, which was located in the forum close to the Arcus Fabianus. It was called Puteal as it was opened at the top, like a well. Years later it would be repaired and dedicated by another Libo, praetor of 80 BC.[5]
L. Scribonius Libo (praetor 80 BC)

Lucius Scribonius Libo (fl. 1st century BC) was a member of a Roman Senatorial family, and held the office of praetor urbanus in 80 BC.[6]

He is known to have had at least one son of the same name, who became consul in 34 BC. He is also cited as the most likely candidate for the father of Scribonia, second wife of Augustus and mother of his only biological child, Julia the Elder. If so, then he would have married at least once to a woman of the Sentia gens, whose ancestors had been directors of the mint.[7][8]

In 62 BC Scribonius was made monetalis during which he repaired the Puteal Scribonianum and issued coins to commemorate the event.[9]

'''L. Scribonius Libo (consul 34 BC)'''
Main article: Lucius Scribonius Libo (consul 34 BC)

Lucius Scribonius Libo (fl. 1st century BC) was the son of the above, and possibly the elder brother or half-brother of Scribonia, first wife of Augustus. His wife was a member of the gens Sulpicia.

When the civil war broke in 49 BC he sided with Pompey and was in command of Etruria. Afterward he accompanied Pompey to Greece. Following the death of Bibulus he was given command of the Pompeian fleet. During the civil wars that occurred after the assassination of Julius Caesar, he sided with his son-in-law Sextus Pompey who married his daughter Scribonia. In 40 BC Octavian, married his sister and she bore him his only natural child Julia. After this marriage a peace was made between the Triumvirs (second triumvirate) and Sextus with the Pact of Misenum in 39 BC. After the war was renewed in 36 BC, Scribonius felt the cause was lost and abandoned Sextus.

In 34 BC he was consul with Mark Antony.

'''L. Scribonius Libo (consul 16)'''

Lucius Scribonius Libo (died 16) was a consul in 16. This nobleman was brother of Marcus Scribonius Libo Drusus, who was accused of planning to revolt against the Roman emperor Tiberius, who also charged Libo in planning a revolt against the emperor and stabbed him to death in 16. They were likely the sons or paternal grandsons of Marcus Livius Drusus Libo (adopted brother of empress Livia). It is possible that he was Marcus Livius nephew whom was adopted.[10]

'''Citations'''
# Livy 22.61.7.
# Livy 23.21.6.
# See discussion by Rachel Feig Vishnia, State, Society, and Popular Leaders in Mid-Republican Rome, 241-167 B.C. (Routledge, 1996), p. 86ff. online.
# T.R.S. Broughton, The Magistrates of the Roman Republic (New York: American Philological Association, 1951, 1986 printing), vol. 1, pp. 249, 306, and vol. 2 (1952), p. 614.
# T. R. S. Broughton, The Magistrates of the Roman Republic, Vol III, pgs. 185-186
# T. R. S. Broughton, The Magistrates of the Roman Republic, Vol III, pg. 185
# CIL 6.31276: Sentia Lib[onis] mater Scr[iboniae] Caes[aris].
# Leon, Ernestine F. (1951). "Scribonia and Her Daughters". Transactions and Proceedings of the American Philological Association. 82: 168–175. doi:10.2307/283429 – via JSTOR.
# T. R. S. Broughton, The Magistrates of the Roman Republic, Vol III, pg. 186
# Pettinger 2012, pp. 222–233.

Lucius Scribonius Libo
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

There were three men of plebs status called Lucius Scribonius Libo who lived in the Roman Republic and Roman Empire who were members of the gens Scribonia:

Lucius Scribonius Libo (flourished 1st century BC) was a member of a Roman Senatorial family. Lucius had married Cornelia Sulla, the daughter of Pompeia Magna (daughter of triumvir Pompey from his third marriage to Mucia Tertia) and senator Faustus Cornelius Sulla (son of dictator Lucius Cornelius Sulla). Cornelia bore Lucius two children: a daughter called Scribonia (the second wife of future Roman Emperor Augustus) and a son of the same name;
Lucius Scribonius Libo - (flourished 1st century BC) son to the above. He was the maternal uncle to consul Publius Cornelius Scipio, Cornelia Scipio and Julia the Elder. Lucius served as a consul of 34 BC. Lucius had died after his consulship. His wife was a member of the gens Sulpicius, the family that the Roman Emperor Galba, had descended from his paternal side. Lucius and wife had three children, two sons: Lucius Scribonius Libo (below) and Marcus Scribonius Libo Drusus and a daughter Scribonia (she married her great great uncle the political rebel Sextus Pompeius. He was the maternal uncle of her paternal grandmother). Their sons had died from violent deaths during Roman Emperor Tiberius' first treason trials in 16.
Lucius Scribonius Libo - (flourished 1st century BC & 1st century, died 16) son of the above. He was a consul in 16. This nobleman had planned to revolt against the Roman Emperor Tiberius. The Emperor had tried him in a Senatorial Court. Lucius had pleaded to the Emperor for the support of Tiberius‘ son Julius Caesar Drusus but the emperor rejected this. Lucius and Tiberius took part in a sacrifice among the priests. During the ceremony, the Emperor had asked Lucius for assistance, when the ceremony was over, Tiberius stabbed him with a knife. This occurred after the trial. Lucius had married Cornelia Pompeia Magna a distant relative, who was the daughter of Pompeia Magna from her second marriage to consul Lucius Cornelius Cinna. Pompeia bore Lucius, a daughter and only child Scribonia. Scribonia married the consul Marcus Licinius Crassus Frugi and had children.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]