== Notes for [[Item:Q89412|Q89412]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Valerius_Maximus_Basilius

Lucius Valerius Maximus Basilius (c. 270 – aft. 321) was a Praefectus Urbi Romae between 319 and 321. He was the son of Lucius Valerius Messalla and wife.

He married the daughter of Septimius Bassus [appears to be a mistake; she was his daughter-in-law] and had a son Lucius Valerius Maximus Basilius.
--------------------
'''
=Valerius Maximus Basilius=
'''

(Lucius) Valerius Maximus Basilius[1] (fl. 4th century) was a Roman senator who held high office during the reign of the Roman emperor Constantine I.

'''Biography'''

Valerius Maximus was a member of the fourth century patrician Gens Valeria, either the son of Valerius Messalla, the Roman consul of AD 280, or (more likely) another descendant of Lucius Valerius Claudius Poplicola Balbinus Maximus, the consul of AD 253.

A pagan, Valerius Maximus’ early career is unknown. He must have had a successful political career, as he managed to be appointed Urban Prefect of Rome, serving from September 1, 319 until September 13, 323.[3] He held this post while the emperor Constantine I was campaigning in the Balkans, and the emperor’s son, the Caesar Crispus was at Augusta Treverorum. The abnormally long period of time he held this post, and the extended imperial absence, indicate that he was a trusted imperial subordinate.

It is speculated that Valerius Maximus married the daughter of Septimius Bassus and had a son Valerius Maximus.

'''Source :'''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Valerius_Maximus_Basilius_(urban_prefect_319)

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]