== Notes for [[Item:Q117605|Q117605]] ==

Alfonso IX de León (15 August 1171 – 24 September 1230) was King of Galicia and the last King of León as an independent kingdom from 1188 until his death in 1230. His son Ferdinand III of León and Castile definitively united the kingdoms of León and Castile in 1230.

The son of Ferdinand II of León and Urraca of Portugal, Alfonso struggled to seize power due to the intrigues of his stepmother Urraca López de Haro, who aspired to enthrone his own son, Infante Sancho. Throughout his reign he had numerous conflicts and tensions with his cousin Alfonso VIII of Castile. Because of these, he was absent at the Battle of the Navas de Tolosa, although he carried out a great activity of reconquest, recovering for Christianity the cities of Cáceres, Montánchez, Mérida and Badajoz.

----

Alfonso IX de León​ (Zamora, Reino de León, 15 de agosto de 1171​-Sarria, Reino de León, 24 de septiembre de 1230) fue el último rey de León como reino independiente,​ desde 1188 hasta su muerte en 1230. Su hijo Fernando III de León y de Castilla une definitivamente los reinos de León y de Castilla en 1230.

Hijo de Fernando II de León y Urraca de Portugal, tuvo dificultades para hacerse con el poder debido a las intrigas de su madrastra Urraca López de Haro, que aspiraba a entronizar a su propio hijo, el infante Sancho. A lo largo de su reinado tuvo numerosos conflictos y tensiones con su primo Alfonso VIII de Castilla. Debido a estos, estuvo ausente en la Batalla de las Navas de Tolosa, pese a lo cual realizó una gran actividad de reconquista, recuperando para la Cristiandad las ciudades de Cáceres, Montánchez, Mérida y Badajoz.

Contrajo matrimonio por primera vez con la infanta Teresa de Portugal, hija del rey Sancho I de Portugal y de la reina Dulce de Aragón. Fruto de su matrimonio nacieron tres hijos:
* Fernando de León y Portugal (1192/1193-1214).
* Sancha de León y Portugal (1191-a.1243).
* Dulce de León y Portugal (1193/1194-1248).

Se casó por segunda vez, en 1197, con la infanta Berenguela de Castilla, hija del rey Alfonso VIII de Castilla y de la reina Leonor de Plantagenet. Fruto de su matrimonio nacieron cinco hijos:
* Leonor de León y Castilla (1198-1202).
* Constanza de León y Castilla (1200-1242). Fue religiosa en el Monasterio de las Huelgas de Burgos.
* Fernando III el Santo (1201-1252). Ocupó el trono castellano en 1217, a la muerte de Enrique I, y el trono leonés en 1230, a la muerte de su padre, Alfonso IX. Contrajo matrimonio en dos ocasiones y fue canonizado por la Iglesia Católica en 1671, durante el pontificado de Clemente X.
* Alfonso de Molina (1202-1272). Señor consorte de Molina y Mesa. Contrajo matrimonio en tres ocasiones y fue el padre de la reina María de Molina.
* Berenguela de León (1204-1237). Contrajo matrimonio en 1224 con Juan de Brienne, rey de Jerusalén y posteriormente regente del Imperio Latino de Constantinopla.

Fruto de su relación con una dama de nombre desconocido nació un hijo,
* Pedro Alfonso de León (¿1196?-1226). Maestre de la Orden de Santiago.

Fruto de su relación con Inés Íñiguez de Mendoza, hija de Íñigo López de Mendoza, nació una hija:
* Urraca Alfonso de León. Señora consorte de Vizcaya por su matrimonio con Lope Díaz II de Haro, señor de Vizcaya.

Fruto de su relación con Aldonza Martínez de Silva, hija de Martín Gómez, señor de Silva, y de su esposa Urraca Rodríguez, nacieron tres hijos:
* Rodrigo Alfonso de León (¿1210?-d.1252). Señor de Aliger y Castro del Río y Adelantado mayor de la frontera de Andalucía. Contrajo matrimonio con Inés Rodríguez, hija de Rodrigo Fernández de Valduerna "el Feo", señor de Cabrera y alférez del rey Alfonso IX.
* Aldonza Alfonso de León (¿1212?-d.1267). Contrajo matrimonio con Diego Ramírez Froilaz, señor de Mansilla y Rueda, y antes de junio de 1230

<ref>Real Academia de Historia, Colección Salazar y Castro, Ref. B-3, fº 325 [http://www.rah.es/pdf/SalazaryCastro.

Donación hecha el 10 de junio de 1230 por Pedro Ponce de Cabrera y doña Aldonza Alfonso, su mujer, al Monasterio de Nogales de la iglesia de San Pelayo de Pobladura, en el valle de Aria</ref> con el conde Pedro Ponce de Cabrera, hijo del conde Ponce Vela de Cabrera y la condesa Teresa Rodríguez, señor del valle de Aria.
* Teresa Alfonso de León. Según algunos historiadores contrajo matrimonio con Nuño González de Lara "el Bueno", señor de la Casa de Lara. No obstante, la mayoría de los cronistas sostienen que quien contrajo matrimonio con Nuño González de Lara fue Teresa Alfonso de Molina, hija del infante Alfonso de Molina. Fruto de su relación con la dama Estefanía Pérez, hija de Pedro Arias de Limia y de Constanza Osorio, nació un hijo:
* Fernando Alfonso de León (1211-¿?). Falleció en su juventud.

Fruto de su relación con la dama Maura nació un hijo:
* Fernando Alfonso de León (¿?-1278). Fue Deán de la Catedral de Santiago de Compostela, Arcediano de la Catedral de Salamanca y canónigo de la Catedral de León.

Fruto de su relación con la dama Teresa Gil de Soberosa, hija de Gil Vázquez de Soberosa y de María Arias o Aries de Fornelos, nacieron cuatro hijos:
* Sancha Alfonso de León (1220-1270). Contrajo matrimonio con Simón Ruiz de los Cameros, señor de los Cameros e hijo de Rodrigo Díaz de los Cameros y de Aldonza Díaz de Haro. Posteriormente profesó como religiosa en el convento de Santa Eufemia de Cozuelos de Ojeda.
* María Alfonso de León (¿1222?-d.1252). Contrajo un primer matrimonio con Álvaro Fernández de Lara, señor de Lara, y posteriormente con Suero Arias de Valladares. Fue amante de Alfonso X el Sabio.
* Martín Alfonso de León (¿1225?-1268/1272). Caballero de la Orden de Santiago. Contrajo matrimonio en tres ocasiones.
* Urraca Alfonso de León y Gil (1228-d.1252). Contrajo un primer matrimonio con García Romeu, señor de Tormos, Pradilla y El Frago, y posteriormente con Pedro Núñez de Guzmán, señor de Guzmán.

___________________
*'''Alfonso IX (15 August 1171 – 23 or 24 September 1230) was king of León and Galicia from the death of his father''' Ferdinand II in 1188 '''until his own death. According to Ibn Khaldun (1332–1406), he is said to have been called the Baboso or Slobberer because he was subject to fits of rage during which he foamed at the mouth'''.

*'''He took steps towards modernizing and democratizing his dominion and founded the University of Salamanca in 1212. In 1188 he summoned the first parliament reflecting full representation of the citizenry ever seen in Western Europe, the Cortes of León.
*'''He took a part in the work of the Reconquest, conquering the area of Extremadura (including the cities of Cáceres and Badajoz).
*'''Alfonso was born in Zamora. He was the only son''' of King Ferdinand II of León and Urraca of Portugal. His father was the younger son of Alfonso VII of León and Castile, who divided his kingdoms between his sons, which set the stage for conflict in the family until '''the kingdoms were re-united by Alfonso IX's son''', Ferdinand III of Castile.
*'''Alfonso IX had great difficulty in obtaining the throne through his given birthright. In July 1188 his cousin''' Alfonso VIII of Castile required the '''younger Alfonso to recognize the elder as overlord in exchange for recognizing the younger's authority in León'''.
*'''The convening of the Cortes de León in the cloisters of the Basilica of San Isidoro would be one of the most important events of Alfonso's reign. The difficult economic situation at the beginning of his reign compelled Alfonso to raise taxes on the underprivileged classes, leading to protests and a few towns revolts'''. In response the king summoned the Cortes, an assembly of nobles, clergy and representatives of cities, and subsequently faced demands for compensatory spending and greater external control and oversight of royal expenditures. '''Alfonso's convening of the Cortes is considered by many historians, including Australia's John Keane,[4] to be instrumental to the formation of democratic parliaments across Europe. Note that Iceland had already held what may have been what is Europe's first parliament, the Þingvellir, in 930 CE. However, the Cortes' 1188 session predates the first session of the Parliament of England, which occurred in the thirteenth century.
*In spite of the democratic precedent represented by the Cortes and the founding of the University of Salamanca, '''Alfonso is often chiefly remembered for the difficulties his successive marriages caused between him with Pope Celestine III. He was first married in 1191 to his first cousin, Theresa of Portugal,[1] who bore him two daughters, and a son who died young. The marriage was declared null by the papal legate Cardinal Gregory for consanguinity.
*After Alfonso VIII of Castile was defeated at the Battle of Alarcos, '''Alfonso IX invaded Castile with the aid of Muslim troops.[1] He was summarily excommunicated by Pope Celestine III. In 1197, Alfonso IX married his first cousin once removed, Berengaria of Castile, to cement peace between León and Castile.[5] For this second act of consanguinity, the king and the kingdom were placed under interdict by representatives of the Pope.[6] In 1198, Pope Innocent III declared Alfonso and Berengaria's marriage invalid, but they stayed together until 1204.[7] The annulment of this marriage by the pope drove the younger Alfonso to again attack his cousin in 1204, but treaties made in 1205, 1207, and 1209 each forced him to concede further territories and rights.[8][9] The treaty in 1207 is the first existing public document in the Castilian dialect.[10]
*The Pope was, however, compelled to modify his measures by the threat that, if the people could not obtain the services of religion, they would not support the clergy, and that heresy would spread. '''The king was left under interdict personally, but to that he showed himself indifferent, and he had the support of his clergy. Berengaria left him after the birth of five children, and the king then returned to Theresa, to whose daughters he left his kingdom in his will.
*'''Alfonso's children by Theresa of Portugal[11] were:
**1) Ferdinand (ca. 1192 – August 1214, aged around 22), unmarried and without issue
**2) Sancha (ca. 1193–bef. 1243), unmarried and without issue. She and her sister Dulce became nuns or retired at the Monastery of San Guillermo Villabuena (León) where she died before 1243.
**3) Dulce, (1194/ca. 1195 - ca./aft. 1243), unmarried and without issue
*'''Alfonso's children by Berengaria of Castile were:[12]
**4) Eleanor (1198/1199 - 11 November 1202)
**5) Constance (1 May 1200 - 7 September 1242) became a nun at Las Huelgas, Burgos, where she died.
**6) King Ferdinand III the Saint (1201–1252), his successor.
**7) Alfonso, 4th Lord of Molina (1203–1272)
**8) Berengaria of León (1204–1237), married John of Brienne
*'''Alfonso also fathered many illegitimate children, some fifteen further children born out of wedlock are documented.
*'''Alfonso's children by Aldonza Martínez de Silva'''[13][14] (daughter of Martin Gomez de Silva & Urraca Rodriguez), later married to Diego Froilaz, Count of Cifuentes:
**9) Pedro Alfonso de León, 1st Lord of Tenorio (ca. 1196/ca. 1200–1226), Grand Master of Santiago, married N de Villarmayor, and had issue
**10) Alfonso Alfonso de León, died young
**11) Fernando Alfonso de León, died young
**12) Rodrigo Alfonso de León (ca. 1210 - ca. 1267), 1st Lord of Aliger and Governor of Zamora, married ca. 1240 to Inés Rodriguez de Cabrera (ca. 1200-), and had issue
**13) Teresa Alfonso de León (ca. 1210-), wife of Nuño González de Lara el Bueno, lord of Lara
**14) Aldonza Alfonso de León (ca.1215–1266), wife, first, of Diego Ramírez Froilaz, nephew of her stepfather, without issue, and then before June 1230 married Pedro Ponce de Cabrera (bef. 1202-between 1248 and 1254), and had issue, ancestors of the Ponce de León family.
*'''Alfonso's child by Inés Iñíguez de Mendoza''' (born c. 1180) (daughter of Lope Iñiguez de Mendoza, 1st Lord of Mendoza (ca. 1140–1189) and his wife Teresa Ximénez de los Cameros (ca. 1150-)):
**15) Urraca Alfonso de León (ca. 1190/ca. 1197-), first wife ca. 1230 of Lope Díaz II de Haro (1192 – 15 December 1236), 6th Sovereign Lord of Viscaya and had issue, including Mécia Lopes de Haro.
*'''Alfonso's child by Estefánia Pérez de Limia''', daughter of Pedro Arias de Limia and wife, subsequently wife of Rodrigo Suárez, Merino mayor of Galicia, had issue):
**16) Fernando Alfonso de León (born c. 1211), died young
*'''Alfonso's children by Maua, of unknown origin:
**17) Fernando Alfonso de León (ca. 1215/1218/1220 - Salamanca, 1278/1279), Archdean of Santiago de Compostella, married to Aldara de Ulloa and had issue
*'''Alfonso's children by Teresa Gil de Soverosa''' (born aft. 1175) (daughter of Gil Vasques de Soverosa and first wife Maria Aires de Fornelos):
**18) María Alfonso de León (ca. 1190/1200/1222 - aft. 1252), first married Álvaro Fernández de Lara, without issue, married as his second wife Soeiro Aires de Valadares (ca. 1140-) and had issue and later mistress of her nephew Alfonso X of Castile
**19) Sancha Alfonso de León (1210/ca. 1210–1270), a nun at the convent of Santa Eufemia in Cozuelos de Ojeda after divorcing without issue Simón Ruíz, Lord of Los Cameros
**20) Martín Alfonso de León (ca. 1210/ca. 1225-1274/ca. 1275)
**21) Urraca Alfonso of León (ca. 1210/1228 - aft.1252), married twice, first to García Romeu of Tormos, without issue, then Pedro Núñez de Guzmán, son of Guillén Pérez de Guzmán and María González Girón, with issue.
*'''Alfonso IX of León died on 24 September 1230. His death was particularly significant in that his son''', Ferdinand III of Castile, who was '''already the King of Castile also inherited the throne of León from his father. This was thanks to the negotiations of his mother, Berengaria, who convinced her stepdaughters to renounce their claim on the throne'''.[15] In an effort to quickly consolidate his power over León, Ferdinand III abandoned a military campaign to capture the city of Jaén immediately upon hearing news of '''his father's death''' and traveled to León to be crowned king. This coronation united the Kingdoms of León and Castile which would go on to dominate the Iberian Peninsula.
*From: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfonso_IX_of_Le%C3%B3n ________________
*'''Alfonso IX 'the Slobberer', King of Leon, Galicia, & Badajoz1,2,3,4,5
*'''M, #3967, b. 15 August 1171, d. 24 September 1230
*Father Ferdinand II, King of Leon, Galicia, & Extremadura2,3,5 b. 1135, d. 21 Jan 1188
*Mother Urraca of Portugal2,3,5 b. c 1151, d. 16 Oct 1188
*''' Alfonso IX 'the Slobberer', King of Leon, Galicia, & Badajoz married Iñes Iñiguez de Mendoza''', daughter of Iñigo Lopez de Mendoza, Señor de Llodio, Soria, & Burgos and Maria Garcia de Lara, '''DID NOT MARRY. Alfonso IX 'the Slobberer', King of Leon, Galicia, & Badajoz married Teresa Gil de Soveroza''', daughter of Gil Vasquez, Senor de Soveroza and Maria Aires de Fornellos, '''DID NOT MARRY.6 Alfonso IX 'the Slobberer', King of Leon, Galicia, & Badajoz Foamed at the mouth in fits of rage. He married Aldonca Martinez de Sylva''', daughter of Martin Gomez de Sylva and Urraca Rodrigues Fernandes de Cabrera. '''Alfonso IX 'the Slobberer', King of Leon, Galicia, & Badajoz was born on 15 August 1171 at Zamora, Castile & Leon, Spain.2,3,5 He married Teresa of Portugal''', daughter of Sancho I, King of Portugal & the Algarve and Dulce of Barcelona, '''on 15 February 1191 at Guimaraes, Ave, Norte, Portugal; They had 1 son''' (Fernando) '''and 2 daughters''' (Sancha; & Dulcia).7,2,3,5 '''Alfonso IX 'the Slobberer', King of Leon, Galicia, & Badajoz and Teresa of Portugal were divorced in 1194; Marriage was annulled for reason of consanguinity by Pope Celestine III. They separated in 1197.8,2,3,5 Alfonso IX 'the Slobberer', King of Leon, Galicia, & Badajoz married Berengaria of Castile''', daughter of Alphonso VIII 'the Noble', King of Castile, Toledo, & Extremadura, Lord of Gascony and Eleanor of England, '''in December 1197 at Valladolid, Castile & Leon, Spain; 2nd marriage for both. They had 2 sons''' (Fernando III, King of Castile & Leon; & Alfonso, Señor de Soria, Molina, Mesa, & Cigales) '''and 3 daughters''' (Leonor; Bérengère/Berenguela, wife of Jean de Brienne, King-Consort of Jerusalem, Emperor-Regent of Constantinople; & Constanza, a nun at Las Huelgas).2,3,5 '''Alfonso IX 'the Slobberer', King of Leon, Galicia, & Badajoz and Berengaria of Castile were divorced in 1204; Due to consanguinity, being refused a dispensation.2 Alfonso IX 'the Slobberer', King of Leon, Galicia, & Badajoz died on 24 September 1230 at Villanueva de Sarria, Castile, Spain, at age 59; Buried in the chapel of St. Lorenzo in Santiago el Mayor Cathedral at Santiago de Compostela. He had 11 illegitimate children by various mistresses.2,5
*'''Family 1 Iñes Iñiguez de Mendoza
*'''Child
**Urraca-Alfonsa of Leon+9
*'''Family 2
*'''Child
**Maria Alphonsez de Leon+6
*'''Family 3 Teresa Gil de Soveroza
*'''Children
**Urraca Alfonso de Leon+6
**Mayor Arias de Leon+10
**Maria Afonso de Leon+6 b. c 1190
*'''Family 4 Teresa of Portugal b. c 1176, d. 18 Jun 1250
*'''Family 5 Aldonca Martinez de Sylva
*'''Children
**Aldonza Alfonso de Leon+ d. 1266
**Rodrigo Alfonso de Leon, Senor de Aliger+6 b. c 1200, d. 1267
*'''Family 6 Berengaria of Castile b. Aug 1181, d. 8 Nov 1246
*'''Children
**Ferdinand III 'the Saint', King of Castile, Leon, Galicia, Toledo, Cordoba, Jaén, & Seville+11,3,5 b. bt 5 Aug 1201 - 19 Aug 1201, d. 30 May 1252
**Alfonso, Infante de Castile, Señor de Soria, Molina, Cigales, & Mesa+3,5 b. c Oct 1202, d. 6 Jan 1272
**Berengaria of Leon+12,3,4,13,5 b. 1204, d. 12 Apr 1237
*Citations
*[S580] Unknown author, Lineage and Ancestry of HRH Prince Charles by Gerald Paget, Vol. I, p. 69.
*[S5] Douglas Richardson, Plantagenet Ancestry, p. 191.
*[S6] Douglas Richardson, Plantagenet Ancestry: 2nd Edition, Vol. I, p. 493.
*[S4] Douglas Richardson, Royal Ancestry, Vol. I, p. 303.
*[S4] Douglas Richardson, Royal Ancestry, Vol. II, p. 115-116.
*[S13] Worldroots.com.
*[S11569] Europaische Stammtafeln, by Wilhelm Karl, Prinz zu Isenburg, Vol. II, Tafels 38 & 62.
*[S11569] Europaische Stammtafeln, by Wilhelm Karl, Prinz zu Isenburg, Vol. II, Tafel 62.
*[S59] GeneaNet.
*[S11600] 40000 Ancestors of the Counts of Paris, 30-371.
*[S5] Douglas Richardson, Plantagenet Ancestry, p. 190-192.
*[S6] Douglas Richardson, Plantagenet Ancestry: 2nd Edition, Vol. I, p. 389.
*[S4] Douglas Richardson, Royal Ancestry, Vol. I, p. 534.
*From: http://our-royal-titled-noble-and-commoner-ancestors.com/p132.htm#i3967

https://familysearch.org/pal:/MM9.2.1/398Z-XWH

http://dustyhills.net/aqwg222.htm

http://www.wikitree.com/wiki/Bourgogne-240

--------------------
Afonso IX de Leão e da Galiza[nt 1] (Zamora, 15 de agosto de 1171 - Sarria, 24 de setembro de 1230[1]), cognominado o Galego nas fontes da época,[2][3] foi o último soberano dos reinos de Leão e de Galiza independentes de 1188 até à sua morte.

Afonso era filho de Fernando II de Leão e de Urraca de Portugal[4] e, portanto, neto materno de Afonso I e de Mafalda de Saboia e sobrinho de Sancho I. Em 1181 os seus pais separaram-se devido a serem primos segundos (terem os mesmos bisavôs), regressando a sua mãe à corte do seu avô materno D. Afonso Henriques e ficando Afonso entregue à tutela do seu pai.

Teve de enfrentar a sua madrastra Urraca Lopes de Haro e o seu meio-irmão Sancho Fernandes de Leão pelo direito à coroa de Leão. Para fortalecer a sua pretensão convocou a Cúria Régia para receber o apoio do clero, da nobreza e dos representantes das cidades. As Cortes de Leão de 1188 podem ser consideradas o primeiro antecedente na Europa Ocidental do parlamentarismo moderno.[5] Nelas foi reconhecido o direito à inviolabilidade do domicílio e o de habeas corpus, entre outros.

Em 1188 Afonso tornou-se rei de Leão e da Galiza após a morte do seu pai. Nesse mesmo ano morreria também a mãe Urraca de Portugal.

Reinado

Mapa político da Península Ibérica em 1210.

Casou-se em 1191 com a sua prima direita Teresa Sanches, filha de Sancho I de Portugal e de Dulce de Aragão.[6] A união seria anulada em 1194 pelo papa e só após algum tempo Afonso acataria a anulação.

Em dezembro de 1197 celebra segundas núpcias em Valladolid com a sua prima-sobrinha Berengária de Castela, filha de Afonso VIII de Castela e Leonor Plantageneta. Deste segundo casamento Afonso teve o herdeiro que uniria as duas coroas, Fernando III. O seu segundo estratégico casamento seria anulado em 1204, novamente por consanguinidade.

Encarado como uma afronta ao poder papal, teve como reação um interdicto (o equivalente à excomunhão para um reino ou território) sobre a sua pessoa e o seu reino.

No entanto, Inocêncio III acabou por levantar a sanção sobre Leão, sob o argumento de que se a população não tivesse acesso aos serviços da religião, deixariam de apoiar o clero, e aumentaria a heresia no reino. Afonso continuou sob interdicto pessoal, ao qual se mostrou indiferente, apoiado pelo seu clero. Depois da separação com Berengária, o rei voltou a ligar-se a Teresa, a cujas filhas legou o reino.

Depois da separação de Berengária, a política de Afonso IX centrou-se na rivalidade com Castela, que violara os acordos com o seu reino, conquistando-lhe toda a franja do Carrión e parte de Tierra de Campos.

Em 1217 Berengária tornou-se rainha de Castela após a morte do irmão Henrique I, mas abdicou quase imediatamente para o filho de ambos, Fernando III. Em consequência, este foi viver com a sua mãe e governar Castela. Afonso IX, que ambicionava a esta coroa por ser neto de Afonso VI, proclamou guerra aberta ao reino do filho, apoiado pela poderosa família Lara e outros nobres descontentes. Os seus planos não se concretizariam e acabaria por assinar umas tréguas com a sua ex-esposa. No processo deserdaria o filho da coroa de Leão.

Posteridade

Em 1218, Afonso fundou a Universidade de Salamanca. Depois do fracasso com Castela, concentrou-se na luta contra o Califado Almóada, onde se destacam as suas conquistas na Estremadura: Cáceres em 1229, Mérida e Badajoz em 1230.

Embora, por sua morte em 1230, o seu testamento previsse que o trono seria legado às suas filhas Sancha e Dulce, resultantes do primeiro matrimónio, foi o filho que teve do segundo, Fernando III, que acabaria por lhe suceder, juntando as duas coroas numa união pessoal:[7] cada uma manteria a sua independência, cortes e oficiais, mas seriam regidas pelo mesmo monarca.

Afonso IX de Leão morreu na cidade galega de Sarria em 24 de Setembro de 1230, com cinquenta e nove anos de idade, quando ele fez uma peregrinação a Santiago de Compostela e foi enterrado na catedral de Santiago de Compostela.[8]

Descendência Do primeiro casamento em 1191 com a infanta Teresa Sanches, filha de Sancho I de Portugal, e de Dulce de Aragão, teve os infantes:

Sancha de Leão[9] (1191-antes de 1243).[10]

Fernando de Leão (1192/1193–1214).[9][11]

Dulce de Leão[9] (1193/1194-1248).[12]

Do segundo casamento, em 1197 com Berengária de Castela,[9] filha de Afonso VIII e de Leonor Plantageneta, princesa de Inglaterra, teve os infantes:

Leonor de Leão (m. 1202).[7]

Constança de Leão (m. 1242), monja no Mosteiro de Las Huelgas.[7]

Fernando III de Castela (Zamora, agosto de 1201-Sevilha, 30 de maio de 1252), sucedeu a Henrique I de Castela em 1214 no trono de Castela e a seu pai em 1230 no trono de Leão, unificado ao de Castela.[7]

Afonso de Molina (1202-1272), senhor de Molina pelo seu primeiro casamento com Mafalda Gonçalves de Lara.[7] De sua terceira esposa, Maior Afonso de Meneses, foi o pai de Maria de Molina, rainha consorte de Castela pelo seu matrimónio com o rei Sancho IV.[9]

Berengária de Leão (m. 1235), casada na cidade de Toledo em 1222 com João de Brienne, rei de Jerusalém[7] e regente do Império de Constantinopla.

Depois da anulação de seu primeiro matrimónio e antes de casar com Berengáira, teve uma relação amorosa que durou cerca de dois anos com Inês Íñiguez de Mendoça, filha de Íñigo Lopes de Mendoça e de Maria Garcia.[13][nt 2]

Urraca Afonso de Leão, casada com Lope Díaz II de Haro, senhor da Biscaia.[14]

Afonso teve outra relaçao com uma nobre galega, Estefânia Peres de Faiam, a quem em 1211 o rei douo um reguengo em terras ourensanas onde a sua família teve muitas propriedades, assim como no norte de Portugal.

Era filha de Pedro Mendes Faiam quem confirmou várious documentos reais do rei Afonso IX, e neta de Menedo Faiam, quem também foi testemunha de diplomas do rei Fernando II emitidos em Galiza a partir de 1155. Estefânia se casou depois de sua relação como o rei com Rodrigo Soares de quem teve descendência. No seu testamento,Estefânia mandou ser enterrada no mosteiro de Fiães.[15]

Alfonso IX e Estefânia foram os pais de:[nt 3]

Fernando Afonso (n. 1211),[15] quem morreu jovem.

Segundo o historiador espanhol Julio González, depois de sua relaçao com Estefânia, o rei Afonso teve um filho com uma senhora chamada Maura, de Salamanca, da origem desconhecida:[17]

Fernando Afonso de Leão (m. 1278), deão da Catedral de Santiago de Compostela,[17] arquidiácono da Catedral de Salamanca, e canónigo da Catedral de Leão.

Entre 1214 e 1218, Afonso teve uma relação com a nobre portuguesa Aldonça Martins da Silva, filha de Martim Gomes da Silva e de Urraca Rodrigues[18] (que depois se casou com Diogo Froilaz, conde de Cifuentes, filho do conde Froila Ramires e da condessa Sancha Fernandes):[19]

Rodrigo Afonso de Leão (m. depois de 1252), senhor de Aliger, casado com Inês Rodriguez de Cabrera, filha de Rui Fernandes de Valduerna "o Feio"[20] e de Maria Frolaz de Cifuentes.

Aldonça Afonso de Leão (m. depois de 1267), casada por duas vezes, a primeira com Diego Ramírez Froilaz de quem não teve filhos e a segunda antes de junho de 1230 com Pedro Ponce de Cabrera filho de Ponce Vela de Cabrera,[21] de quem vem os Ponce de Leão.

Teresa Afonso de Leão, a esposa de Nuno Gonçalves de Lara o Bom.[22]

A relação mais duradoura do rei Afonso, que começou em 1218 e durou até 1230,[23] foi com Teresa Gil de Soverosa,[24] filha de Gil Vasques de Soverosa e de Maria Aires de Fornelos, tendo esta também tido filhos de Sancho I de Portugal: Os filhos, que nasceram entre 1218 e 1230, foram:[25]

Sancha Afonso (m. 1270), casada com Simão Roiz, senhor de Os Cameros. Depois de enviuvar, foi freira no convento de Santa Eufémia de Cozuelos que tinha fundado.[26]

Maria Afonso de Leão (m. depois de julho de 1275).[nt 4] Contraiu um primeiro matrimónio com Álvaro Fernandes de Lara e depois, segundo o conde de Barcelos, casou com Soeiro Aires de Valadares, filho de Aires Nunes de Valadares e de Jimena Nunes. Foi concubina do rei Afonso X[26] com quem teve uma filha chamada Berengária.[27]

Martim Afonso de Leão (m. antes de abril de 1272), casou-se com Maria Mendes de Sousa,[28] filha de Mem Gonçalves de Sousa e de Teresa Afonso de Menezes. Foram os fundadores do Mosteiro de Sancti Spíritus em Salamanca, um convento feminino da Ordem de Santiago.[28]

Urraca Afonso de Leão (n. 1228), casada com Garcia de Romeu e depois com Pedro Nunes de Guzmão.[26] Embora tenha sido atribuído um outro filho ao rei Afonso IX chamado Pedro, supostamente mestre da ordem de Santiago, Pedro não está documentado como os outros filhos do rei.[29]

Notas

Parte do texto foi baseado na tradução do artigo «Alfonso IX de León» na Wikipédia em castelhano (acessado nesta versão). ↑ Segundo a numeração cronológica real do Reino de Leão, deveria ter sido conhecido como Afonso VIII, mas, historicamente atribuiu-se-lhe o ordinal IX, como forma de "unir" as cronologias de Leão e de Castela (em Castela reinava então Afonso VIII). Contudo, nas Siete Partidas do seu neto Afonso X, este afirmava ser Afonso IX ↑ Inês teve uma irmã, Milia, que foi a esposa de Fernão Guterres de Castro, alferes do rei.[13] ↑ É possivel que tevem outro filho, João Afonso quem aparece em alguns documentos com os filhos de Estefânia e seu arido Rodrigo Soares.[16] ↑ Em 4 julho de 1275, Maria doou ao mosteiro de Santa Maria de Melón (Melón, Ourense) a quarta parte do couto de Lougares. Referências ↑ Caetano de Sousa 2014, p. 65, livro I. ↑ Martínez, H. Salvador (2012). Berenguela la grande y su época. Madrid: Ediciones Polifemo. 119 páginas ↑ González, Julio (1944). Alfonso IX (em :es). [S.l.]: Centro Superior de Investigaciones científicas ↑ Caetano de Sousa 2014, pp. 65–66, livro I. ↑ «González, Miguel Ángel y Chao, Ricardo, Historia de León, La Revista. Diario de León em maio de 2006». Consultado em 24 de maio de 2016. Arquivado do original em 29 de março de 2015 ↑ Fernandes Marques 2008, pp. 62 3 87. ↑ Ir para: a b c d e f Martínez Díez 2007, p. 47. ↑ Arco y Garay 1954, pp. 183-184. ↑ Ir para: a b c d e Caetano de Sousa 2014, p. 67, livro I. ↑ Fernandes Marques 2008, pp. 89 e 140. ↑ Fernandes Marques 2008, p. 140. ↑ Fernandes Marques 2008, pp. 140 e 143. ↑ Ir para: a b Calderón Medina 2011, p. 262. ↑ Calderón Medina 2011, pp. 262–263. ↑ Ir para: a b Calderón Medina 2011, pp. 264–265. ↑ Calderón Medina 2011, p. 264 n.31. ↑ Ir para: a b Calderón Medina 2011, p. 265. ↑ Calderón Medina 2011, p. 266–267. ↑ Calderón Medina 2011, p. 268. ↑ Calderón Medina 2011, pp. 267–268. ↑ Calderón Medina 2011, pp. 268–270. ↑ Calderón Medina 2011, p. 269. ↑ Calderón Medina 2011, p. 275. ↑ Calderón Medina 2011, p. 270. ↑ Calderón Medina 2011, pp. 268, 270 y 275. ↑ Ir para: a b c Calderón Medina 2011, p. 276. ↑ Salazar y Acha 1990, pp. 220-221. ↑ Ir para: a b Calderón Medina 2011, pp. 275–276. ↑ Ayala Martínez 1997, p. 245 n.14.

Bibliografia Álvarez Palenzuela, Vicente Ángel (2007). Historia de España de la Edad Media (em espanhol). Barcelona: Ed. Ariel. ISBN 84-34466-68-6 Arco y Garay, Ricardo (1954). Sepulcros de la Casa Real de Castilla (em espanhol). [S.l.]: Instituto Jerónimo Zurita. Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas. OCLC 11366237 Ayala Martínez, Carlos de (1997). «Las órdenes militares en el siglo XII castellano. La consolidación de los maestrazgos». Anuario de Estudios Medievales (em espanhol) (27). Barcelona: CSIC: Institución Milá y Fontanals. ISSN 0066-5061 Caetano de Souza, Antonio (1735). Historia Genealógica de la Real Casa Portuguesa (PDF). I, Livros I e II. Lisboa: Lisboa Occidental, na oficina de Joseph Antonio da Sylva. ISBN 978-84-8109-908-9 Calderón Medina, Inés (2011). «Las otras mujeres del rey: El concubinato regio en el reino de León (1157- 1230)» (PDF). Seminário Medieval 2009-2011 (em espanhol). Oporto: Instituto de Filosofía da Faculdade de Letras da Universidade do Porto. pp. 255–289. ISBN 9789898459145 Marques, Maria Alegria (2008). Estudos sobre a Ordem de Cister em Portugal. Coimbra: Estudos da Faculdade de Letras da Universidade de Coimbra. ISBN 972-772-019-6 Rodrigues Oliveira, Ana (2010). Rainhas medievais de Portugal. Dezassete mulheres, duas dinastias, quatro séculos de História. Lisboa: A esfera dos livros. ISBN 978-989-626-261-7 Salazar y Acha, Jaime de de (1990). «Precisiones y nuevos datos sobre el entorno familiar de Alfonso X el Sabio fundador de Ciudad Real». Cuadernos de estudios manchegos (em espanhol) (20). Ciudad Real: , Instituto de Estudios Manchegos. ISSN 0526-2623
--------------------
Alfonso IX King of Castille and Leon

Sosa : 2,835,262 (Alfonso IX King of Castille and Leon Rey de León) Rey de León

Born 15 August 1171 - Zamora, Castilla y León, España Baptized 24 September 1230 - Sarría, Zuia, Álava, Basque Country, Spain Deceased 24 September 1230 - Sarria, Lugo, Galicia, Spain, aged 59 years old Buried 29 September 1230 - Galicia, España

Parents sosa Fernando II de León, Rey , born in 1137 - Spain, deceased 22 January 1188 - Spain aged 51 years old , buried - Santiago, La Coruña, Galicia, Spain Married 10 May 1165, Of, Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, to sosa Urraca de Portugal, born in 1151 - Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, deceased 16 October 1188 - Valladolid, Valladolid, Castilla y León, Spain aged 37 years old , buried - Monasterio de Santa María de Wamba (Valladolid, España)

Spouses, children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren Married in 1190, MISTRESS, to sosa Teresa Gil de Soverosa, born (aproximadamente 1175) - Spain, deceased after 1210 (Parents : M sosa Gil Vásques de Soverosa 1165-1240 & F sosa María Aires de Fornelos ca 1160-) with F María Alfonso de León 1200-1266 Married in 1236, Lara de los Infantes, Burgos, Castille y León, Spain, to Álvar Fernández de Lara, Señor de Lara ca 1210-1240/
María Alfonso de León 1200-1266 Married after 1240, Valladares, Spain, to Suero "Sarraça" Arias de Valladares †
María Alfonso de León 1200-1266 With Alfonso X El Sabio de Castilla, rey de Castilla 1221-1284 with M Alfonso Fernández, el Niño †1281 With Alda de Morante † with : M Juan Fernández de Bobadilla † F Berenguela Alfonso ? 1241- F Berenguela Alfonso 1253-1284
María Alfonso de León 1200-1266 With Alvaro Fernandez de Lara †1243 with F Teresa Alvarez de Lara ca 1213- F Sancha Alfonso de León ca 1210-ca 1270 With Simón Rodríguez (Sol. Ruiz), Señor de los Cameros †1277 M Martín Alfonso de León 1220-1272 With María Mendez de Sousa † F sosa Urraca Alfonso de León 1228-ca 1252 With sosa Pedro Ruiz de la Bureba de Mansilla 1129- with F sosa Urraca Pérez de Bureba x 1159-1230 Married about 1179, Spain, to sosa Diego Iñiguez López Zúñiga 1161-1230 with : M Iñigo Ortíz De Las Cuevas ca 1182- M sosa Lope Ortiz de Zúñiga 1191-ca 1239
Urraca Alfonso de León 1228-ca 1252 With Pedro de Guzmán, Señor de GuzmánSeñor de Derruña y San Román ca 1220- with M Pedro Núñez de Guzmán Sr. de Brizuela y Manzanedo 1290-
Urraca Alfonso de León 1228-ca 1252 With sosa Pedro Núñez de Guzmán, Sr. de Guzmán †1265 with M sosa Fernan Perez de Guzman, Señor de Valadazot y Villanueva † With sosa Sancha Rodriguez de Cabrera 1240- with : F sosa Juana Fernández de Guzmán y Rodriguez Cabrera ca 1268-
Urraca Alfonso de León 1228-ca 1252 With sosa Lope Diaz de Haro II 1191-1236 with M Alfonso Lopez de Haro †ca 1268 With Sancha Gil † M sosa Alfonso Lopez De Haro 1202-1264 With sosa María Alvarez de los Cameros † with : M sosa Juan Alfonso Lopez de Haro †1312 M Manrique López de Haro 1204-1236 M Fernando López de Haro 1206- F Berenguela López de Haro 1208-1296 With Rodrigo González Giron 1190-1256 M sosa Diego López III de Haro 1210-1254 With sosa Constance de Béarn ca 1225-1278 with : M Diego López de Haro 1240-1288 M Diego López V de Haro 1250- F sosa Teresa Díaz de Haro /1254-1294 F sosa Sancha Díaz De Haro †1288 F Urraca López de Haro †1284 F Mencia Lopez De Haro 1210-1270 Married in 1234 to Alvaro Perez de Castro †1240
Mencia Lopez De Haro 1210-1270 Married in 1245 to Sancho II de Portugal, Rey † M Lope López de Haro 1212- With Mayor Gonzalez Girón ca 1220-1255/ Married in 1191, Guimarães, Braga, Portugal, to Teresa de Portugal, Reina de Portugal , born 4 October 1178 - Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, deceased 18 June 1250 - Lorvão, Penacova, Coimbra, Portugal aged 71 years old (Parents : M Sancho I El Poblador de Portugal, Rey 1154-1211 & F María Pais Pais Ribeira 1170-/1258) with M Fernando de León †1214 F Sancha De León 1191-1242 F Dulce De León 1194-1248 Married 17 November 1197, Valladolid, Castilla y León, Spain, to sosa Berenguela de Castilla, Reina de Castilla , born in 1180 - Segovia, Segovia, Castilla y León, Spain, deceased 8 November 1246 - Burgos, Burgos, Castilla y León, Spain aged 66 years old , buried after 8 November 1246 - Burgos, Castilla y León, Spain (Parents : M sosa Alfonso VIII Castile, King of Castile , Toledo, and Extremadura 1155-1214 & F sosa Leonor Plantagenet, Reina de Castilla 1161-1214) with M Ferdinand Of Castille 1198-1252 Married in 1234, Seville, Sevilla, Andalucia, Spain, to Jeanne Countess Ponthieu Dedammartin 1208-1278 with F Queen Eleanor Of Castle x 1240-1290 Married 18 October 1254, Marriage/Burgos, Burgos, Castilla-Leon, Spain, to Edward I Longshanks England 1239-1307 M Juan Sednor Prince of Marchena Leon & Castile 1246-1283 M sosa Fernando III el Santo de León y de Castilla, Rey de Castilla 1199-1252 Married 30 November 1219, Burgos, Castilla y León, Spain, to sosa Isabel de Suabia, Reina consorte de Castilla ca 1198-1235 with M Alfonso X El Sabio de Castilla, rey de Castilla 1221-1284 With María Alfonso de León 1200-1266 with : M Alfonso Fernández, el Niño †1281 F Berenguela Alfonso ? 1241- F Berenguela Alfonso 1253-1284

Alfonso X El Sabio de Castilla, rey de Castilla 1221-1284 With Violante d’Aragón ca 1236-1301 with : M Sancho IV El Bravo de Castilla y León, Rey 1258-1295

Alfonso X El Sabio de Castilla, rey de Castilla 1221-1284 With María Guillen Guzman Villena 1222-1262 with : F Beatriz de Castilla 1242-1303 F Berenguela De Castilla 1253-1300 F Beatrice of Castille 1254-1286 M Fernando de la Cerda, Príncipe Heredero de Castilla y León 1255-1275 F Leonor De Castilla 1256- F Constanza De Castilla 1259-1280 M Pedro Perez de Castilla 1260-1283 F Isabel de Castilla y Aragón 1263-1264 F Violante De Castilla 1265- F Urraca Alfonso de Castilla †

Alfonso X El Sabio de Castilla, rey de Castilla 1221-1284 With Violante de Aragón y Hungría reina consorte de Castilla 1236-1301 with : F Urraca Alfonso Sra. Consorte de Fuentes 1154- F Berenguela de Castilla 1237- F Beatriz Alfonso de Guzmán, Reina Consorte de Portugal 1242-1303 M Alfonso "El Niño" Fernández 1243-1281 M Martín Alfonso, Abad de Valladolid ? 1244- F Berenguela Alfonsez Infanta de Castilla 1253-1284 F Beatriz de Castilla, Marquesa del Moferrato 1254-1280 F Beatrix de Castille 1254-1286 F Leonor Alfonzes, Infanta de Castilla ? 1256-1275 M Sancho Iv of Castille ? 1258-1295 F Constanza Alfonzes, Infanta de Castilla ? 1259- M Juan "El Tarifa" de Valencia y Acuña, Sr de Valencia de Campos 1260-1319 M Pedro Alfonzes, Infante de Castilla ? 1261-1283 F Isabel Alfonzes, Infanta de Castilla ? 1263-1264 F Violante de Castilla, Señora de Vizaya ? 1265-1296 M Jaime de Castilla, Sr. de los Cameros 1267-1284

Alfonso X El Sabio de Castilla, rey de Castilla 1221-1284 With Mayor GuillÉn De GuzmÁn, SeÑora De Cifuentes 1225-1266 M Fadrique Fernández de Castilla 1223-1277 M Fernando De Castilla Y Leon /1225-/1248 M Enrqiue Fernandez Castile 1230-1303 Relationship with Mayor Rodriguez de Pecha 1225- with : M Enrique Enriquez †1323 M Felipe de Castilla y León, Señor de Valdecomeja 1231-1274 Married (31 de marzo de 1258), Valladolid, Valladolid, Castilla y León, España, to Cristina De Noruega 1234-1262
Felipe de Castilla y León, Señor de Valdecomeja 1231-1274 Married before 1269 to Leonor Ruiz De Castro †1275
Felipe de Castilla y León, Señor de Valdecomeja 1231-1274 With Inés Rodriguez Giron † F Leonor de Castilla, Reina Consorte de Inglaterra 1232/-1290 M Sancho Fernández, Arzobispo de Sevilla y de Toledo 1233-1261 M sosa Manuel Fernández de Castilla, Infante de Castilla y León 1234-1283 Married in 1274 to sosa Béatrice de Savoie ca 1250-1292 with : F Constanza Manuel ? † M sosa Juan Manuel El Escritor de Castilla, Principe de Villena 1282-1348

Manuel Fernández de Castilla, Infante de Castilla y León 1234-1283 Married to ? ? F Berenguela Fernández Castile 1234-1279 F María Fernández Castile /1235-1235 Married in 1258, Toledo, Castilla-La Mancha, Spain, to Gutiérrez Armídez de Toledo 1230-1340 with : F Arabuena de Armildez Gutierrez Fernández 1259-1334

María Fernández Castile /1235-1235 Married, Toledo, Castilla, La Mancha, Spain, to Juán Martínez de Leiva 1230-1340 M Luis de Castilla ?, Sr. de Marchena y Zuheros 1243-1279 M Simón, Infante de Castilla y León ? 1244- M Juan, Infante de Castilla y León ? 1246-1246
Fernando III el Santo de León y de Castilla, Rey de Castilla 1199-1252 Married in October 1237, Burgos, Castile, Spain, to Jeanne de Dammartin 1220-1279 with M Fernando De Castille † With Laure de Montford, Lady of Espernon ca 1240-1270 with : M Jean I Ponthieu Aumale, Comte 1264-1302 F Eleanor de Castile, Queen consort of England 1240-1290 Married 1 November 1254, Monastery of Las Huelgas, Burgos, Spain, to Edward I x, King of England 1239-1307 with : F Katherine ? /1264-1264 F Joan of England 1265-/1265 M John ?, of England 1266-1271 M Henry ?, of England 1267-1274 F Eleanor of England 1269-1298 F Juliana ? ca 1271-1271 F Joan of Acre, Countess of Gloucester and Hertford 1272-1307 M Alphonso ?, Earl of Chester 1273-1284 F Margaret of England 1275-1333 F Berengaria Princess Of England 1276-1278 F Mary ?, of Woodstock 1278-1332 F Isabella ? 1279-1279 F Elizabeth ?, of Rhuddlan 1282-1316 M Edward x, II 1284-1327 M Louis ?, de Castilla 1243-1275 M Simon de Castilla 1244-1244 M Juan Castile ca 1246-1246 F Constanza de Castilla 1200-1242 F Berenguela de León 1200-1237 With John de Brienne ca 1198-1237
Berenguela de León 1200-1237 Married in 1223, Toledo, Castilla-La Mancha, Spain, to Jean De Brienne,, King of Jerusalem ca 1148-1237 with F Marie Of Brienne, Latin Empress Consort of Constantinople ca 1224-1275 Married in 1234 to Baldwin II De Courtenay 1217-1273 with : F Artesia Xiv Constantinople † F Helena x, d' Anjou 1230-1314 M Philippe De Courtenay 1243-1283 F Leonor de Castilla 1202-1202 M sosa Alfonso de Castilla, Señor de Molina y Mesa 1202-1272 With Teresa Gonzalez de Lara 1202- with F Berengeira Alfonzes de Molina ca 1222-1272 F Urraca Alfonsez de Molina Téllez de Meneses 1225- With Garci Romeu "El de Los Garfios" Gómez Carrillo, Sr. de Ormaza 1255- with : M García Gómez Carrillo de Molina, Sr. de Ormaza y Mazuelo 1266-1312

Urraca Alfonsez de Molina Téllez de Meneses 1225- Married in 1255, Castilla, España, to Garci Romeu "El de Los Garfios" Gómez Carrillo, Sr. de Ormaza 1220-1293 with : M García Gómez Carrillo de Molina 1266-1312 M García Gómez Carrillon de Molina Señor de Ormaza y Mazuelo 1266-1312 M Gómez Carrillo, Alcaide Mayor de Los Hijosdalgos de Castilla ? † M Juan Alonso Carrillo ? † M Juan Alonso Carrillo I Señor de Priego x †
Alfonso de Castilla, Señor de Molina y Mesa 1202-1272 Married in 1260 to Mayor Alfonso de Meneses, Señora de Meneses y Villanueva x 1230- with M Pedro Gonzalez De Molina † F Urraca Alfonso Molina ca 1220- M Juana Alfonso De Molina ca 1246-1280/ F Uracca De Molina ca 1246- F Leonora De Molino ca 1256- F Johanna De Molino ca 1262- F María de Molina 1264-1321 Married in 1284, Tordesillas, Valladolid, Castilla y León, Spain, to Sancho IV El Bravo de Castilla y León, Rey 1258-1295 with : F Theresa Sánchez De Castilla ca 1270- F Violante Sánchez de Castilla 1275-1333 F Isabel Princess Of CASTILE & LbEON 1283-1328 F Isabel de Castilla y Molina de Castilla, Reina Consorte de León 1283-1328 M Fernando IV"El Emplazado", Rey de Castilla y León x 1285-1312 M Alfonso Prince Of CASTILE & LbEON 1286-1291 M Alfonso de Castilla x 1286-1291 M Alfonso de Castilla y Leòn 1286-1291 M Enrique Prince Of CASTILE & LbEON 1288-1299 M Enrique de Castilla 1288-1299 M Henry of Castillia 1288-1299 M Pedro de Castilla 1290-1319 M Peter of Catallia 1290-1319 M Felipe de Castilla y Molina 1292-1327 M Felipe de Castilla, Sr. de Cabrera y Ribera 1292- M Felipe Prince Of CASTILE & LbEON 1292-1327 M Phillip de Castallia 1292-1327 F Beatriz de Castilla, Princesa 1293-1359 F Beatriz de Castilla y León 1293-1359 M Juan Alfonso De Molina ca 1268- M Affonso Tellez De Meneses ca 1297-1318
Alfonso de Castilla, Señor de Molina y Mesa 1202-1272 Married in 1240 to Mafalda ( Teresa) Gonzalez de Lara 1217-1245 with M Fernando Alonso de Molina 1242-1250 F Blanca Alfonso de Castilla 1243-1293 F Juana Alfonso De Molina 1245-1308 Married in 1269 to Diego López de Haro 1240-1288
Alfonso de Castilla, Señor de Molina y Mesa 1202-1272 With Teresa Peres de Bragança ca 1224-1246
Alfonso de Castilla, Señor de Molina y Mesa 1202-1272 With sosa Teresa Peres De Bragança ca 1175- with F sosa Leonor Alonso de Molina 1220- Married (31 de julho de 1586), Santa Maria La Mayor, Tordesillas, Valladolid, Espanha, to sosa Alonso Garcia Sarmiento Villamayor, Primer Sr. de Sesamonde 1210- with : F sosa Mayor Garcia De Villamayor 1247- M Juan Fernández Sarmiento, Sr. Villamayor y Bureba † F Juana de Ávila y Núñez †
Alfonso de Castilla, Señor de Molina y Mesa 1202-1272 With Mafalda ( Teresa) Gonzalez de Lara 1217-1245 with F Juana Alfonso de Molina 1245-1280 With Diego López IV de Haro, Sr. de Vizcaya 1245-1288 with : F Aldonza López de Haro 1323-1360 M X Alfonso ca 1220-1272 Married about 1245 to De Meneses † Married in 1205, Portugal, to sosa Aldonza Martinez de Silva, born in 1184 - León, León, Castilla y León, Spain, baptized - León, Castilla y León, Spain, deceased 8 November 1246 - Burgos, Castilla y León, Spain aged 62 years old , buried in 1279 - Monasterio de Santa Maria de Nogales (Parents : M sosa Martim Gómez de Silva 1162- & F sosa Urraca Ruiz de Cabrera y Ponce 1144-) with M Rodrigo Alfonso de León, Señor de Aliger y Castro del Río 1206-1267 With Inés Rodríguez de Cabrera † with F Sancha Alfonso de Leon † With Lope Sancho De Lopera I Señor de Valenzuela † with : F Sancha Alfonso De Valenzuela 1165- M Pedro Sánchez de Valenzuela † M Sancho Martinez de Jodar † M Pedro Alfonso de León ca 1210- M Pedro Alfonso de Léon, senhor de Astorga † F Aldonza Rodríguez De León, señora de Villamartín † With Esteban Fernandez de Castro Señor de Lemos 1220-1288 with : M Fernando Rodriguez de Castro 1270-1335 F Mayor Fernández de Castro 1270-
Rodrigo Alfonso de León, Señor de Aliger y Castro del Río 1206-1267 With Inés De Cabrera Señora de cabrera y rivera † with F Aldonza de cabrera y Rivera † M Juan Ramirez de cabrera y Rivera † M Martin Ruiz de Leon † F sosa Aldonza Alfonso de León ca 1207-1266 Married before June 1230 to sosa Pedro Ponce de Cabrera, Sr. del Valle de Aria 1190-1264 with M Rodrigo Pérez Ponce †1354 Married to Isabel de la Cerda y Guzman 1329-1389 F Aldonza Ponce de León † With Almirante Payo Gómez Chirino † F Elvira Pérez Ponce de León † F Juana Pérez Ponce de León † M Pedro Perez Ponce de Leon † With Toda Alvarez De Alagon 1226- with : M Juan Ponce de Cabrera †1328 M Arias De Cabrera † F Maria Ponce de Cabrera † M Pedro Ponce de Cabrera † M Juan Ponce de Cabrera, Sr. de Cabra y Torre de Pajares 1400- F Thoda Perez Roldan de Cabrera † M Álvar Pérez Ponce de León † M sosa Fernan Perez Ponce de Leon 1223-1292 With sosa Urraca Gutierrez de Meneses y de Sousa † with : F Aldonza Ponce de León † M sosa Fernando Ponce de León, Señor de Marchena, Bornos, Espera, Rota y Chipiona x 1265-1331 F Aldonza Ponce de León 1278- F Juana Ponce de León y Meneses 1280-1310 F Beatriz Ponce de León 1280-1359 F Juana Ponce de León y Meneses 1280-1310 M Gutierre Pérez Ponce de León x ca 1290- M Rodrigo Ponce de Asturias 1300- M Ruy Pérez Ponce de León, Maestre de la Orden de Calatrava, Ayo de Fernando IV †1295 M Juan Ponce de León, Sr. de Lopera † M Fernán Pérez Ponce de León, Sr. de Cangas y de la Puebla de Asturias †1292 M Pedro Ponce de Cabrera y Alonso 1243-1358 M Pedro Ponce de Cabrera, Comendador de Castilla y Trece de la Orden de Santiago 1256-1280 F Violante Pérez Ponce de Leon † With Pedro Alvarez de Quiñones † with : F Theressa Ponce de León †1638 M Suer Pérez de Quiñones x 1280-

Violante Pérez Ponce de Leon † With Pedro Álvarez de Quiñones † with : M Suero Pérez de Quiñones, II Señor de Luna 1350-1367

Violante Pérez Ponce de Leon † With Pedro Álvarez de Quiñones † M Juan Ponce de Cabrera, Sr. de Cabra y Torre de Pajares 1260- With Inés Enríquez de Arana ca 1265- with : F Guiomar Ponce de Cabrera ca 1290- F Sancha Ponce de Cabrera ca 1300-

Juan Ponce de Cabrera, Sr. de Cabra y Torre de Pajares 1260- With Inés Enríquez de Toledo 1400- with : M Fernando Núñez de Cabrera †1350 M Pedro Ponce de Cabrera IV Sr. de la Torre de Arias Cabrera 1300- Married in 1314, Spain, to Constanza Alfonso de Cordoba 1310- with : M Pedro de Cabrera † F Beatriz Fernández de Cabrera 1315-
Aldonza Alfonso de León ca 1207-1266 With Pedro Ponce de Cabrera † with M Fernando Ponce de Leon Señor de Gangas y de Pueblas de Asturias † With Urraca Tellez de Meneses † with : F Juana Ponce de León † M Pedro Ponce de León, Señor de la Puebla de Asturias, Cangas y Tineo x 1265- F Beatriz Ponce de León † M Fernando Ponce de León † M Juan Ponce de León † F María Ponce de León †

Fernando Ponce de Leon Señor de Gangas y de Pueblas de Asturias † With Urraca Pérez de Meneses †
Fernando Ponce de Leon Señor de Gangas y de Pueblas de Asturias † With Urraca Tellez de Meneses † F sosa Teresa Alfonso de León x ca 1225- With sosa Nuño González de Lara, El Bueno 1240- with M Juan Núñez I de Lara †1294 M sosa Juan Núñez, I de Lara † Married (aproximadamente 1260) to Teresa Álvarez de Azagra † with : M Álvaro Núñez de Lara †1287 M Juan Núñez, II de Lara 1276- F Teresa Núñez de Lara 1280-1314 M Nuño González de Lara 1284-1296

Juan Núñez, I de Lara † Married in 1270 to sosa Teresa Díaz de Haro /1254-1294 with : F sosa Juana Núñez de Lara 1286-1351 F Teresa Nunez ca 1220- Married about 1244, Spain, to Gil Gomez De Roa Y Manzanedo, Señor de Aza 1220-1274 F sosa Leonor Fernandes de Lara 1270- With sosa Juan Arias de Cuadros 1261- with : F sosa Elvira Arias de Cuadros y Lara † F Mencia Arias de Cuadros 1296-1389 Married about 1214, Leon, Spain, to Inés Iñiguez de Mendoza, born (aproximadamente 1190) - León, León, Castilla y León, Spain, deceased - Burgos, Castilla y León, Spain (Parents : M sosa Íñigo Lopez de Mendoza, II Señor de Llodio 1115- & F sosa María García de Salvadores 1180-) with F Urraca Alfonso de Leon, Señora de Vizcaya ca 1195- With Lope Diaz de Haro y Manrique de Lara 1170-1236 with M Lope "El Chico" Lopez de Haro 1200-1253 Married, Toledo, Castille-La Mancha, España, to Berenguela González de Girón 1186- with : M Ruy López de Haro † M Diego López de Campos † M Lope Diaz † M Pedro Lopez † M Pedro Lopez de Ayala ca 1214-1253 F María López de Haro, Señora De Autillo 1240- M Pedro Lopez de Haro 1250- F Berengela Lopez De Haro 1253- M D Diego Lopez De Haro 1260-

Lope "El Chico" Lopez de Haro 1200-1253 With Mariana Muñoz de Urdiales 1714-

Siblings M Sancho Prince Of Leon ca 1176-1217 With Teresa Díaz de Haro 1190- M Fernando ?, infante de León y Castilla 1178-1214 M García Fernández De Leon 1181-1184 M García Fernández, Infante de León 1182-1184 M Alfonso ? 1184- M Sancho "El Cañamero" el de León, Sr. de Monteagudo 1186-

Half-siblings On the side of sosa Fernando II de León, Rey , born in 1137 - Spain, deceased 22 January 1188 - Spain aged 51 years old , buried - Santiago, La Coruña, Galicia, Spain On the side of sosa Urraca de Portugal, born in 1151 - Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, deceased 16 October 1188 - Valladolid, Valladolid, Castilla y León, Spain aged 37 years old , buried - Monasterio de Santa María de Wamba (Valladolid, España) with sosa Teresa Fernández de la Traba, born in 1132 - Spain, deceased 6 February 1180 - León, Castilla y León, Spain aged 48 years old , buried in 1180 - León, Castilla y León, Spain M Fernando de León 1178-1187 with Urraca López de Haro, Reina Consorte , born in 1151 - Coimbra, Portugal, deceased - Villena, Alicante, Comunitat Valenciana, Spain M García Fernández de León 1182-1184 M Alfonso Fernandez de Leon 1184-1188 M Sancho El Cañamero, infante Fernández de León, II señor de Monteagudo y Aguilar 1186-1220 with sosa Pedro Alfonso Viegas de Ribadouro, born in 1100 - Coimbra, Portugal, deceased in 1205 - Coimbra, Portugal aged 105 years old , buried - Portugal F sosa Sancha Perez de Lumiares ca 1160-1230 Married about 1180, Of, Spain, to sosa Pedro Ruiz De Giron ca 1159-
Sancha Perez de Lumiares ca 1160-1230 With Pedro Rodriguez Giron † M X Ix Fernandez 1171- M Abril Peres, Senhor de Couto e de Linhares 1180-1245 With Sancha Nunes de Barbosa 1190- with Estevão Gonçalves, born (aproximadamente 1170), deceased F María Esteves † With Afonso Nunes De Mariz †

Paternal grand-parents, uncles and aunts M sosa Alfonso VII de León, Rey 1105-1157 married F sosa Berenguela de Barcelona, Reina 1116-1149 M Ramón de Castilla 1136- not married, Without posterity M sosa Sancho III El Deseado de Castilla, Rey 1136-1158 married (1151) 2 children F Constanza de Castilla 1136-1160 married (1153) 6 children M sosa Fernando II de León, Rey 1137-1188 married 1 1 child , married 2(1165) 7 children , married 3(1187) 3 children M García de Castilla 1142-1146 not married, Without posterity M Alfonso de Castilla 1144-1149 not married, Without posterity F Sancha de Castilla 1154-1208 with 1 3 children , married 2(1174) 11 children , not married 3, with 4 1 child , with 5, with 6, not married 7

M sosa Alfonso VII de León, Rey 1105-1157 married (1152) F Riquilda de Polonia, Castile 1140-1185 F Sancha of Castile Queen of Aragon 1155-1208 married 1(1174) 5 children , with 2 1 child , with 3 5 children , with 4 3 children F Sancha De Castilla y Polonia Reine Consorte de Aragon † with F Sancha de Castilla x † with 1 7 children , married 2(1174) 5 children , with 3

M sosa Alfonso VII de León, Rey 1105-1157 with F Gontroda Pérez 1106-1187 F Urraca "La Asturiana" Alfonso de Castilla 1132-1164 with

M sosa Alfonso VII de León, Rey 1105-1157 with F Urraca Fernandez de Castro F Estefanía La Desdichada Alfonso †1180 with

Maternal grand-parents, uncles and aunts M sosa Alfonso I El Conquistador de Portugal, Rey 1109-1185 with F Dulce de Aragón, Reina 1159-1198

M sosa Alfonso I El Conquistador de Portugal, Rey 1109-1185 with F sosa Mafalda de Saboya, Reina consorte de Portugal 1125-1157 F Theresa Capet 1151-1218 with F sosa Urraca de Portugal 1151-1188 married 1(1165) 7 children , married 2(1157) 3 children , with 3 1 child M Sancho I El Poblador de Portugal, Rey 1154-1211 married 1(1174) 17 children , with 2 6 children , with 3 1 child , with 4 1 child , with 5 M João Affonso Fortes 1156-1218 with F Mafalda Affonsez Princess Of Portugal And Algarves 1157-1218 married 1, married 2(1194), with 3, with 4, not married 5 1 child F Theresia Mathilde Portugal 1157-1218 with

(hide)

Events 15 August 1171 : Birth - Zamora, Castilla y León, España 1190 :Marriage (with Teresa Gil de Soverosa) - MISTRESS 1191 : Marriage (with Teresa de Portugal) - Guimarães, Braga, Portugal 17 November 1197 : Marriage (with Berenguela de Castilla) - Valladolid, Castilla y León, Spain 1205 : Marriage (with Aldonza Martinez de Silva) - Portugal about 1214 : Marriage (with Inés Iñiguez de Mendoza) - Leon, Spain 24 September 1230 : Baptism - Sarría, Zuia, Álava, Basque Country, Spain --- : Title of Nobility --- : Unknown 24 September 1230 : Death - Sarria, Lugo, Galicia, Spain 1230 : Death - Sarria, Lugo, Galicia, Spain (24 de septiembre de 1230) : Death - Sarria, Lugo, Galicia, España 29 September 1230 : Burial - Galicia, España

Sources Individual: FamilySearch Family Tree


----

===References
# Roberts, Gary Boyd. ''The Royal Descents of 600 Immigrants''. Baltimore, MD, USA: Genealogical Publishing Co., (2004). Section: Immigrant Descendants of High Medieval Kings. Page 385. < [https://www.ancestry.com/imageviewer/collections/49324/images/FLHG_RoyalDescentsof600Immigrants-0489?ranMID=50138&ranEAID=4026539&ranSiteID=Xib7NfnK11s-OX.rA2C0xPEjs.87ueVoQw&o_xid=4026539&o_lid=4026539&o_sch=Affiliate+External&pId=93946 Ancestry.com] >; ([https://www.geni.com/documents/view?doc_id=6000000212566386836 document attached.]) "Descent from https://www.geni.com/people/Alfonso-IX-king-of-Leon-and-Galicia/6000000008477543238 & https://www.geni.com/people/Berenguela-I-la-Grande-reina-de-Castilla/6000000001412951572?through=6000000008477543238."

Afonso IX de Leão
Origem: Wikipédia, a enciclopédia livre.
Ir para: navegação, pesquisa
Afonso IX
Rei de Leão
Reinado 1188
23 de Setembro de 1230
Nascimento 15 de Agosto de 1171
Zamora, Espanha
Antecessor Fernando II de Leão
Sucessor Fernando III de Leão e Castela
Consorte Teresa Sanches
Berengária de Leão e Castela
Filhos Fernando de Leão
Sancha II de Leão
Dulce I de Leão
Berengária de Leão e Castela
Constança de Castela
Fernando III de Leão e Castela
Leonor de Castela
Afonso de Molina
Pedro Afonso de Leão
Rodrigo Afonso de Leão
Afonso de Leão
Fernando de Leão
Aldonza Alonso de Leão
Teresa Afonso de Leão
Urraca Afonso de Leão
Martim Afonso de Leão
Maria Afonso de Leão
Sancha de Leão
Urraca Afonso de Leão
Maria Afonso de Leão
Fernando Afonso de Leão
Dinastia Borgonha
Pai Fernando II de Leão
Mãe Urraca de Portugal
Afonso IX de Leão (Zamora, 15 de Agosto de 1171 - Zamora, 23 de Setembro de 1230), cognominado o Baboso por Ibn Khaldun porque seria acometido de fúrias durante as quais espumava da boca, foi o último soberano do Reino de Leão independente, de 11
88 até à sua morte.

Índice esconder
1 Subida ao trono
2 Reinado
3 Posteridade
4 Descendência
5 Referências
6 Ligações externas



editar Subida ao trono
Afonso era filho de Fernando II de Leão e de Urraca de Portugal e, portanto, neto materno de Afonso I de Portugal e Mafalda de Sabóia, sobrinho de Sancho I de Portugal.

Em 1181 os seus pais separaram-se devido a serem primos em 3º grau, regressando a sua mãe à corte do seu avô materno D. Afonso Henriques e ficando Afonso entregue à tutela do seu pai.

Teve de enfrentar a sua madrastra Urraca Lopes de Haro e o seu meio-irmão Sancho, pelo direito à coroa de Leão. Para fortalecer a sua pretensão convocou a Curia Regia para receber o apoio do clero, da nobreza e dos representantes das cidades. As
Cortes de Leão de 1188 podem ser consideradas o primeiro antecedente na Europa Ocidental do parlamentarismo moderno. Nelas foi reconhecido o direito à inviolabilidade do domicílio e o de habeas corpus, entre outros.

Em 1188 Afonso tornou-se rei de Leão após a morte do seu pai. Nesse mesmo ano morreria também a mãe Urraca de Portugal. Segundo a numeração cronológica real do Reino de Leão deveria ser conhecido como Afonso VIII de Leão, mas a sua denominação co
m o ordinal IX é a mais habitual. A justificação pode ser devida a o seu primo mais velho Afonso VIII de Castela ter assumido o ordinal antes.


editar Reinado

Mapa político da Península Ibérica em 1210Casou-se em 1191 com a sua prima direita Teresa Sanches, filha de Sancho I de Portugal e de Dulce de Aragão. A união seria anulada em 1194 pelo papa e só após algum tempo Afonso acataria a anulação. Em De
zembro de 1197 celebra segundas núpcias em Valladolid com a sua prima em 2.º grau Berengária de Castela, filha de Afonso VIII de Castela e Leonor Plantageneta. Deste segundo casamento Afonso teve o herdeiro que uniria as duas coroas, Fernando III
de Leão e Castela. O seu segundo estratégico casamento seria anulado em 1204, novamente por consanguinidade.

Encarado como uma afonta ao poder papal, teve como reação um interdicto (o equivalente à excumunhão para um reino ou territótio) sobre a sua pessoa e o seu reino. No entanto, Inocêncio III acabou por levantar a sanção sobre Leão, sob o argumento
de que se a população não tivesse acesso aos serviços da religião, deixariam de apoiar o clero, e aumentaria a heresia no reino. Afonso continuou sob interdicto pessoal, ao qual se mostrou indiferente, apoiado pelo seu clero. Depois da separação
com Berengária, o rei voltou a ligar-se a Teresa, a cujas filhas legou o reino.

Depois da separação de Berengária, a política de Afonso IX centrou-se na rivalidade com Castela, que violara os acordos com o seu reino, conquistando-lhe toda a Franja del Carrión e parte de Tierra de Campos.

Em 1217 Berengária tornou-se rainha de Castela após a morte do irmão Henrique I de Castela, mas abdicou quase imediatamente para o filho de ambos, Fernando III de Leão e Castela. Em consequência, este foi viver com a sua mãe e governar Castela. A
fonso IX, que ambicionava a esta coroa por ser neto de Afonso VII de Leão e Castela, proclamou guerra aberta ao reino do filho, apoiado pela poderosa família Lara e outros nobres descontentes. Os seus planos não se concretizariam e acabaria por a
ssinar umas tréguas com a sua ex-esposa. No processo deserdaria o filho da coroa de Leão.


editar Posteridade
Em 1218, Afonso fundou a Universidade de Salamanca. Depois do fracasso com Castela, concentrou-se na luta contra os almóadas, onde se destacam as suas conquistas na Extremadura: Cáceres em 1229, Mérida e Badajoz em 1230.

Embora, por sua morte em 1230, o seu testamento prevesse que o trono seria legado às suas filhas Sancha II de Leão e Dulce I de Leão, resultantes do primeiro matrimónio, foi o filho que teve do segundo, Fernando III de Leão e Castela, que acabari
a por lhe suceder, juntando as duas coroas numa união pessoal: cada uma manteria a sua independência, cortes e oficiais, mas seriam regidas pelo mesmo monarca.


editar Descendência

Estátua de Berengária de Leão e Castela nos Jardins do Retiro de MadridDo primeiro casamento em 15 de Agosto de 1171 com Teresa Sanches de Portugal (Coimbra, 1181 – Lorvão, 18 de Junho de 1250), filha de Sancho I de Portugal, e de Dulce Berenguer
de Barcelona, teve:

Fernando de Leão (1192 - Agosto de 1214).
Sancha II de Leão (1193-1270).
Dulce I de Leão (1194-1243).
Do segundo casamento, em 1197 com Berengária de Castela (Segóvia, 1 de Junho de 1180 - Las Huelgas, 8 de Novembro de 1246), filha de Afonso VIII de Castela e de Leonor Plantageneta, princesa de Inglaterra, teve:

Berengária de Leão e Castela (1198-1237), casada na cidade de Toledo em 1222 com João de Brienne, rei de Jerusalém e regente do Império de Constantinopla.
Constança de Castela (1 de Maio de 1200 - Burgos, Las Huelgas, 7 de Setembro de 1242. Foi monja no mosteiro de Las Huelgas.
Fernando III de Leão e Castela (Zamora, Agosto de 1201 - Sevilha, 30 de Maio de 1252), seu sucessor no trono de Leão, unificado ao de Castela. Foi casado por duas vezes, a primeira em 1219 com Isabel da Suábia (1202 - 1235) filha de Filipe de Hoh
enstauten (1176 - 21 de Junho de 1208) e de Irene Angelina Rainha de Constantinopla (1180 - 1208) e a segunda em 1237 com Joana de Aumale (1210 - 1278), condessa de Ponthieu, filha de Simão de Dammartin (1180 -?) e de Maria de Belleme.
Leonor de Castela, infanta (1202) - 1202).
Afonso infante de Castela, infante de Castela e Senhor de Molina (1203 - Salamanca, 6 de Janeiro de 1272), senhor de Molina. Casou-se por três vezes, a primeira em 1240 com Mafalda Perez de Lara, 4ª senhora de Molina e Mesa, filha de Gonçalo Pere
z Manrique de Lara e de Sancha Gomez de Trastamara. O segundo casamento foi em 1244 com Teresa Gonçalves (ou Nunes) de Lara, (1210 -?), filha de D. João Nunez de Lara, "o Gordo" (1250 -?) e de Teresa Alvarez de Azagra, senhora de Albaracim. O Ter
ceiro casamento foi em 22 de Julho de 1260 com Maior Afonso Teles de Córdoba filha de D. Afonso Telez (1200 -?) e de D. Maria Anes de Lima (1210 -?), 6ª senhora de Menezes, sendo por isso pai de Maria de Molina, a célebre rainha e regente de Leão
e Castela.
Afonso IX também teve vários filhos bastardos.

Filhos de Aldonça Martins da Silva (1175 -?), (sendo esta casada com Diogo Froilaz, conde de Cifuentes), (filha de Martim Gomes da Silva (1150 -?) e de Urraca Rodrigues:

Pedro Afonso de Leão, senhor de Tenorio (c. 1200 -?) casado com N de Villarmayor.
Rodrigo Afonso de Leão, senhor de Aliger (c. 1200 - 1267) casado em 1240 com Inês Rodriguez de Cabrera, filha de Rui Fernandes, "o Feo de Valduerna" e de Maria Frolaz de Cifuentes.
Afonso de Leão, morreu jovem.
Fernando de Leão, morreu jovem
Aldonza Alonso de Leão (c. 1215 - 1266), casada por duas vezes, a primeira com Diogo Froilaz de quem não teve filhos e a segunda com Pedro Ponce de Cabrera (1210 -?) de quem teve descendência.
Teresa Afonso de Leão (c. 1210 - Ejica, 1275), casada em 1250 com Nuno Gonzalez de Lara, "O Bom", senhor de Lara.
Filhos de Inês Iñiguez de Mendoza (1180 -?), filha de Lope Iñíguez (1140 - 1189), primeiro senhor de Mendoza, e Teresa Ximenez de los Cameros (1150 -?):

Urraca Afonso de Leão (c. 1190 -?)), casada em 1230 com Lopo Diaz II de Haro, 6.º senhor da Biscaia.
Filhos de Teresa Gil de Soverosa (1170 -?), filha de Gil Vasques de Soverosa (1150 -?) e de Maria Aires de Fornelos (1180 -?), tendo esta também tido filhos de D. Sancho I de Portugal, rei de Portugal (Coimbra, 11 de Novembro de 1154 - Coimbra, 2
6 de Março de 1211).

Martim Afonso de Leão (c. 1210 - 1275), casou-se por três vezes, a primeira com com Sancha de Ortanega, a segunda em 1220 com Maria Giron e a terceira com Maria Mendes de Sousa (1230 -?), filha de Mem Gonçalves de Sousa e de Teresa Afonso de Mene
zes.
Maria Afonso de Leão (c. 1190 -?)), casada com Soeiro Aires de Valadares (1140 -?) filho de Aires Nunes (1110 -?) e de Ximena Nunes (1120 -?).
Sancha de Leão (c. 1210 -?)), casada com Simão Roiz (1230 + Trevino, 1277), senhor de Los Cameros.
Urraca Afonso de Leão (c. 1210 -?)), casada com Garcia de Romero.
Filhos de uma mulher desconhecida:

Maria Afonso de Leão (c. 1200), casada com Álvaro Fernandez de Lara (1200 -?) filho de Fernando Nunes de Lara, senhor de Jerez (1160 -?) e de Maior Garcez de Aza (c. 1160 -?)
Fernando Afonso de Leão (c. 1220 - Salamanca, 1279), casado com Aldara de Ulloa.

editar Referências
Reinas Catolicas, Enrique Florez, 1761
Artigo da Encycopædia Britannica de 1911 sobre Afonso IX (em inglês)
Ancestral Roots of Certain American Colonists Who Came to America Before 1700 by Frederick Lewis Weis, Lines 114-27, 114-28
José Augusto de Sotto Mayor Pizarro, Linhagens Medievais Portuguesas - 3 vols. Universidade Moderna, 1ª Edição, Porto, 1999, vol. 1-pg. 168.
D. António Caetano de Sousa, História Genealógica da Casa Real Portuguesa Atlântida-Livraria Editora, Lda, 2ª Edição, Coimbra, 1946, Tomo I-pg. 67.

editar Ligações externas
Familiamelobanha.no.sapo.pt
Geneall.net.

EVEN:
TYPE Acceded
PLAC Castile, Leon, Spain

EVEN:
TYPE Acceded
PLAC Castile, Leon, Spain

EVEN:
TYPE Acceded
PLAC Castile, Leon, Spain

Sources conflict on who Alfonso married and when.
"Ancestral roots of certain American colonists who came to America before1700", Weis, 1992, seventh edition.
"The Lineage and Ancestry of HRH Prince Charles", Gerald Paget.
"Plantagenet Ancestry", Turton.
"Royal Highness, Ancestry of the Royal Child", Moncreiffe.
"Europaische Stammtafeln", Isenburg.
"De Ayala of Castile, The Augustan".
"Pedigrees from Mike Talbot of Metairie, LA".

1 NAME Alfonso Pierre Raimund /Alphonsez/ III

1 NAME Alfonso Pierre Raimund /Alphonsez/ III

AlfonsoVIII
http://trees.ancestry.com/rd?f=image&guid=5acbdf46-a86a-4c32-892e-11c0976ad924&tid=2456826&pid=80521655

Alfonso IXc
http://trees.ancestry.com/rd?f=image&guid=1dfd8a57-cecf-4f89-bb75-a07d968f912e&tid=9692367&pid=-524462710

Alfonso IXb
http://trees.ancestry.com/rd?f=image&guid=317011fa-80e4-4a44-a84d-afd409ab50b4&tid=9692367&pid=-524462710

Alfonso IXa
http://trees.ancestry.com/rd?f=image&guid=d5294888-06b6-43d8-8d7b-744ed2a511a7&tid=9692367&pid=-524462710

Laon CoA
http://trees.ancestry.com/rd?f=image&guid=619a36ad-0954-4e53-a65a-9623c0c4a725&tid=9692367&pid=-524462710

Castillo Sarria
http://trees.ancestry.com/rd?f=image&guid=686615b6-508f-48af-b6d7-379a2487d7c7&tid=9692367&pid=-524462710

Castillo de Zamora
http://trees.ancestry.com/rd?f=image&guid=551b884c-1010-4931-bbc6-e7bab7091f51&tid=9692367&pid=-524462710

Church of Santa Maria la Antigua, Valladolid
http://trees.ancestry.com/rd?f=image&guid=cbac6447-8f34-4811-b9ef-a5d51eb97fe5&tid=9692367&pid=-524462710

Biography
http://trees.ancestry.com/rd?f=document&guid=8900e953-de59-4997-a965-1f4487a64e67&tid=9692367&pid=-524462710

Alfonso IX of Leon and Galicia (1171-1230)
http://trees.ancestry.com/rd?f=document&guid=7996e733-de4d-4e66-a860-3d5a067b89ee&tid=9692367&pid=-524462710

Alfonso of Leon
http://trees.ancestry.com/rd?f=document&guid=6e4a58ec-4f9a-48ac-8864-a4d068fb2203&tid=9692367&pid=-524462710

1 NAME Alfonso Pierre Raimund /Alphonsez/ III

-- MERGED NOTE ------------

Wikidata: https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q316115 | Geni: https://www.geni.com/people/6000000008477543238

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]