== Notes for [[Item:Q115827|Q115827]] ==

1 proprietário do Couto de Avintes

------------------
-http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/SPANISH%20NOBILITY%20LATER%20MEDIEVAL.htm#VascoFernandezMTeresaGoncales

1. VASCO Fernández . The Nobiliario of Pedro Conde de Barcelos names "Fernan Gomez el Cautivo" as son of "El Conde D. Gomes de Sobrado" and father of "D. Vasco Fernandez"[2639].

'''m''' TERESA Gonçales de Sousa, daughter of GONÇALO Mendes de Sousa & his second wife Dordia Egas de Riba Douro. The Nobiliario of Pedro Conde de Barcelos names "Condesa D. Elvira de Faya, D. Teresa Gonçalez" as the children of "D. Gonçalo Mendez de Sousa" and his second wife "D. Dordia Veegas", and in another passage records that "D. Vasco Fernandez" married "D. Teresa Gonçalez de Sousa"[2640]. Vasco & his wife had four children:

* a) GIL Vásquez de Soverosa (-before 1222, bur Pombeiro). The Nobiliario of Pedro Conde de Barcelos names "D. Gil Vazquez de Soverosa, D. Martin, D. Elvira Vazquez, D. Aldara Vazquez" as the children of "D. Vasco Fernandez" and his wife "D. Teresa Gonçalez de Sousa", adding that Gil was buried "en Pombero"[2641]. see below.
* b) MARTÍN Vásquez (-killed in battle Plasencia). The Nobiliario of Pedro Conde de Barcelos names "D. Gil Vazquez de Soverosa, D. Martin, D. Elvira Vazquez, D. Aldara Vazquez" as the children of "D. Vasco Fernandez" and his wife "D. Teresa Gonçalez de Sousa", adding that Martín "muerto de Moros en Plasencia"[2642].
* c) ELVIRA Vásquez . The Nobiliario of Pedro Conde de Barcelos names "D. Gil Vazquez de Soverosa, D. Martin, D. Elvira Vazquez, D. Aldara Vazquez" as the children of "D. Vasco Fernandez" and his wife "D. Teresa Gonçalez de Sousa", adding that Elvira had a child by "Vasco Martinez Mogudo" while still married and later married him, in a later passage recording that Vasco was "vassallo de Payo Soarez de Valladares, i caso con su muger D. Elvira Vazquez de Soverosa"[2643]. m firstly PELAYO Soarez de Valladares, son of ---. m secondly VASCO Martínez Mogudo, son of ---.
* d) ALDARA Vásquez . The Nobiliario of Pedro Conde de Barcelos names "D. Gil Vazquez de Soverosa, D. Martin, D. Elvira Vazquez, D. Aldara Vazquez" as the children of "D. Vasco Fernandez" and his wife "D. Teresa Gonçalez de Sousa", adding that Aldara was "monja en S. Tirso"[2644].

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]