== Notes for [[Item:Q112083|Q112083]] ==

https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fern%C3%A1n_Gonz%C3%A1lez

Fernando González(en la documentación coetánea, Fredinandus Gundisalviz; Castillo de Lara, c. 910-Burgos, 970), más conocido en los cantares de gesta y crónicas posteriores como Fernán González, fue conde de Castilla, Burgos, Álava, Lantarón y Cerezo (931-944 y 945-970).

Fue hijo de Muniadona y Gonzalo Fernández,​ quien había sido nombrado conde de Burgos y de Castilla, según se desprende de la Carta Puebla de Brañosera, Munio Núñez sería antepasado suyo.
-----------------------------------

http://genealogics.org/getperson.php?personID=I00106638&tree=LEO

http://dbe.rah.es/biografias/10986/fernan-gonzalez

Ferdinand II González (910–970) was the first independent count of Castile, son of Gonzalo Fernández de Lara, who had been named count of Arlanza and the Duero around the year 900, a descendant of Nuño Rasura, one of the two judges from Castile, and of Rodrigo, the first of the counts from Castile.

Ferdinand González was a colourful character of legendary status in Iberia and a member of the influential Lara family. In the year 930, Ferdinand's name appears with the title of count inside the administrative organization of eastern the Kingdom of León.

He grew up in the castle of Lara and inherited his father's title after the capture and death of his brother, Nuño Fernández.

In 931, Ferdinand gathered under his control a strong military force composed of troops from the counties of Burgos, Asturias, Santillana, Lantaron, Álava, Castile, and Lara. His military prowess came to prominence in the Battle of Simancas in 939 and then at Sepulveda, where he wrested the region from the Moors and repopulated it. As his power increased, so did his independence from León. During this period he married Sancha, the sister of the king of Navarre, García III. Sancha was a daughter of Sancho I of Pamplona, and Toda of Navarre.

After having fought with Ramiro II of León against the Arabs, and after the Battle of Simancas and the retreat of the Muslims, Ferdinand was dissatisfied because the king of León distributed his troops in the frontier towns and he rose in rebellion against him. He was, however, defeated and made prisoner in 944, which lasted for 3 years until he became reconciled with his sovereign, giving his daughter Urraca in marriage to the king's son, Ordoño, who afterwards became King Ordoño III.

Notwithstanding this alliance, Ferdinand continued to foment trouble and discord in León, aiming to secure his independence. He successively aided Sancho I against his brother Ordoño III, and Ordoño IV, son of Alfonso IV, against Sancho himself.

Upon the death of Ramiro II of Leon in 951, the kingdom of León experienced a dynastic crisis that Ferdinand played out to his advantage.

Initially he supported the demands of Sancho I against his brother Ordoño III, but when he failed, he was forced to recognize Ordoño as king. Ordoño III's early death allowed Ferdinand to recover his maneuvering capacity, although in this occasion he didn't support his old ally, Sancho's, pretenses, but rather allied himself with the son of Alfonso IV, Ordoño IV. Defeated in 960 through Navarrese intervention, he was captured by King García of Navarre, but he recovered his freedom after making various territorial concessions. With the kingdom of León weakened and in disorder, Ferdinand slowly assured his position as legitimate independent count of Castile.

After his death the county was left to his son García Fernández. His remains were buried in the monastery of San Pedro of Arlanza.

His life and feats are recorded in an anonymous poem, The Poem of Fernán González, written between 1250 and 1271 and conserved as an incomplete copy from the fifteenth century.

--------------------

Fernán González

De Wikipedia, la enciclopedia libre

Escultura de Fernán González en el Arco de Santa María de BurgosFernán González o Fernando González.[1] , Fredinandus Gundisalviz en latín, (Castillo de Lara ? - † Burgos 970), fue conde de Castilla (931-944 y 945-970), hijo de Muniadona y Gonzalo Fernández, quien había sido nombrado conde de Burgos y de Castilla, supuesto descendiente de Nuño Rasura, uno de los dos jueces de Castilla, y de Rodrigo, el primero de los condes de Castilla[2] En la Carta Puebla de Brañosera aparece Munio Núñez de Brañosera como antepasado suyo,[3] por lo que los antepasados de Fernán González y su padre no son del todo claros.

Tabla de contenidos

1 Biografía

2 Descendientes

3 El buen conde

4 Referencias

4.1 Notas

4.2 Bibliografía

5 Enlaces externos

6 Referencias

Biografía

Personaje teñido de tintes legendarios, era miembro de la influyente familia Lara. La base patrimonial de su familia era el castillo de Lara (Lara de los Infantes), estableciendo un poderoso linaje que alcanzará gran influencia en el reino leonés. Crece en el castillo de Lara y hereda el título de su padre tras el apresamiento y muerte de su tío Nuño Fernández.

En el año 929, Fernán González aparece en documentos con el título de conde al frente del alfoz de Lara, dentro de la organización administrativa de la marca oriental del reino de León. En el 931, Fernán González logró reunir el gobierno de los condados de Burgos, Lara, Lantarón, Cerezo y Álava[4] y es mencionado como conde de Castilla por primera vez en un documento del año 932.

En el 932, Ramiro II de León organizó una expedición contra la fortaleza de Magerit a la que acudió Fernán González; la ciudad fue tomada así como su castillo obteniendo de ello un gran botín, sin embargo Magerit fue retomada por los musulmanes tras el abandono de los castellanos y de los leoneses. Un año más tarde Abd al-Rahman III contraataca cercando Osma y San Esteban de Gormaz, Ramiro II acudió en ayuda de Fernán González logrando levantar el cerco de San Esteban de Gormaz y venciendo junto a Fernán González una batalla cerca de Osma. En el 934 Abd al-Rahman avanza con su ejército sin ninguna oposición, asola Álava y destruye Burgos, pero es nuevamente derrotado por Ramiro y Fernán en Osma.

Tuvo un papel destacado en la batalla de Simancas[5] (939) en la que fueron derrotadas las tropas de Abd al-Rahman III, a continuación , conquistó Sepúlveda y la repobló (940), así como Riaza y Fresno. Ese mismo año concedió un fuero a Sepúlveda, dicho fuero estaba concebido para atraer repobladores a esa zona extremadamente peligrosa por su situación fronteriza con las tierras musulmanas.

Viendo su poder acrecentado, empezó a actuar de manera cada vez más independiente del reino de León, y siguiendo esta política, se casó con Sancha Sánchez, hermana del rey de Navarra, García Sánchez I (más tarde se casaría con su hija, Urraca Díaz), sobre estas fechas parece ser que se permitió en Castilla el empleo del derecho consuetudinario en detrimento del Liber Iudiciorum aplicado en León.

Las relaciones entre Ramiro II y Fernán González se enfriaron enormemente por motivos territoriales como el nombramiento de Ansur Fernández como conde de Monzón tapando la expansión de Fernán González hacia los territorios comprendidos entre el río Cea y el río Pisuerga (excluyendo el Condado de Saldaña en el norte), con lo que Fernán González se enfrenta a Ramiro que le hace encarcelar en León en el año 944 junto con su aliado en la rebelión, el conde de Saldaña Diego Muñoz que fue encarcelado en el Castillo de Gordón, Ramiro nombra en sustitución de Fernán González a Ansur Fernández como Conde de Castilla. Después de permanecer alrededor de un año en prisión, Fernán González recupera el condado y jura fidelidad a Ramiro II.

Muerto Ramiro II en el 951, el reino de León quedó sumido en una crisis dinástica que Fernán González supo aprovechar en su favor. Inicialmente apoyó las reclamaciones de Sancho el Craso contra su hermano Ordoño III, pero, al no prosperar su causa, se vio obligado a reconocer a Ordoño como rey. Paralelamente, en el año 955 Fernán González derrota a las tropas musulmanas en San Esteban de Gormaz.

La temprana muerte de Ordoño III permitió al castellano recuperar su capacidad de maniobra, aunque en esta ocasión no apoyó las pretensiones de su antiguo aliado, el rey García Sánchez que pretendía que Sancho el Craso fuera rey de León, sino que se alineó con el primo de Ordoño III, Ordoño IV que fue elegido rey de León. Derrotado en el 960 por la intervención Navarra, fue capturado por García Sánchez en Cirueña, pero recuperó la libertad tras hacer diversas concesiones territoriales.

Para reforzar su posición frente a los demás territorios cristianos, casó a su hija Urraca Fernández con el hijo de Ramiro II, Ordoño III, más tarde Urraca sería repudiada por Ordoño III gracias al apoyo que prestó Fernán González a Sancho el Craso. Después de la muerte de Ordoño III, Urraca se casó con Ordoño IV que por entonces era aliado de Fernán González, y tras la muerte de Ordoño IV se casó con Sancho Garcés II de Navarra. Otra de sus hijas Muniadona (o Nuña) fue dada en matrimonio a Gómez Díaz, hijo del conde de Saldaña, Diego Muñoz.

En el 963 pacta una tregua con Alhakén II tras la toma de San Esteban de Gormaz por los musulmanes, el conde castellano se comporta ya de hecho como conde independiente.

Con el reino de León debilitado y en una situación de desorden, Fernán González fue asegurando lentamente su posición como señor hereditario del condado independiente de Castilla, llegando a gobernar un extenso territorio desde el mar Cantábrico hasta más al sur del río Duero. Al morir, dejó el condado a su hijo García Fernández estableciendo el principio de la sucesión hereditaria del título de conde de Castilla.

Su vida y hazañas están recogidas en un poema anónimo, el Poema de Fernán González, escrito entre 1250 y 1271 y conservado en una copia incompleta del siglo XV. Los restos de Fernán González fueron enterrados en el Monasterio de San Pedro de Arlanza y posteriormente trasladados en 1841 a la Colegiata de San Cosme y San Damián de Covarrubias junto con los de su esposa Sancha.

Descendientes [editar] Fernán González∞Sancha Sánchez

____________________|______________________________

↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓

Gonzalo Sancho Munio García Muniadona Urraca Fronilde

El buen conde [editar]

Fernán González, Señor de Castilla. Obra de Juan Ricci. Monasterio de San Millán de Yuso.A Fernán González, la historia le ha otorgado el título de "el Buen Conde". Dicho título aparece en innumerables ocasiones a lo largo de todo el Poema de Fernán González, hasta en 33 ocasiones. En la primera estrofa en la que se refiere a González en estos términos:

«Dijo don fray Pelayo delante su señor:

Fágote, el buen Conde, de tanto sabidor

Que quiere la tu facienda guiar el Criador;

Vencerás todo el poder del moro Almozor.»

238

Tan importante es este título que incluso la última estrofa del Poema hace referencia a Fernán González como el Buen Conde obviando su nombre:

«Quiso Dios al buen Conde esta gracia facer,

Que moros nin cristianos non le podían vencer»

740

--------------------

Ferdinand González (930–970) was the first independent count of Castile, son of Gonzalo Fernández de Lara, who had been named count of Arlanza and the Duero around the year 900, a descendant of Nuño Rasura, one of the two judges from Castile, and perhaps of Rodrigo, the first of the counts from Castile. His mother Muniadona Ramírez was so well remembered that the later Counts of Castile would sometimes be recorded by Iberian Muslim scholars as Ibn Māma Duna (descendant of Muniadona).

Ferdinand González was a colourful character of legendary status in Iberia, founder of the influential González de Lara family. In the year 930, Ferdinand's name appears with the title of count inside the administrative organization of eastern the Kingdom of León.

--------------------

Ferdinand González (930–970) was the first independent count of Castile, son of Gonzalo Fernández de Lara, who had been named count of Arlanza and the Duero around the year 900, a descendant of Nuño Rasura, one of the two judges from Castile, and perhaps of Rodrigo, the first of the counts from Castile. His mother Muniadona Ramírez was so well remebered that the later Counts of Castile would sometimes be recorded by Iberian Muslim scholars as Ibn Māma Duna (descendant of Muniadona).

Ferdinand González was a colourful character of legendary status in Iberia and a member of the influential Lara family. In the year 930, Ferdinand's name appears with the title of count inside the administrative organization of eastern the Kingdom of León.

He grew up in the castle of Lara and inherited his father's title after the capture and death of his uncle, Nuño Fernández.

In 931, Ferdinand gathered under his control a strong military force composed of troops from the counties of Burgos, Asturias, Santillana, Lantaron, Álava, Castile, and Lara. His military prowess came to prominence in the Battle of Simancas in 939 and then at Sepulveda, where he wrested the region from the Moors and repopulated it. As his power increased, so did his independence from León. During this period he married Sancha, the sister of the king of Navarre, García Sánchez I. Sancha was a daughter of Sancho I of Pamplona, and Toda of Navarre.

After having fought with Ramiro II of León against the Arabs, and after the Battle of Simancas and the retreat of the Muslims, Ferdinand was dissatisfied because the king of León distributed his troops in the frontier towns and he rose in rebellion against him. He was, however, defeated and made prisoner in 944, which lasted for 3 years until he became reconciled with his sovereign, giving his daughter Urraca in marriage to the king's son, Ordoño, who afterwards became King Ordoño III.

By Sancha of Navarre, he had the following children:

Gonzalo, who married Fronilde Gómez, suggested to have been granddaughter of count Diego Rodríguez Porcelos

Sancho, named in a charter of his paternal grandmother

Munio

García, his eventual successor

Urraca, successively queen of León and then Navarre

Muniadona, wife of Gómez Díaz, count of Saldaña, of the powerful Beni Gómez clan

--------------------

Fernán González of Castile

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Ferdinand González (930–970) was the first independent count of Castile, son of Gonzalo Fernández de Lara, who had been named count of Arlanza and the Duero around the year 900, a descendant of Nuño Rasura, one of the two judges from Castile, and perhaps of Rodrigo, the first of the counts from Castile. His mother Muniadona Ramírez was so well remebered that the later Counts of Castile would sometimes be recorded by Iberian Muslim scholars as Ibn Māma Duna (descendant of Muniadona).

Ferdinand González was a colourful character of legendary status in Iberia and a member of the influential Lara family. In the year 930, Ferdinand's name appears with the title of count inside the administrative organization of eastern the Kingdom of León.

He grew up in the castle of Lara and inherited his father's title after the capture and death of his uncle, Nuño Fernández.

In 931, Ferdinand gathered under his control a strong military force composed of troops from the counties of Burgos, Asturias, Santillana, Lantaron, Álava, Castile, and Lara. His military prowess came to prominence in the Battle of Simancas in 939 and then at Sepulveda, where he wrested the region from the Moors and repopulated it. As his power increased, so did his independence from León. During this period he married Sancha, the sister of the king of Navarre, García Sánchez I. Sancha was a daughter of Sancho I of Pamplona, and Toda of Navarre.

After having fought with Ramiro II of León against the Arabs, and after the Battle of Simancas and the retreat of the Muslims, Ferdinand was dissatisfied because the king of León distributed his troops in the frontier towns and he rose in rebellion against him. He was, however, defeated and made prisoner in 944, which lasted for 3 years until he became reconciled with his sovereign, giving his daughter Urraca in marriage to the king's son, Ordoño, who afterwards became King Ordoño III.

Notwithstanding this alliance, Ferdinand continued to foment trouble and discord in León, aiming to secure his independence. He successively aided Sancho I against his brother Ordoño III, and Ordoño IV, son of Alfonso IV, against Sancho himself.

Upon the death of Ramiro II of Leon in 951, the kingdom of León experienced a dynastic crisis that Ferdinand played out to his advantage.

Initially he supported the demands of Sancho I against his brother Ordoño III, but when he failed, he was forced to recognize Ordoño as king. Ordoño III's early death allowed Ferdinand to recover his maneuvering capacity, although in this occasion he didn't support his old ally, Sancho's, pretenses, but rather allied himself with the son of Alfonso IV, Ordoño IV. Defeated in 960 through Navarrese intervention, he was captured by King García of Navarre, but he recovered his freedom after making various territorial concessions. With the kingdom of León weakened and in disorder, Ferdinand slowly assured his position as legitimate independent count of Castile.

After his death the county was left to his son García Fernández. His remains were buried in the monastery of San Pedro of Arlanza.

His life and feats are recorded in an anonymous poem, The Poem of Fernán González, written between 1250 and 1271 and conserved as an incomplete copy from the fifteenth century.

Fernán, conde de Castilla1

b. circa 910, d. June 970

Father Gonzalo Fernández, señor de Lara2,3 b. circa 880, d. 932

Mother Munia domna Nuñez de Amaya2,3 b. circa 885, d. after 5 August 935

"Castile's chief reason for being was military, and it did a better job of defending itself against Muslim onslaught than any other Christian principality. The most redoubtable quality of Fernán González was his fierce military leadership. The vernacular Castilian romances later remembered that

'Decianle por sus lides el buitre carnicero.' (They called him for his battles the butcher vulture.)."4 Also called conde independiente de Castilla Fernán González de Lara.2,3 Fernán, conde de Castilla was born circa 910. He was the son of Gonzalo Fernández, señor de Lara and Munia domna Nuñez de Amaya.2,3 Fernán, conde de Castilla became the first Count of an independent Castile, within the kingdom of León, whose territories fluctuated from the Duero in the south to the Basque country of Alava and to Asturias de Santillana in the north in 930.5 Count of Castile at the Kingdom of León, Spain, between 930 and 970.6,5,7,8 He married Sancha Sánchez de Pamplona, daughter of Sancho I Garcés, rey de Pamplona and Toda Aznárez de Larraun, circa 932; His 1st. Her 3rd.2,3 Fernán, conde de Castilla was the Count of Castile, Alava, Lara, Burgos and León between 932 and 970 at Spain.7 He was a witness where Ramiro II "el Feroz Guerrero", rey de León failed to suppress the Castilian separatist movement led by Fernán González, the first count of unified Castile, circa 950.9 Fernán, conde de Castilla laid the foundations for the independence of Castile, a region that eventually came to dominate Spain militarily, politically, and linguistically, between 950 and 951.10,9 He was a witness where García II Sánchez, rey de Navarra managed to capture the famous count of Castile, Fernán González, holding him prisoner for many years, in 960.9 Fernán, conde de Castilla married Urraca Garcés de Navarra, daughter of García II Sánchez, rey de Navarra and Teresa Ramírez de León, between 960 and 962; His 2nd. Her 2nd. Niece of his 1st wife.3 Fernán, conde de Castilla was the predecessor of García I "el de las Manos Blancas", conde de Castilla; Count of Castile.6,8,11 Fernán, conde de Castilla died in June 970 at Burgos, Kingdom of León, Spain.2,3,1 Fernán, conde de Castilla was buried in St. Peter's, Arlanza, Léon Province, Castile.3 He was immortalized in chronicles and ballads, and the thirteenth century "Poema de Fernán González".12

Family 1

Sancha Sánchez de Pamplona b. circa 915, d. December 959

Child

García I "el de las Manos Blancas", conde de Castilla+ b. 938, d. bt 18 Apr 995 - 19 Jul 9952,13

Family 2

Urraca Garcés de Navarra b. circa 944?

Children

Urraca Fernández de Castilla+

Salvadore Pedro, conde de Castilla+ b. a 962

Citations

[S882] Armerías ilustres, online http://members.xoom.com/chema, Corona de Castilla.

[S187] Royal Genealogy Database, online http://www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/public/genealogy/

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 285-36.

[S1312] Stanley G. Payne Payne, pg. 50.

[S513] Bernard F. Reilly, León-Castilla under King Alfonso VI, pg. 7.

[S261] Regnal Chronologies, online http://www.hostkingdom.net/regindex.html

[S771] Medieval Spain, online http://rococo.ele.cie.uva.es/ismael/english.html

[S882] Armerías ilustres, online http://members.xoom.com/chema

[S172] Various Encyclopaedea Britannica.

[S223] Si, online http://www.sispain.org/english/history/, reconque.html.

[S1074] Bishop Pelayo "the Fabulist" of Oviedo, "CRL", CRL (pg. 77).

[S446] Melveena McKendrick, History of Spain.

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 285-35.

--------------------
Ferdinand González (930–970) was the first independent count of Castile, son of Gonzalo Fernández de Lara, who had been named count of Arlanza and the Duero around the year 900, a descendant of Nuño Rasura, one of the two judges from Castile, and perhaps of Rodrigo, the first of the counts from Castile. His mother Muniadona Ramírez was so well remebered that the later Counts of Castile would sometimes be recorded by Iberian Muslim scholars as Ibn Māma Duna (descendant of Muniadona).

Ferdinand González was a colourful character of legendary status in Iberia and a member of the influential Lara family. In the year 930, Ferdinand's name appears with the title of count inside the administrative organization of eastern the Kingdom of León.

He grew up in the castle of Lara and inherited his father's title after the capture and death of his uncle, Nuño Fernández.

In 931, Ferdinand gathered under his control a strong military force composed of troops from the counties of Burgos, Asturias, Santillana, Lantaron, Álava, Castile, and Lara. His military prowess came to prominence in the Battle of Simancas in 939 and then at Sepulveda, where he wrested the region from the Moors and repopulated it. As his power increased, so did his independence from León. During this period he married Sancha, the sister of the king of Navarre, García Sánchez I. Sancha was a daughter of Sancho I of Pamplona, and Toda of Navarre.

After having fought with Ramiro II of León against the Arabs, and after the Battle of Simancas and the retreat of the Muslims, Ferdinand was dissatisfied because the king of León distributed his troops in the frontier towns and he rose in rebellion against him. He was, however, defeated and made prisoner in 944, which lasted for 3 years until he became reconciled with his sovereign, giving his daughter Urraca in marriage to the king's son, Ordoño, who afterwards became King Ordoño III.

By Sancha of Navarre, he had the following children:

Gonzalo, who married Fronilde Gómez, suggested to have been granddaughter of count Diego Rodríguez Porcelos

Sancho, named in a charter of his paternal grandmother

Munio

García, his eventual successor

Urraca, successively queen of León and then Navarre

Muniadona, wife of Gómez Díaz, count of Saldaña, of the powerful Beni Gómez clan
--------------------
Wikipedia:

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gonzalo_Fern%C3%A1ndez_de_Burgos

Gonzalo Fernández of Castile

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

(Redirected from Gonzalo Fernández de Burgos)

Jump to:navigation, search

This article does not cite any references or sources.

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2009)

Gonzalo Fernández, Count of Burgos (ca. 899-915) and of Castile (c. 909-915).

Recorded for the first time in 899 as Count of Burgos, soon the region expanded to the eastern mountain valleys enabling Gonzalo to make his fort base in Lara, thus stretching his rule from the foot of the Cantabrian Mountains around Espinosa de los Monteros to the river Arlanza, which therefore became the border with the neighbouring Muslim territories. In order to stretch his territory this far, he first had to displace the Muslim forces based at the stronghold of Carazo that dominated the area and access. This was achieved after a long and well contested struggle.

The valley of Lara was then the rallying point of the family that - years later - achieved through his son, Fernan Gonzalez the quasi-independence of Castile, securing the area for five generations with the family until it became a kingdom under Fernando I of Castile of the Jimenez dynasty.

His name appears for the first time in charter of the Monastery of San Pedro de Cardeña (899), one of the most influential monastic houses later in Castile together with the Monastery of Santo Domingo de Silos. He was also the founder of the other Monastic House of San Pedro de Arlanza (912).

In 912, he took main part in the Castilian offensive to the river Duero, settling the old villeages of Haza, Clunia and San Esteban de Gormaz.

Gonzalo Fernández appears as Count of Castile for the first time in a document of January 8, 914 and again in January 1, 915. He appears witnessing royal documents among other magnates and nobles at the Leonese Court main Assemblies until the defeat of the Leonese in the battle of Valdejunquera (920), after which he was considered dead. Modern scholars suspect that he must have been in disgrace at Court for some unrecorded mistake or other major offense typically resulting in exile, as somebody with his name and the seldom given then rank of Count - Gundisalvus comes - appears signing royal documents at the Court of Navarre between the years 924 and 930, the year that his son was given the authority of Count alone. Previously, his wife Munia Donna (or Muniadona) appears holding the patrimony estates and county regency during the minority of their son Fernan Gonzalez.

His remains were laid to rest in a vault at San Pedro de Arlanza, as Friar Antonio de Yepes registers in his "General Chronicle".

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gonzalo_Fern%C3%A1ndez_of_Castile"

Categories: Counts of Spain

Hidden categories: Articles lacking sources from May 2009 | All articles lacking sources

Personal tools

* This page was last modified on 8 August 2009 at 23:10.
--------------------
Ferdinand González ( –970) was the first independent count of Castile, son of Gonzalo Fernández de Burgos, who had been named count of Arlanza and the Duero around the year 900, a descendant of Nuño Rasura, one of the two judges from Castile, and perhaps of Rodrigo, the first of the counts from Castile. His mother Muniadona Ramírez was so well remembered that the later Counts of Castile would sometimes be recorded by Iberian Muslim scholars as Ibn Māma Duna (descendant of Muniadona).

Ferdinand González was a colourful character of legendary status in Iberia, founder of the influential González de Lara family. In the year 930, Ferdinand's name appears with the title of count inside the administrative organization of eastern the Kingdom of León.

He grew up in the castle of Lara and inherited his father's title after the capture and death of his uncle, Nuño Fernández.

By Sancha of Navarre, he had the following children:

* Gonzalo, who married Fronilde Gómez, suggested to have been granddaughter of count Diego Rodríguez Porcelos

* Sancho, named in a charter of his paternal grandmother

* Munio

* García, his eventual successor

* Urraca, successively queen of León and then Navarre

* Muniadona, wife of Gómez Díaz, count of Saldaña, of the powerful Beni Gómez clan

--------------------
Grew up in the castle of Lara.
--------------------
Fernando González,[1] (en latín, Fredinandus Gundisalviz; Castillo de Lara, c. 910 - Burgos, 970), más conocido en los cantares de gesta y crónicas posteriores como Fernán González, fue conde de Castilla y de Álava (931-944 y 945-970).

Fue hijo de Muniadona y Gonzalo Fernández, quien había sido nombrado conde de Burgos y de Castilla, descendiente del infante Rodrigo, el primero de los condes de Castilla.[2] En la Carta Puebla de Brañosera aparece Munio Núñez de Brañosera como antepasado suyo,[3] por lo que los antepasados de Fernán González y su padre no están del todo claros. Personaje teñido de tintes legendarios, la base patrimonial de su familia era el castillo de Lara (Lara de los Infantes), estableciendo un poderoso linaje que alcanzará gran influencia en el reino leonés. Crece en el castillo de Lara y hereda el título de su padre tras el apresamiento y muerte de su tío Nuño Fernández.

En el año 929, Fernán González aparece en documentos con el título de conde al frente del alfoz de Lara, dentro de la organización administrativa de la marca oriental del reino de León. En el 931, Fernán González logró reunir el gobierno de los condados de Burgos, Lara, Lantarón, Cerezo y Álava[4] y es mencionado como conde de Castilla por primera vez en un documento del año 932. Estatua de Fernán González en la Plaza de Oriente de Madrid. Esculpida en piedra blanca entre 1750 y 1753.

En el 932, Ramiro II de León organizó una expedición contra la fortaleza de Magerit a la que posiblemente acudió Fernán González; la ciudad fue tomada así como su castillo obteniendo de ello un gran botín, sin embargo Magerit fue retomada por los musulmanes tras ser abandonada por el monarca leonés. Un año más tarde Abderramán III contraatacó cercando Osma y San Esteban de Gormaz, Ramiro II acudió en ayuda de Fernán González logrando levantar el cerco de San Esteban de Gormaz y venciendo a las huestes califales cerca de Osma. En 934 Abderramán III avanzó nuevemente con su ejército por territorio castellano, sin encontrar ninguna oposición. Asoló Álava, destruyó Burgos, y cometió numerosos atropellos, como la matanza de 200 monjes en Cardeña. En el viaje de retorno se encontró con que Ramiro II había tomado Osma, y estaba allí esperándolo junto con Fernán González. Los leoneses derrotaron en batalla a los musulmanes, "matando a muchos millares de ellos", según los Anales Castellanos Primeros.

El conde de Castilla tuvo un papel destacado en la batalla de Simancas[5] (939) en la que fueron derrotadas las tropas del califa Abderramán III. A continuación, conquistó Sepúlveda y la repobló (940), así como Riaza y Fresno. Ese mismo año concedió un fuero a Sepúlveda, dicho fuero estaba concebido para atraer repobladores a esa zona extremadamente peligrosa por su situación fronteriza con las tierras musulmanas.

Viendo su poder acrecentado, empezó a actuar de manera cada vez más independiente del reino de León, y siguiendo esta política, se casó con Sancha Sánchez, hermana del rey de Navarra, García Sánchez I (más tarde se casaría con su hija, Urraca Díaz).

Fernán González se sintió enormemente agraviado cuando el Rey, nombró a Ansur Fernández como conde de Monzón, condado que bloqueaba su expansión hacia los territorios comprendidos entre el río Cea y el río Pisuerga (excluyendo el Condado de Saldaña en el oeste).

Según Sampiro, en 944 "Fernán González y Diego Muñoz ejercieron tiranía contra el rey Ramiro, y aun prepararon la guerra. Mas el rey, como era fuerte y previsor, cogiólos, y uno en León y otro en Gordón, presos con hierros, los echó en la cárcel." Ramiro entregó el gobierno de Castilla al infante Sancho y al conde Ansur Fernández, que sería su ayo y protector. Después de permanecer alrededor de un año en prisión, Ramiro II liberó al traidor, no sin antes hacerle jurar fidelidad. Para dar solemnidad a lo pactado, poco después se produjo la boda entre la hija del conde, Urraca Fernández y su propio hijo y heredero, Ordoño. Estas disensiones internas debilitaron el reino leonés, lo cual fue aprovechado por los musulmanes para lanzar varias razzias de castigo con destino al reino cristiano. El arabista francés Évariste Lévi-Provençal sospechaba que durante estos años Fernán González pudo establecer algún tipo de amistad o de alianza con el califa de Córdoba, y que las razzias dejaron en paz a la debilitada Castilla, y se dirigieron hacia la zona occidental del reino.

Muerto Ramiro II en el 951, el reino de León quedó sumido en una crisis dinástica que Fernán González supo aprovechar en su favor. Inicialmente apoyó las reclamaciones de Sancho el Craso contra su hermano Ordoño III, pero, al no prosperar su causa, se vio obligado a reconocer a Ordoño como rey. Paralelamente, en el año 955 Fernán González derrotó a las tropas musulmanas en San Esteban de Gormaz.

La temprana muerte de Ordoño III permitió al castellano recuperar su capacidad de maniobra, aunque en esta ocasión no apoyó las pretensiones de su antiguo aliado, el rey García Sánchez, que pretendía que Sancho el Craso fuera rey de León, sino que se alineó con el primo de Ordoño III, Ordoño IV, que fue elegido rey de León. Derrotado en el 960 por la intervención navarra, fue capturado por García Sánchez en Cirueña, pero recuperó la libertad tras hacer diversas concesiones territoriales. Sepulcro de Fernán González en la Colegiata de Covarrubias, la tapa es del siglo XIX y la caja del siglo V.

Para reforzar su posición frente a los demás territorios cristianos, casó a su hija Urraca Fernández con el hijo de Ramiro II, Ordoño III, más tarde Urraca sería repudiada por Ordoño III gracias al apoyo que prestó Fernán González a Sancho el Craso. Después de la muerte de Ordoño III, Urraca se casó con Ordoño IV que por entonces era aliado de Fernán González, y tras la muerte de Ordoño IV se casó con Sancho Garcés II de Navarra. Otra de sus hijas Muniadona (o Nuña) fue dada en matrimonio a Gómez Díaz, hijo del conde de Saldaña, Diego Muñoz.

En el 963 pactó una tregua con Alhakén II tras la toma de San Esteban de Gormaz por los musulmanes, el conde castellano actuaba al margen de la debilitada autoridad real. En tal situación de desorden, Fernán González fue asegurando lentamente su posición como señor hereditario del condado de Castilla, llegando a gobernar un extenso territorio desde el mar Cantábrico hasta más al sur del río Duero. Al morir, dejó el condado a su hijo García Fernández, estableciendo así el principio de la sucesión hereditaria en el título condal de Castilla.

Su vida y hechos fueron magnificados en un poema anónimo, el Poema de Fernán González, escrito entre 1250 y 1271 y conservado en una copia incompleta del siglo XV. Los restos de Fernán González fueron enterrados en el Monasterio de San Pedro de Arlanza y posteriormente trasladados en 1841 a la Colegiata de San Cosme y San Damián de Covarrubias junto con los de su esposa Sancha.
--------------------
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sculpture in Arco de Santa María of Burgos. Fernán González (died 970) was the first independent count of Castile, son of Gonzalo Fernández de Burgos, who had been named count of Arlanza and the Duero around the year 900, and by tradition a descendant of semi-legendary judge Nuño Rasura. His mother Muniadona Ramírez was so well remembered that the later Counts of Castile would sometimes be recorded by Iberian Muslim scholars as Ibn Māma Duna (descendant of Muniadona).

Fernán González was a colourful character of legendary status in Iberia, and founder of the dynasty that would rule a semi-autonomous Castile, laying the foundations for its status as an independent kingdom. In the year 930, Ferdinand's name appears with the title of count inside the administrative organization of eastern the Kingdom of León.

He grew up in the castle of Lara and inherited his father's title after the capture and death of his uncle, Nuño Fernández.

Statue in Madrid (J. Villanueva, 1750-53). In 931, Fernán gathered under his control a strong military force composed of troops from the counties of Burgos, Asturias, Santillana, Lantaron, Álava, Castile, and Lara. His military prowess came to prominence in the Battle of Simancas in 939 and then at Sepulveda, where he wrested the region from the Moors and repopulated it. As his power increased, so did his independence from León. During this period he married Sancha, the sister of the king of Navarre, García Sánchez I. Sancha was a daughter of Sancho I of Pamplona, and Toda of Navarre.

After having fought with Ramiro II of León against the Arabs, and after the Battle of Simancas and the retreat of the Muslims, Fernán was dissatisfied because the king of León distributed his troops in the frontier towns and he rose in rebellion against him. He was, however, defeated and made prisoner in 944, which lasted for 3 years until he became reconciled with his sovereign, giving his daughter Urraca in marriage to the king's son, Ordoño, who afterwards became King Ordoño III.

Notwithstanding this alliance, Fernán continued to foment trouble and discord in León. He later aided Sancho I against his brother Ordoño III, and then Ordoño IV, son of Alfonso IV, against Sancho.

Upon the death of Ramiro II of Leon in 951, the kingdom of León experienced a dynastic crisis that Fernán played out to his advantage.

Sepulchre in Covarrubias, Spain, the lid is from the nineteenth century and the casket from the fifth. Initially Fernán supported the demands of Sancho I against his brother Ordoño III, but when Sancho failed, Fernán was forced to recognize Ordoño as king. Ordoño III's early death allowed Fernán to recover his maneuvering capacity, although he abandoned his old ally Sancho, instead supporting his rival Ordoño IV. Defeated in 960 through Navarrese intervention, he was captured by King García of Navarre, but he recovered his freedom after making various territorial concessions. With the kingdom of León weakened and in disorder, Fernán slowly solidified his position as legitimate independent count of Castile.

After his death the county was left to his son García Fernández. His remains were buried in the monastery of San Pedro of Arlanza.

His life and feats are recorded in an anonymous poem, The Poem of Fernán González, written between 1250 and 1271 and conserved as an incomplete copy from the fifteenth century.

--------------------
D. Nuño, Conde de Amaya. Este Infante afirma Pellicer, que casó con hija de D. Rodrigo, Conde de Castilla, segundo del nombre, y tuvo por hijos á D. Rodrigo Nuñez, que sigue la línea, y á D. Nuño Nuñez, Conde de Amaya, que pobló á Roa por lósanos de 950, y aun vivia en 954, si bien el Obispo Sampiro anticipa esta población por los años de 9o3. También fué hija del Infante D. Nuño, doña Nuña, que casó con D. Gonzalo Fernandez, Conde de Lara, hijo del gran Conde '''Fernan-Gonzalez de Castilla''', de quien tuvo por hijos á D. Nuño González , Señor de Lara , y progenitor de esta Casa, que ocupó el primer lugar entre la Nobleza Gastellana, y á D. Fernando González , Señor de Aza y progenitor de las grandes familias de Aza, Fuente- Almexis, Manzanedo, Villalobos y otras, de quienes trataremos.

''in: Diccionario histórico, genealógico y heráldico de las familias ilustres de la monarquía española p. 200 <http://books.google.com/books?id=17ByHmazca0C&pg=PA3&hl=pt-BR&source=gbs_toc_r&cad=4#v=onepage&q=amaya&f=false>''

- - - - - - - - -

Bolviendo a tratar de los hijos de el Conde Fernan Gonçalez de Caftilla, profigue el Conde don Pedro la fucefsion del Conde don Pedro de Palecia, y dize, que don Fernan Gonçalez fu hijo tuvo hijos al Conde don Ramiro el Vellofo, a quien no da fucefsion, y a don Gonçalo Muñoz, que defpeñarõ en Aça fus Solariegos, que fue padre del Conde don Gomez de Mançanedo, y de doña Elvira Sanchez NOBLEZA DEL ANDALVZIA Por Gonçalo Argote de Molina, Sevilla 1588. Libro Primero. Don Gomez Manriqve Maestre de Calatrava gana a Alcaudete de los Moros, y el Rey don Fernando la da a la dicha Orden, y fucefsion de fu linage, y del linage de el Conde Fernan Gonçalez. Cap. CV. Pág. 117

Fernan Gonzalez, Conde Sobernao de Castilla, Principe gloriosisimo en las armas. Casa de Cabrera en Córdoba, P. Francisco Ruano Libro Cuarto, Capítulo IX. De la restante posteridad de D. Juan Fernandez de Cordoba, y Cabrera, III Vizconde de Torres Cabrera, en quien recayeron los mayorazgos de esta Casa. Pág 548
--------------------
FERNÃO GONÇALVES, CONDE SOBERANO de CASTELA-INDEPENDENTE

Conde soberano de Castela, casou com D. Sancha Infanta de Navarra (Gayo, tit. Morais, $ 1 N 1).
--------------------
Fernando González [1] (in contemporary documentation, Fredinandus Gundisalviz, Castillo de Lara, c. 910 - Burgos, 970), better known in the songs of gesta and later chronicles as Fernán González, was Count of Castile and Álava (931 -944 and 945-970).

He was son of Muniadona and Gonzalo Fernandez, who had been named count of Burgos and of Castile, according to it is clear of the Letter Puebla of Brañosera, Munio Nunez would be his ancestor.

Character dyed of legendary dyes, the patrimonial base of his family was the castle of Lara (Lara de los Infantes), establishing a powerful lineage that will reach great influence in the kingdom of Leon. He grew up in the castle of Lara and inherited the title of his father after the arrest and death of his uncle Nuño Fernández.

In the year 929, Fernán González appears in documents with the title of count to the front of the alfoz of Lara, within the administrative organization of the oriental mark of the kingdom of Leon. In 931, Fernán González managed to reunite the government of the counties of Burgos, Lara, Lantarón, Cerezo and Álava [4] and is mentioned like count of Castile for the first time in a document of the year 932.

In 932, Ramiro II de Leon organized an expedition against the fortress of Magerit, possibly attended by Fernán González; The city was taken as well as its castle obtaining from it a great button, however Magerit was taken over by the Muslims after being abandoned by the monarch of Leon. A year later Abderramán III counterattacked with Osma and San Esteban de Gormaz, Ramiro II came to the aid of Fernán González managing to raise the siege of San Esteban de Gormaz and overcoming the caliphs near Osma. In 934 Abderramán III advanced again with its army by Castilian territory, without finding any opposition. It destroyed Álava, destroyed Burgos, and committed numerous abuses, such as the massacre of 200 monks in Cardena. On the return journey he found that Ramiro II had taken Osma, And was there waiting for him along with Fernán González. The Leoneses defeated the Muslims in battle, "killing many thousands of them", according to the Anales Castellanos Primeros.

The Count of Castile had a prominent role in the battle of Simancas (5) (939) in which the troops of the caliph Abderramán III were defeated. Of 937 dates the only original document signed by him that is conserved, a notarial deed for which he owns his property, the monastery of Santa María de Cárdaba (today in the province of Segovia), the monastery of San Pedro de Arlanza (Burgos ). [6] He then conquered Sepulveda and repopulated it (940), as did Riaza and Fresno. That same year granted a fuero to Sepúlveda, said fuero was conceived to attract repopuladores to that zone extremely dangerous by its position bordering with the Muslim lands.

Seeing his increased power, he began to act increasingly independent of the kingdom of Leon, and following this policy, he married Sancha Sánchez, sister of the King of Navarre, Garcia Sánchez I (later he would marry his daughter, Urraca Garcés ).

Fernán González was greatly aggrieved when the King named Ansur Fernandez as Count of Monzón, a county that blocked its expansion into the territories between the river Cea and the Pisuerga River (excluding Saldana County in the west).

According to Sampiro, in 944 "Fernan Gonzalez and Diego Muñoz exercised tyranny against King Ramiro, and even prepared the war." But the king, being strong and farsighted, took them, and one in Leon and one in Gordon, Threw in jail. " Ramiro gave the government of Castile to the infant Sancho and to the count Ansur Fernandez, that would be its ayo and protector. After spending about a year in prison, Ramiro II freed the traitor, not without first making him swear allegiance. To give solemnity to the agreement, shortly after the marriage took place between the daughter of the count, Urraca Fernandez and his own son and heir, Ordoño. These internal dissensions weakened the Leonese kingdom, which was exploited by the Muslims to launch several punishments of punishment destined to the Christian kingdom.

Ramiro II died in 951, the kingdom of Leon was sunk in a dynastic crisis that Fernán González knew to take advantage of in his favor. Initially he supported the claims of Sancho el Craso against his brother Ordoño III, but, when his cause did not prosper, he was forced to recognize Ordoño as king. In parallel, in 955 Fernán González defeated the Muslim troops in San Esteban de Gormaz.

The early death of Ordoño III allowed Castilian to regain his maneuverability, although on this occasion he did not support the pretensions of his former ally, King Garcia Sanchez, who claimed that Sancho el Craso was king of Leon, but aligned with the Cousin of Ordoño III, Ordoño IV, that was chosen king of Leon. Defeated in 960 by the navarre intervention, he was captured by Garcia S nchez in Cirueña, but recovered his freedom after making various territorial concessions.

Tomb of Fernán González in the Colegiata de Covarrubias, the cover is of the nineteenth century and the box of the fifth century. To strengthen its position in front of the other Christian territories, married his daughter Urraca Fern ndez with the son of Ramiro II, Ordoño III. Later, Urraca would be repudiated by Ordoño III thanks to the support that Fernán González gave to Sancho el Craso. After the death of Ordoño III, Urraca married Ordoño IV that at that time was allied of Fernán González, and after the death of Ordoño IV married Sancho Garces II of Navarre. Another of his daughters, Muniadona (or Nuna), was given in marriage to Gómez Díaz, son of the Count of Saldaña, Diego Muñoz.

In 963 he agreed a truce with Alhakén II after the destruction of San Esteban de Gormaz by the Muslims, the Castilian count acted outside the weakened royal authority. In such a situation of disorder, Fernán González was slowly securing his position as hereditary lord of the county of Castile, coming to govern an extensive territory from the Bay of Biscay to the south of the Douro River. When he died, he left the county to his son García Fernández, thus establishing the principle of hereditary succession in the county title of Castile.

His life and deeds were magnified in an anonymous poem, the Poem of Fernan Gonzalez, written between 1250 and 1271 and preserved in an incomplete copy of the fifteenth century. The remains of Fernán González were buried in the Monastery of San Pedro de Arlanza and later transferred in 1841 to the Collegiate Church of San Cosme and San Damián de Covarrubias along with those of his wife Sancha.

<Hr>

XIV. Fernando Diaz, Count of Castile in 902, whose son was XV. Gonzalo Fernandez, Count of Castile and Lord of Burgos, Lara and Amaya, who procreated to XVI. Fernan Gonzalez, the first Sovereign Count of Castile, Amayo, Alava and Lara, who settled in Sepulveda in 940 and married the Infanta Dona Sancha, sister of King García Sánchez IV of Navarra, and of Teresa Florentina, Queen of León (the three children of Sancho García II, King of Navarre, and his wife Doña Toda Aznarez),

--------------------
Fernán González, Señor de Castilla. Conde de Castilla, Burgos, Álava, Lantarón y Cerezo 931 - 944

Nacimiento c. 910 Castillo de Lara Fallecimiento 969/ Burgos Entierro Colegiata de Covarrubias Familia Padre Gonzalo Fernández Madre Muniadona de Lara Cónyuges

Sancha Sánchez

Urraca Garcés

Fernando González (en la documentación coetánea, Fredinandus Gundisalviz; Castillo de Lara, c. 910-Burgos, 970), más conocido en los cantares de gesta y crónicas posteriores como Fernán González, fue conde de Castilla, Burgos, Álava, Lantarón y Cerezo (931-944 y 945-970).

Fue hijo de Muniadona y Gonzalo Fernández, quien había sido nombrado conde de Burgos y de Castilla,b​ según se desprende de la Carta Puebla de Brañosera.

https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fern%C3%A1n_Gonz%C3%A1lez
--------------------
======

=Fernán González, Conde de Castilla=

==Durante el reinado de Ordoño I de Oviedo, y como consecuencia de la necesidad de reforzar las fronteras orientales frente a los musulmanes, nace el Condado de Castilla en el extremo este del Reino Astur.

El primer conde de Castilla será Rodrigo (año 850) y desde entonces Castilla, un pequeño y difuso territorio situado en el norte de lo que hoy es la actual provincia de Burgos cobrará entidad propia, al principio como condado dependiente de Oviedo o León, más tarde como condado independiente aunque con reconocimiento (teórico) de la autoridad de León y por último como reino (a partir del reinado de Sancho Garcés III de Navarra)==

==Uno de aquellos legendarios condes castellanos altomedievales fue Fernán González, uno de los grandes personajes ligados al sentimiento patriótico castellano.==

==Si comparamos con objetividad a Fernán González con el mismísimo Cid Campeador, cuyas hazañas legendarias se han perpetuado en la memoria colectiva del pueblo, observamos que figura del Conde tiene aún mayor carácter castellano y fue más decisiva en la historia de Castilla que la del Campeador.

Y es que en el extenso periodo de tiempo que Fernán González gobernó Castilla, logró la independencia, de facto, del Condado, estableciendo el carácter hereditario de su gobierno y afirmando las bases para que, décadas más tarde, se constituyera en reino.==

==Fernán González nació probablemente en el castillo de Lara (Lara de los Infantes) en la Sierra de la Demanda burgalesa en una fecha indeterminada de los inicios del siglo X.
==

==Fue hijo de Muniadona y Gonzalo Fernández, a su vez conde de Burgos y de Castilla, supuesto descendiente de Nuño Rasura, uno de los dos jueces de Castilla, y de Rodrigo, el primero de los condes de Castilla.==

==En el año 931, Fernán González aparece como Conde de Burgos, Castilla, Asturias de Santillana, Lara, Lantarón, Cerezo y Álava y es persona respetada e influyente en la corte de Ramiro II de León, puesto que en los enfrentamientos que se suceden durante la cuarta década del siglo X con los ejércitos cordobeses, Ramiro y Fernán González aparecen siempre combatiendo juntos.==

==El acontecimiento decisivo para su encumbramiento debió ser el apoyo que, de nuevo, las tropas del buen Conde prestaron al rey Ramiro en la famosa batalla de Simancas, celebrada en el año 939 y en el que un inmenso ejército musulmán intentó acabar definitivamente con los levantiscos reinos cristianos del norte, reuniendo un ejército formidable para la época.

La victoria cristiana en Simancas y días más tarde en un lugar impreciso de Guadalajara o Soria (jornada del barranco) fue tan rotunda que hasta el propio Califa Abderramán III estuvo cerca de perder la vida.==

==Este acontecimiento permitió a Fernán González extender inmediatamente su acción repobladora hasta la Cordillera Central (Sepúlveda y Riaza fueron repobladas en el año 940)
Poco después Fernán González se casa con Sancha, hermana del rey de Navarra García Sánchez lo que refuerza su poder y le permite acentuar su política autonomista.==

==Para bajar los humos al Conde, Ramiro II nombra a Assur Fernández conde de Monzón (con dominio sobre los territorios comprendidos entre el Cea y el Pisuerga, recién conquistados a los árabes) tapando la expansión de Fernán González por Tierra de Campos lo que provoca que éste se rebele y se enfrente al rey leonés.==

==Fernán González es encarcelado (944-945) en León y Assur Fernández es nombrado durante este periodo conde de Castilla.
Tras ese año en la cárcel, llega la reconciliación entre Ramiro y Fernán, posiblemente porque el empuje del califa cordobés exige aunar esfuerzos para combatirlo. De esta manera, Fernán González recupera el título de Conde Castilla y emparenta con el propio rey tras la boda entre su hija Urraca con el hijo de Ramiro, y heredero del trono de León, el futuro Ordoño III.==

==Los últimos años de vida del Fernán González están marcados por los desórdenes dinásticos de León, iniciados por los problemas sucesorios tras la muerte de Ramiro II y las luchas entre sus hijos Ordoño III y Sancho I, Durante estos años el conde castellano toma partido por uno o por otro bando en función de los enredados avatares políticos y de su propia conveniencia.

Fernán González muere en el año 970 en Burgos, dejando unas tierras autónomas, fortalecidas y acostumbradas a la vida de frontera y al combate. Tal fortaleza hará que unos pocos años después, cuando Almanzor toma las riendas del Califato y someta a los reinos cristianos a los más duros de los azotes guerreros, Castilla, aun sufriéndolos también, se vea menos afectada y entre en el siglo XI con buenas perspectivas para convertirse en un gran reino.==

=El arte en los tiempos de Fernán González=

==A lo largo y ancho de la Sierra de la Demanda y en otras comarcas cercanas de Burgos existen algunos edificios prerrománicos que bien pudieran ser de tiempos de Fernán González o algunas décadas anteriores o posteriores. Aunque la mayoría sufrieron reformas y adiciones en época románica, lo conservado es suficiente para conocer algunas de sus características:==

* Se trata de pequeñas iglesias, modestas en tamaño, recias y utilitarias, como la época en que se construyeron.
*
* Las cabeceras son planas
*
* Están muy escasamente decoradas.
*
* La fábrica es de sillería a base de sillares de gran tamaño, que recuerdan (e incluso se confunden) con la de los antiguos edificios visigóticos. También se emplea la mampostería en algunos casos.
*
* La puertas eran de simple arco de herradura poco sobrepasado, también al estilo hispanorromano y visigótico.
*
* Parece que estas construcciones condales se impregnaron poco de las formas califales que los mozárabes trajeron de
*
* Andalucía y que tanto afectó a la arquitectura de repoblación que aparece más al oeste, en el Reino de León.
*
* Como conclusión, se aprecia un continuismo con la tradición anterior de la España cristiana, es decir la correspondiente a la arquitectura tardorromana e hispanovisgótica.

==Aunque el edificio emblemático de esta época es el Torreón de Fernán González en Covarrubias, cabría citar también las torres de Valdeande y Caleruega, las cabeceras de las iglesias de Santa Cecilia de Barriosuso, San Vicente del Valle, Barbadillo del Mercado (aunque también podría ser visigótica), Santa María de Barbadillo de Pez, Tolbaños de Abajo, restos la iglesia de San Millán de Lara, elementos de la nave de la iglesia románica de Vizcaínos, etc.==

==También la nave de la iglesia de Santa María de Cárdaba en el norte de Segovia, junto a Sacramenia, puede ser de mitad del siglo X.==

=El buen conde=

==A Fernán González, la historia le ha otorgado el título de "el Buen Conde". Dicho título aparece en innumerables ocasiones a lo largo de todo el Poema de Fernán González, hasta en 33 ocasiones. En la primera estrofa en la que se refiere a González en estos términos:

Dijo don fray Pelayo delante su señor:
Fágote, el buen Conde, de tanto sabidor Que quiere la tu facienda guiar el Criador; Vencerás todo el poder del moro Almozor. Tan importante es este título que incluso la última estrofa del Poema hace referencia a Fernán González como el Buen Conde obviando su nombre:

Quiso Dios al buen Conde esta gracia facer, Que moros nin cristianos non le podían vencer.

==

RESEARCH NOTES:
Count of Lara (931-970), Castile, Alava

SOURCE NOTES:
www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal11069

COUNT DE LARA; COUNT OF CASTILE

Conde de Lara (929); de Castilla, Álava, Burgos, Lantaron (932-970)
Fundador del Reino de Castilla y su primer Conde Soberano.
Su figura ha inspirado numerosos romances y leyendas populares.
Ayudó a Ramiro II de León, de quien era vasallo, a derrotar a los moros en 933, y en 940 se sublevó contra su autoridad. Reducido a prisión, Fernán González logró evadirse merced a un ardid de su esposa y a las amenazas de los castellanos, pero Ramiro le impuso duras condiciones que fueron cumplidas sólo en parte. En 947 volvía a titularse conde de Castilla, aunque no independiente, puesto que siguió reconociendo la soberanía de León, y en 955 obtuvo una gran victoria contra Abderramán III, cerca de San Esteban de Gormaz.

1 BIRT 2 DATE ABT. 893 2 PLAC Castile, Spain

110897736. Greve Fernan Gonzales GONZALOSON av Kastiljen(9454) was a Greve in 923 in Burgos.(9455) etter kongens ordre He was a Greve in 927 in Kastaljen. (9456) i 931 også greve av Kastiljen og Alava. I 935 antok han titelen greve av hele Kastiljen. He died in 970. (9457) Han ble bisatt i klostret i Arlanza men er i nyere tid overført til Colegiata de Covarubias. He was a Greve in Kastiljen. (9458) Han var den første greve av Kastiljen, den mest berømte av sitt fyrstehus. Tradisjonen holder ham for en etterkommer av dommeren Nunio Rasura og for en sønn av grev Gonzalo Nuniez, men nyere undersøkelser har vist at hans far var Gonzalo Fernandez. Sagnet vil vite at han var hyrde hos maurerne, Han denstammet imidlertid fra de gamle dommere av Kastiljen gjennom sin far. I 904 deltok han i slaget ved San Quirece og stiftet samme sted et kloster.Alliert med Ramiro II av leon vant han seier for kaliffen av Cordova Abd-er-Rahman III ved Omsa i 933 eller 934. I 934, 938 og 939 vant de en annen batalje ved Simancas, hvor araberne skal ha tapt 80,000 mann. Muselmennene led et tredje nederlag ved Dazio. Ferdinand søkte nå å gjøre seg uavhengig av kongeriket Leon og allierte seg med Ramiros motstandere. Men han ble tatt til fange, oppnådde dog tilgivelse og ga sin datter Urraca til Ramiros sønn Ordogno III. I 940 anla han Sepulveda.
He was married to Urraca (Sancha) N.NSDTR av Navarra before 912. (9459)

Conde de Lara (929); de Castilla, Álava, Burgos, Lantaron (932-970)
Fundador del Reino de Castilla y su primer Conde Soberano.
Su figura ha inspirado numerosos romances y leyendas populares.
Ayudó a Ramiro II de León, de quien era vasallo, a derrotar a los moros en 933, y en 940 se sublevó contra su autoridad. Reducido a prisión, Fernán González logró evadirse merced a un ardid de su esposa y a las amenazas de los castellanos, pero Ramiro le impuso duras condiciones que fueron cumplidas sólo en parte. En 947 volvía a titularse conde de Castilla, aunque no independiente, puesto que siguió reconociendo la soberanía de León, y en 955 obtuvo una gran victoria contra Abderramán III, cerca de San Esteban de Gormaz.

Name Suffix:<NSFX> Count Galicia

Event: Titled 932 Count of Castile
Event: Titled Count of Burgos and Lara

As the kings of Leon expanded eastward, they reached Burgos. Because the area
there was protected by castles built to guard the frontiers of the newly
acquired territory, the region became know as Castilla, or Castile. Under
Count Fernan Gonzales, the region became independent of Leon, and in 932
Fernan declared himself first King of Castile. Later, Sancho, King of Navarre,
captured much of Leon & Castile, and made son Ferdinand I King of Castile. On
Sancho's death the kingdom was divided amongst his three sons - big trouble!

Event: Titled 932 Count of Castile
Event: Titled Count of Burgos and Lara

Greve av Castilla 923 - 970.
Fernan Gonzales var den første greve av Castilla, den mest berømte av sitt fyrstehus.
Tradisjonen holder ham for å være en etterkommer til dommeren Nunio Rasura og sønn til
greve Gonzalo Nuniéz. Det er riktig at han nedstammet fra de gamle dommere av Castilla,
men nyere undersøkelser viser at hans far var Gonzalo Fernandèz. Sagnet om at han var
hyrde hos maurerne er neppe korrekt.
Castillaslekten var grever av Castilla fra 923 til 1026. Etter at slekten døde ut ble Castilla
kongedømme i union med Navarra og senere med Leon.
I 904 deltok han i slaget ved San Quirce og stiftet samme sted et kloster. I 923
forekommer han som greve av Burgos, etter kongens ordre. I 927 kaller han seg greve av
Castilla og i 931 greve av Castilla og Alava. Alliert med Ramiro II av Leon vant han en seier
over kaliffen av Córdova, Abd-er-Rahman III ved Osma i 933 eller 934. I 935 antok han titelen
greve av hele Castilla. I 934, 938 og 939 vant de et annet slag ved Simancas, hvor maurerne
skal ha tapt 80.ooo mann. Muselmennene led et tredje nederlag ved Dazio.
Fernan søkte nå å gjøre seg uavhengig av kongeriket Leon, og allierte seg med
Ramiros motstandere. Han ble tatt til fange, men oppnådde tilgivelse, og ga sin datter Urraca til
Ramiros sønn Ordogno III.
I 940 anla han Sepulveda.
Han ble bisatt i klosteret i Arlanza, men er i nyere tid overført til Colegiata de
Covarrubias.

As the kings of Leon expanded eastward, they reached Burgos. Because the area
there was protected by castles built to guard the frontiers of the newly
acquired territory, the region became know as Castilla, or Castile. Under
Count Fernan Gonzales, the region became independent of Leon, and in 932
Fernan declared himself first King of Castile. Later, Sancho, King of Navarre,
captured much of Leon & Castile, and made son Ferdinand I King of Castile. On
Sancho's death the kingdom was divided amongst his three sons - big trouble!

Ferdinand II of Castile
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Ferdinand II González (930–970) was the first independent count of Castile, son of Gonzalo Fernández de Lara, who had been named count of Arlanza and the Duero around the year 900, a descendent of Nuño Rasura, one of the two judges from Castile, and of Rodrigo, the first of the counts from Castile.

Ferdinand González was a colourful character of legendary status in Iberia and a member of the influential Lara family. In the year 930, Ferdinand's name appears with the title of count inside the administrative organization of eastern the Kingdom of León.

He grew up in the castle of Lara and inherited his father's title after the capture and death of his brother, Nuño Fernández.

In 931, Ferdinand gathered under his control a strong military force composed of troops from the counties of Burgos, Asturias, Santillana, Lantaron, Álava, Castile, and Lara. His military prowess came to prominence in the Battle of Simancas in 939 and then at Sepulveda, where he wrested the region from the Moors and repopulated it. As his power increased, so did his independence from León. During this period he married Sancha, the sister of the king of Navarre, García III.

After having fought with Ramiro II of León against the Arabs, and after the Battle of Simancas and the retreat of the Muslims, Ferdinand was dissatisfied because the king of León distributed his troops in the frontier towns and he rose in rebellion against him. He was, however, defeated and made prisoner in 944, which lasted for 3 years until he became reconciled with his sovereign, giving his daughter Urraca in marriage to the king's son, Ordoño, who afterwards became King Ordoño III.

Notwithstanding this alliance, Ferdinand continued to foment trouble and discord in León, aiming to secure his independence. He successively aided Sancho I against his brother Ordoño III, and Ordoño IV, son of Alfonso IV, against Sancho himself.

Upon the death of Ramiro II of Leon in 951, the kingdom of León experienced a dynastic crisis that Ferdinand played out to his advantage.

Initially he supported the demands of Sancho I against his brother Ordoño III, but when he failed, he was forced to recognize Ordoño as king. Ordoño III's early death allowed Ferdinand to recover his maneuvering capacity, although in this occasion he didn't support his old ally, Sancho's, pretenses, but rather allied himself with the son of Alfonso IV, Ordoño IV. Defeated in 960 through Navarrese intervention, he was captured by King García of Navarre, but he recovered his freedom after making various territorial concessions. With the kingdom of León weakened and in disorder, Ferdinand slowly assured his position as legitimate independent count of Castile.

After his death the county was left to his son García Fernáandez. His remains were buried in the monastery of San Pedro of Arlanza.

His life and feats are recorded in an anonymous poem, The Poem of Fernán González, written between 1250 and 1271 and conserved as an incomplete copy from the fifteenth century.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to:
Fernán González
Preceded by:
Ferdinand Aznárez count of Castile
923–970 Succeeded by:
García I Fernáandez

Fernán González of Castile
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Ferdinand González (930–970) was the first independent count of Castile, son of Gonzalo Fernández de Lara, who had been named count of Arlanza and the Duero around the year 900, a descendant of Nuño Rasura, one of the two judges from Castile, and perhaps of Rodrigo, the first of the counts from Castile. His mother Muniadona Ramírez was so well remebered that the later Counts of Castile would sometimes be recorded by Iberian Muslim scholars as Ibn Mama Duna (descendant of Muniadona).

Ferdinand González was a colourful character of legendary status in Iberia and a member of the influential Lara family. In the year 930, Ferdinand's name appears with the title of count inside the administrative organization of eastern the Kingdom of León.

He grew up in the castle of Lara and inherited his father's title after the capture and death of his uncle, Nuño Fernández.

In 931, Ferdinand gathered under his control a strong military force composed of troops from the counties of Burgos, Asturias, Santillana, Lantaron, Álava, Castile, and Lara. His military prowess came to prominence in the Battle of Simancas in 939 and then at Sepulveda, where he wrested the region from the Moors and repopulated it. As his power increased, so did his independence from León. During this period he married Sancha, the sister of the king of Navarre, García Sánchez I. Sancha was a daughter of Sancho I of Pamplona, and Toda of Navarre.

After having fought with Ramiro II of León against the Arabs, and after the Battle of Simancas and the retreat of the Muslims, Ferdinand was dissatisfied because the king of León distributed his troops in the frontier towns and he rose in rebellion against him. He was, however, defeated and made prisoner in 944, which lasted for 3 years until he became reconciled with his sovereign, giving his daughter Urraca in marriage to the king's son, Ordoño, who afterwards became King Ordoño III.
Sepulchre in Covarrubias, the lid is from the nineteenth century and the casket from the fifth.
Sepulchre in Covarrubias, the lid is from the nineteenth century and the casket from the fifth.
Statue in Madrid (J. Villanueva, 1750-53).
Statue in Madrid (J. Villanueva, 1750-53).

Notwithstanding this alliance, Ferdinand continued to foment trouble and discord in León, aiming to secure his independence. He successively aided Sancho I against his brother Ordoño III, and Ordoño IV, son of Alfonso IV, against Sancho himself.

Upon the death of Ramiro II of Leon in 951, the kingdom of León experienced a dynastic crisis that Ferdinand played out to his advantage.

Initially he supported the demands of Sancho I against his brother Ordoño III, but when he failed, he was forced to recognize Ordoño as king. Ordoño III's early death allowed Ferdinand to recover his maneuvering capacity, although in this occasion he didn't support his old ally, Sancho's, pretenses, but rather allied himself with the son of Alfonso IV, Ordoño IV. Defeated in 960 through Navarrese intervention, he was captured by King García of Navarre, but he recovered his freedom after making various territorial concessions. With the kingdom of León weakened and in disorder, Ferdinand slowly assured his position as legitimate independent count of Castile.

After his death the county was left to his son García Fernández. His remains were buried in the monastery of San Pedro of Arlanza.

His life and feats are recorded in an anonymous poem, The Poem of Fernán González, written between 1250 and 1271 and conserved as an incomplete copy from the fifteenth century.
Preceded by
Ferdinand Ansúrez count of Castile
923–970 Succeeded by
García Fernández

As the kings of Leon expanded eastward, they reached Burgos. Because the area
there was protected by castles built to guard the frontiers of the newly
acquired territory, the region became know as Castilla, or Castile. Under
Count Fernan Gonzales, the region became independent of Leon, and in 932
Fernan declared himself first King of Castile. Later, Sancho, King of Navarre,
captured much of Leon & Castile, and made son Ferdinand I King of Castile. On
Sancho's death the kingdom was divided amongst his three sons - big trouble!

As the kings of Leon expanded eastward, they reached Burgos. Because the area
there was protected by castles built to guard the frontiers of the newly
acquired territory, the region became know as Castilla, or Castile. Under
Count Fernan Gonzales, the region became independent of Leon, and in 932
Fernan declared himself first King of Castile. Later, Sancho, King of Navarre,
captured much of Leon & Castile, and made son Ferdinand I King of Castile. On
Sancho's death the kingdom was divided amongst his three sons - big trouble!

[Wikipedia, "Ferdinand II González", retrieved 5 Oct 07]
Ferdinand II González (930-970) was the first independent count of Castile, son of Gonzalo Fernández de Lara, who had been named count of Arlanza and the Duero around the year 900, a descendant of Nuño Rasura, one of the two judges from Castile, and of Rodrigo, the first of the counts from Castile.

Ferdinand González was a colourful character of legendary status in Iberia and a member of the influential Lara family. In the year 930, Ferdinand's name appears with the title of count inside the administrative organization of eastern the Kingdom of León.

He grew up in the castle of Lara and inherited his father's title after the capture and death of his brother, Nuño Fernández.

In 931, Ferdinand gathered under his control a strong military force composed of troops from the counties of Burgos, Asturias, Santillana, Lantaron, Álava, Castile, and Lara. His military prowess came to prominence in the Battle of Simancas in 939 and then at Sepulveda, where he wrested the region from the Moors and repopulated it. As his power increased, so did his independence from León. During this period he married Sancha, the sister of the king of Navarre, García III. Sancha was a daughter of Sancho I of Pamplona, and Toda of Navarre.

After having fought with Ramiro II of León against the Arabs, and after the Battle of Simancas and the retreat of the Muslims, Ferdinand was dissatisfied because the king of León distributed his troops in the frontier towns and he rose in rebellion against him. He was, however, defeated and made prisoner in 944, which lasted for 3 years until he became reconciled with his sovereign, giving his daughter Urraca in marriage to the king's son, Ordoño, who afterwards became King Ordoño III.

Notwithstanding this alliance, Ferdinand continued to foment trouble and discord in León, aiming to secure his independence. He successively aided Sancho I against his brother Ordoño III, and Ordoño IV, son of Alfonso IV, against Sancho himself.

Upon the death of Ramiro II of Leon in 951, the kingdom of León experienced a dynastic crisis that Ferdinand played out to his advantage.

Initially he supported the demands of Sancho I against his brother Ordoño III, but when he failed, he was forced to recognize Ordoño as king. Ordoño III's early death allowed Ferdinand to recover his maneuvering capacity, although in this occasion he didn't support his old ally, Sancho's, pretenses, but rather allied himself with the son of Alfonso IV, Ordoño IV. Defeated in 960 through Navarrese intervention, he was captured by King García of Navarre, but he recovered his freedom after making various territorial concessions. With the kingdom of León weakened and in disorder, Ferdinand slowly assured his position as legitimate independent count of Castile.

After his death the county was left to his son García Fernández. His remains were buried in the monastery of San Pedro of Arlanza.

His life and feats are recorded in an anonymous poem, The Poem of Fernán González, written between 1250 and 1271 and conserved as an incomplete copy from the fifteenth century.

"The legend of his kidnap as a young child is commemorated in the 13th century "Poema de Fernán González". Conde de Lara 929. He was installed in 932 as FERNANDO González Conde de Castilla y Álava. During his rule, he united the territory of Castile into a single county, incorporating in particular Lantarón in 935, Cerezo and Grañón in 936. Following the humiliating peace imposed on the kingdom of Navarre by Abd al-Rahman III Caliph of Córdoba in 934, the Caliph invaded Castile, sacking Burgos and destroying the monastery of San Pedro de Cardeña before moving into the territory of León. However, Conde Fernando allied himself with Ramiro II King of León and Queen Toda regent of Navarre, their combined forces defeating the Caliph's troops at Alhandega/al-Khandaq, near Simancas in 939. Conde Fernando exploited this victory by recapturing Sepúlveda in 940. In [943/44], he rebelled against King Ramiro II, allied with Diego Múñoz Conde de Saldaña, but was captured and his lands temporarily confiscated. Caliph Abd al-Rahman's troops launched further raids against Galicia and Castile between 953 and 955, but were defeated by Conde Fernando near San Esteban de Gormaz in 955. Conde Fernando became embroiled in the civil war in León, supporting in turn King Sancho I and later his son-in-law King Ordoño IV, but was captured by troops from Navarre at Nájera in 960. After being released by Urraca de Navarra, whom he married, he formed an alliance with Navarre and Barcelona against Caliph Al-Hakam II. The alliance was unsuccessful and Conde Fernando lost San Esteban de Gormaz and Atienza to the Caliph's troops. Although Castile was considerably weakened by Muslim attacks during the last years of his rule, Conde Fernando had been a dynamic leader who established the full autonomy of the county of Castile, and competently defended it against Muslim incursions. His exploits are commemorated in vernacular Castilian romances."

Event: Titled 932 Count of Castile
Event: Titled Count of Burgos and Lara

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]