== Notes for [[Item:Q107743|Q107743]] ==

https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alavides
-/
Hassan al Utrush was am Alid missionary oof the Zaydi Shis sect who re-established Zayidi rûe over the province of Tabarestan in 914 after 14 years of Samanid rule.
--
page 154 Iranian History at a Glance, Reza Shabani. r.880-883 Upon the murder of Mohammad ibn Zeid, the Samanids became the governors of Tabarestan. Upon the death of Amir Ismail (Samanid), Hassan ibn Ali recaptured all of Tabarestan in 301 AH. Finally he made peace with the Samanids and passed away shortly after.
====
Al-Nasir Al-Kabir (230 - 304 AH) or Al-Nasir Haqq or Al-Atrush, is Al-Hassan bin Ali, one of the tribes of Imam Al-Sajjad, peace be upon him, and the third ruler of the Alawites in Tabaristan, and his government was in the third century AH, and he was known among the people for his knowledge, asceticism, and justice. In his history: Residents of Tabaristan have never known a fairer government than his.

In addition to his rule over Tabaristan, he also extended his rule over other regions of northern Iran, including Daylam, and the eastern part of Gilan, and chose a city of Hope as the center of his government, and he protected scholars, and called Sadat to live in Tabaristan, built mosques, and he also had a major role in Islam and the spread of Islam. A large crowd of Tabaristan residents.

He is Abu Muhammad Al-Hassan Bin Ali Bin Al-Hassan Bin Ali Bin Omar Al-Ashraf Bin Imam Ali Bin Al-Hussein Bin Al-Imam Ali Bin Abi Talib, known as Al-Nasser Al-Kabeer Al-Atrush, and He is the grandfather of Al-Murtada and Al-Radhi. [1] He was born in Medina around the year 230 AH. 2] Then he moved to Kufa, and where he was interested in hadith, where he presented his hadiths to the sheikhs of hadith in Kufa and other cities, as well as narrated from its sheikhs. [3]

And he had four children: Muhammad, Ali, Ahmed, and Ja`far, and Muhammad died young, and Ali was a poet, and he had a poem in criticism of Zaydism, and Ahmed was the commander of his father's army, and therefore he was called the owner of the army, and Hassan al-Atrush preferred his cousin Hassan bin al-Qasim - grandson Imam al-Hasan al-'Aliyah.PBUH.

The great Nasser supported Al-Hassan bin Zaid al-Hasani (250-270 AH), the first Alawite ruler in Tabaristan, and Muhammad bin Zaid (270-287 AH) their second ruler there. After the death of Muhammad bin Zaid, he worked to teach Islam in Gilan and Daylam, [13] and continued in Notifying him of 14 years until he established his government in the year 301 AH, on Tabaristan, Daylam, and the eastern suburbs of Gilan, and made Amal city the center of his government, [14] and his government lasted for three years and three months, [15] then he moved to the mercy of God. [16]

Ibn Esfandiar mentioned in his book “The History of Tabaristan” that Al-Nasser left the government at the end of his life, and then many people came to him to learn from him the jurisprudence and hadith. [17]

Al-Nasser supported the scholars, taught the Qur’an, taught jurisprudence, hadith, and the interpretation of the Qur’an, encouraged poets, built mosques, and invited masters to live in Tabaristan, [18] and he had a great role in Islam and the spread of people, [19] so that it was said that 14,000 people embraced Islam. In one day. [20]

https://ar.wikishia.net/view/%D8%A7%D9%84%D9%86%D8%A7%D8%B5%D8%B1_%D8%A7%D9%84%D9%83%D8%A8%D9%8A%D8%B1

---
Zaydī ʿAlid rule in Ṭabarestān was restored in 301/914 by the Hosaynid Ḥasan b. ʿAlī Oṭrūš known as al-Nāṣer le’l-Ḥaqq. Nāṣer, originally from Medina, had come to Ṭabarestān under the reign of Ḥasan b. Zayd and participated in the battle in which Moḥammad b. Zayd was killed. He escaped first to Ray and from there followed an invitation of the Jostanid king of the Daylamites, who promised him support in the reconquest of Ṭabarestān. After two abortive campaigns to Ṭabarestān, Nāṣer undertook successfully to convert the Daylamites north of the mountains and the Gilites east of the Safīd-rūd to Islam. Since his legal doctrine differed in some points from that of Qāsem b. Ebrāhīm, which had been adopted by the Zaydīs in Rūyān and eastern Daylamān, his converts came to form a separate Zaydī community known as the Nāṣerīya. In 301/914 he inflicted a crushing defeat on the Samanid army on the river Būrrūd west of Čālūs and took possession of Ṭabarestān. His reign received high praise from the contemporary Sunnite historian Ṭabarī for its justice. The later Zaydīs universally considered him as one of their Imams in recognition of his outstanding scholarship and exemplary conduct. Some of his numerous works on theology and law are extant. He died in 304/917 and was buried in Āmol. His shrine there became a place of pilgrimage for the Nāṣerīya, who retained a strong attachment to his descendants, all of whom were given the honorific surname Nāṣer.

https://iranicaonline.org/articles/alids-of-tabarestan-daylaman-and-gilan

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000039185899396

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]