== Notes for [[Item:Q87351|Q87351]] ==

=Quintus Servilius Caepio the Younger=

Quintus Servilius Caepio the Younger was a Roman soldier and statesman. He was elected praetor in 91 BC, and fought for Rome during the Marsic Wars of the Italian Rebellion against Rome. His father was Quintus Servilius Caepio the Elder.

Caepio married Livia Drusa, sister of Marcus Livius Drusus the Younger. Livia bore him three children: Servilia Caepionis, the mistress of Julius Caesar, mother of Brutus and mother-in-law of Gaius Cassius Longinus; another daughter, also called Servilia; and a son, Quintus Servilius Caepio. He divorced Livia after a political and personal dispute with Drusus. Livia later married Marcus Porcius Cato Salonianus and gave birth to Marcus Porcius Cato the Younger, Julius Caesar's most adamant and fanatical opponent.

Caepio became an adamant opponent to Drusus and his laws attempting to give full citizenship to the Italians. Pliny said that the dispute between the two started because of a golden ring. Caepio, it was rumored, was even involved in the assassination of Drusus. Later, during the Social War, Caepio was made a Legate in the Roman Army. He was captured and executed by the Italian allies after being tricked into leaving a secure position.

'''Source''': https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quintus_Servilius_Caepio_the_Younger

==Quintus Caepio: Disgraced Roman General at the Battle of Arausio, 105 BCE==
[https://brewminate.com/quintus-caepio-disgraced-roman-general-at-the-battle-of-arausio-105-bce/]

===''Cataclysm 90 BC: The Forgotten War That Almost Destroyed Rome'', by Philip Matyszak===
https://books.google.com/books?id=_QxEBgAAQBAJ&q=Caepio#v=snippet&q=Caepio&f=false

===Battle of Arausio, 6 October 105 BC===
http://www.historyofwar.org/articles/battles_arausio.html

===''Ancient Society Vol. 18'' "The Engagement of Faustus Sulla and Pompeia"===
https://www.jstor.org/stable/44034973

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]