== Notes for [[Item:Q89246|Q89246]] ==

m [OZENDA [Adosinda/Imilo], daughter of --- (-[bur Oviedo]). Confusion exists about King Vermudo´s wife, who is named only in later sources. Flórez cites the epitaph of the monastery of San Juan de Corias which records the transfer of the remains of "Ozenda" with her husband Vermudo from Ciella to Corias, suggesting that "Ozenda" was an abbreviated form of "Adosinda"[149]. Barrau-Dihigo points out that the inscription is from a later date, if not falsified[150]. Lucas de Tuy names "Nunilo Regina Oueti" as wife of King Vermudo I and mother of his two sons "Ramiro et Garsia", when recording that she was buried with her husband[151]. The name “Nunilo...Oueti” suggests confusion with the wife of King Fruela I, who is named in the Sebastiani Chronicon "Munia Oveti" (see above)[152]. The 13th century work by Rodrigo de Toledo names the wife of King Vermudo as "Imilo" when referring to her burial with her husband at Oviedo[153].]

En las crónicas de Rodrigo de Toledo y Lucas de Tuy es llamada Imilo o Nunilo, pero que en su epitafio es nombrada Ozenda (Ursinda)
--------------------
Las crónicas de Rodrigo de Toledo y Lucas de Tuy es llamada Imilo o Nunilo, y que era hija de Flavio Ataúlfo, magnate gallego nieto del rey godo Witiza. Fruto de su unión nacieron cuatro hijos:

- Ramiro I de Asturias (c.790-850). Heredó el trono de Asturias a la muerte del rey Alfonso II el Casto. Fue sepultado en el Panteón de reyes de la Catedral de Oviedo.

- Cristina. Una inscripción colocada en el monasterio de San Juan de Corias, indicaba que fue sepultada allí, junto con sus padres.

- García. Es mencionado en una donación efectuada por su hermano, el rey Ramiro I de Asturias, a la iglesia de Santiago.

- Thisiena

--------------------
En las crónicas de Rodrigo de Toledo y Lucas de Tuy es llamada Imilo o Nunilo, pero que en su epitafio es nombrada Ozenda (Ursinda) <nowiki>--------------------</nowiki> Las crónicas de Rodrigo de Toledo y Lucas de Tuy es llamada Imilo o Nunilo, y que era hija de Flavio Ataúlfo, magnate gallego nieto del rey godo Witiza. Fruto de su unión nacieron cuatro hijos:

SOURCE NOTES:
www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal10922

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]