== Notes for [[Item:Q112025|Q112025]] ==

----

https://genealogics.org/getperson.php?personID=I00631142&tree=LEO

Lists as Urraka, daughter https://www.geni.com/people/Galindo-I-Aznarez-conde-de-Aragon/6000000009275527320

----
===Biography

https://genealogics.org/getperson.php?personID=I00106653&tree=LEO

Sancho was the second son of Garcia I Iñiguez, king of Pamplona, and his wife Uracca. He was likely the _Sancium regem_ named as son-in-law _(generum meum)_ by Galindo I Aznár, conde de Aragón, in 867. He is also probably the Sancho, lord of Pamplona and head of the Basques, who defeated Muzaffar ibn Muza ibn Di al-Nun at some date between 865 and 875 (during his brother's captivity), as reported by the chronicler Ibn Khaldun. Chronicler Al-Udri names Velasquita, wife of Mutarrif ibn Musa ibn Qasi, as daughter of sahib Sancho, although Ibn Hayyan reports her as daughter of Garcia Iñiguez. Sancho's son Aznár Sánchez married a daughter of his uncle king Fortún Garcés and had a son Sancho and two future queens Toda Aznárez, wife of Sancho I Garcés, king of Navarre, and Sancha Aznárez, wife of Sancho's brother, king Jimeno Garcés.

It is not recorded when Sancho died.

----

< [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galindo_Aznárez_I Wikipedia] > Galindo Aznárez I (died 867) was Count of Aragón from 844 to 867.

Galindo Aznárez and an unknown woman had a son, Aznar Galíndez II, his successor. He appears to have had at least one additional child: an 867 charter mentions a son-in-law, "king Sancho", whom several scholars have identified with the younger son of García Íñiguez of Pamplona, Sancho Garcés, father of Aznar Sánchez of Larraun and grandfather of queen Toda of Pamplona.[1][2]

----

http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/NAVARRE.htm#AssonaIniguez

*Íñigo "Arista" & his wife ONECA had four children:
**1. GARCÍA Iñíguez ([810]-killed by Arabs [Lumberri] 882[57], bur Leire Monastery). The Codex de Roda names "Garsea Enneconis et domna Assona…et domna ---" m [firstly] URRACA, daughter of ---. García I & his [first] wife had [four] children:
***b) SANCHO García . The Codex de Roda names "Fortunio Garseanis et Sanzio Garseanis et domna Onneca" as the children of "Garsea Enneconis" and his unnamed wife[68]. m ---. '''The name of Sancho's wife is not known. Sancho García & his wife had [two] children''': …
****i) AZNAR Sánchez de Larraún . The Codex de Roda names "Asnari Sanziones qui et Larron" as son of "Sanzio Garseanis"[69]. m (880) [as her second husband,] his first cousin, ONECA [%C3%8D%C3%B1iga] Fortún de Pamplona, [repudiated wife of ABD ALLAH later ABD ALLAH I Emir of Córdoba], … Aznar Sánchez & his wife had three children: …
**** ii) ['''VELASQUITA''' Sánchez. Al-Udri records that "Mutarrif ibn Musa" married "Faliskita, hija de Sanyo, señor de Pamplona" and that he brought her to Huesca (which suggests that the marriage should be dated to [870/71] when Mutarif took control of Huesca) and had children by her[76]. The date of her marriage is consistent with Velasquita having been the daughter of Sancho, son of García I Iñíguez [King] of Pamplona, but this is not confirmed beyond all doubt by the passage in Al-Udri. m ([871/72]) as his [---] wife, MUTARIF ibn Musa, son of MUSA Ibn Musa & his wife --- (-crucified Córdoba 6 Sep 873).]


----
===References
* https://genealogics.org/getperson.php?personID=I00549526&tree=LEO Cites
** Europäische Stammtafeln, J.A. Stargardt Verlag, Marburg, Schwennicke, Detlev (Ed.). 2:54
* http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/ARAGON%20&%20CATALONIA.htm#GalindoAznardied867B Does not show her
* https://dbe.rah.es/biografias/14064/galindo-i-aznar
* < [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galindo_Aznárez_I Wikipedia] > Galindo Aznárez I (died 867) cites
** Ubieto Arteta, Antonio (1967). ¿Un nuevo rey pamplonés para el siglo IX? Princípe de Viana 28(108/109):289-291 [1]
** Cañada Palacio, Fernando (1988). El círculo nobilario y la «familia regis» en la monarchía pamplonesa hasta el s. XI. Princípe de Viana: Anejo 8:19-25

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]