== Notes for [[Item:Q56492|Q56492]] ==

From Gonzalez direct lines by Mary Anne Curray:

http://www.currays.net/Gonzalez%20Web%20Project/ps05/ps05_416.htm

Esquibel, Jose Antonio, “Tragedy Among Onate’s Colony: A Chronicle of the Sosa Albornoz Family,” Nuestra Raices, Genealogical Society of Hispanic America, Spring 1998, Vol. 10, No. 1.

p. 3:

In 1540, they were residents of Santa Olalla, Spain, when their sons, don Francisco de Sosa Albornoz, a native of Toledo, Spain, and don Esteban de Sosa, came to Nueva Espana. 4 Don Francisco was successful in procuring matrimony with dona Inez de Tapia y Sosa, daughter of the highly esteemed and remarkable conquistador Maese de Campo y Teniente don Andres de Tapia. Don Francisco and dona Inez became the parents of don Alonso de Sosa Albornoz, a native of Mexico City born circa 1550, who eventually joined Onate’s colonizing expedition. 5

----

2. Francisco SOSA ALBORNOZ m. 1560, Ines TAPIA SOSA, (daughter of Andres DE-TAPIA and Isabel DE-SOSA).
* 1. Alonso SOSA ALBORNOZ b. 1549, Xochitla, Mex, Mex, m. (1) abt 1565, Juana RAMIREZ ORTIZ, b. abt 1550, (daughter of Gabriel RAMIREZ and __________ ORTIZ) m. (2) 1585, Beatriz NAVARRO RODRIGUEZ, b. abt 1564, (daughter of Juan NAVARRO and Maria RODRIGUEZ SOSA). Alonso died abt 1601.

http://www.vsalgs.org/stnemgenealogy/alonsoes.html

========================

Francisco de SOSA ALBORNOZ24,2980 was born (date unknown). A native of Toledo, Spain, he was one of the discoverers and conquerors of the new Kingdoms of Nueva Galicia and Nueva Viscaya in the new country of Nueva España. Parents: Esteban de SOSA and Ana de ALBORNOZ.

Spouse: Inez de TAPIA Sosa. Inez de TAPIA Sosa and Francisco de SOSA ALBORNOZ were married about 1560. Children were: Alonso de SOSA ALBORNOZ.

http://www.raullongoria.net/Genealogy/FamilyTree/b214.html#P1723

==================================

20. FRANCISCO7 DE SOSA-GUEVARA-Y-ALBORNOZ (ESTEBAN6 DE SOSA-GUEVARA, JUAN-ALONSO5 DE ESTRADA, ANA4 ESTRADA-DE-LA-CABALLERIA, ALONSO3 DE ESTRADA, FERDINAND II (THE2 CATHOLIC), JOHN II OF1 ARAGON) was born 1530 in Santa Olalla, Spain. He married INES DE TAPIA-Y-SOSA 1548 in Xochitla, Mexico City, D.F., Mexico, daughter of ANDRES DE TAPIA and ISABEL DE SOSA. She was born in Spain, and died in Mexico City, F.D., Mexico.

Notes for FRANCISCO DE SOSA-GUEVARA-Y-ALBORNOZ:
In the book, Mil Familias III, by Rodolfo Gonzalez de la Garza, he is listed as a descendent of the Don Alonso of Estrada, Duke of Aragon. Page 85. Conquistador of Nueva Galicia, Mexico.

Marriage Notes for FRANCISCO DE SOSA-GUEVARA-Y-ALBORNOZ and INES DE TAPIA-Y-SOSA: Marriage source from the book, Mil Familias III by Rodolfo Gonzalez de la Garza. Page 85.

Children of FRANCISCO DE SOSA-GUEVARA-Y-ALBORNOZ and INES DE TAPIA-Y-SOSA are:
* 28. i. CAPTAIN ALONSO8 DE SOSA-ALBORNOZ, b. Abt. 1549, Xochitle, Mexico F.D., Mexico; d. Abt. 1601, Murdered at San Gabriel, New Mexico.
* ii. ANA DE SOSA-ALBORNOZ, d. Bef. 02 Sep 1591, Mexico City, F.D. Mexico?.

http://www.somosprimos.com/inclan/estrada.htm

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]