== Notes for [[Item:Q100703|Q100703]] ==

=Yarhi is another term for 'Lunel'=

(e) The י yod (or יי double yod) is transcribed as g/sh/ch/s/x/j (and vice versa) as is shown by the following examples: gessiva for ישיבה yešiḇa ‘religious school’; shayin for יין yayin ‘wine’; chantou for יום טוב yom ṭoḇ ‘holiday’; Jassé for יוסף yosep̄ ‘Joseph’; '''Sarhy for ירחי yarḥi ‘Lunel’'''. Examples of the reverse are מלייאי malayyʾy for Malachie; רוייט ruyyeṭ for Rouget; and איי ʾyy for Aix. Most likely, this transcription with יי yy does not indicate an actual pronunciation [y].

Bibliography

References

Aslanov, Cyril. 2001. Le provençal des Juifs et l’hébreu en Provence: Le dictionnaire šaršot ha-Kesef de Joseph Caspi. Louvain: Peeters.

Bar-Asher, Moshé. 2006. Les traditions de l’hébreu des communautés juives du Sud-ouest de la France. 2 vols. Jerusalem: Bialik.

Bar Tiqva, Binyamin. 2009. Genres and topics in Provencal and Catalonian piyyut (in Hebrew). Jerusalem: Bialik.

Garbell, Irene. 1954. “The pronunciation of Hebrew in medieval Spain”. Homenaje a Millás-Vallicrosa, vol. 1, 647–696. Barcelona: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas.

Hirschler, Raoul. 1896–1897. “Harcanot et Barcanot ou la mefila de Carpentras au XVIIIʿ siècle”. Annuaire israélite du Midi de la France pour l’année religieuse (du 8 septembre 1896 au 26 septembre 1897), 51–66. Toulouse: the author.

——. 1894–1895. “Petit vocabulaire comprenant à peu près tous lès (sic) mots et expressions judéo-provençales employées (sic) par les israélites dits contadins (sic), avec étymologie”. Calendrier à l’usage des israélites pour l’année religieuse (du 1er octobre 1894 au 18 septembre 1895), 26–32. Toulouse: the author.

Lazar, Moshé. 1963. “Lis Obros: Chansons hébraïco-provençales”. Romanica et occidentalia: Etudes dédiées à la mémoire de Hiram Péri (Pflaum), ed. by Moshé Lazar, 290–345. Jerusalem: Magnes.

Mrejen-O’Hana, Simone. 2009. Le registre d’Élie Crémieux de Carpentras: Ephémérides de la communauté juive de Carpentras (1736–1769). Edition scientifique annotée (in Hebrew). Jerusalem: Bialik.

——. 2006. “Hebrew in Carpentras and the surrounding area. Part 2” (in Hebrew). Massorot 13/14:163–179.

——. 2007. “Hebrew in Carpentras and the Surrounding Area. Part 1” (in Hebrew). Sha’are lashon: Studies in Hebrew, Aramaic, and Jewish languages presented to Moshe Bar-Asher, ed. by Aharon Maman, Steven E. Fassberg, and Yochanan Breuer, vol. 3, 344–367. Jerusalem: Bialik.

——. 2008. “A propos de l’hébreu dans les ‘quatre saintes communautés’ du Comtat Venaissin et d’Avignon: Lexique et grammaire”. Revue des études juives 167:121–152.

——. 2010. “The Hebrew component in the French and Provençal of Jews in the four papal communities” (in Hebrew). Massorot 15:139–154.

Pansier, Pierre. 1925. “Une comédie en argot hébraïco-provençal de la fin du XVIIIʿ siècle”. Revue des études juives 81:113–145.

Schwarzfuchs, Simon. 2003. Le Mémorial de la communauté des Juifs de Carpentras au XVIIIʿ siècle. Leuven: Peeters.

Szajkowski, Zosa. 1948. The language of the Jews in the four communities of Comtat Venaissin (in Yiddish). New York: YIVO.

Toaff, Renzo. 1990. La nazione ebrea a Livorno e a Pisa (1591–1700), Storia dell’ebraismo Italia. Florence: Leo S. Olschki.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD8FCB651EFBBFA9822EF79916C24EF
geni:6000000006275899033

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]