== Notes for [[Item:Q79116|Q79116]] ==

"Required to put aside Helena and to marry Theodora , the daughter of Maximian .4 Upon the retirement of Diocletian and Maximian on 1 May 305 Constantius succeeded to the rank of Augustus. 5"

----

Flavius Valerius Constantius "Chlorus" (c. 250 – 25 July 306), also called Constantius I, was a Roman emperor as one of the four original members of the "Tetrarchy" established by Diocletian in 293. He was a junior-ranking emperor, or Caesar, from 293 to 305, and senior emperor, Augustus, from 305 to 306. Constantius was also father of Constantine the Great, the first Christian emperor of Rome. The nickname Chlorus (Greek: Χλωρός, lit. "the Green") was first popularized by Byzantine-era historians and not used during the emperor's lifetime.

Of humble origin, Constantius had a distinguished military career and rose to the top ranks of the army. Around 289 he set aside Helena, Constantine's mother, to marry a daughter of Emperor Maximian, and in 293 was added to the imperial college by Maximian's colleague, Diocletian. Assigned to rule Gaul, Constantius defeated the usurper Carausius there and his successor Allectus in Britain, and campaigned extensively along the Rhine frontier, defeating the Alamanni and Franks. When the Diocletianic Persecution was announced in 303, Constantius ordered the demolition of churches but did not actively hunt down Christians in his domain. Upon becoming senior emperor in May 305, Constantius launched a successful punitive campaign against the Picts beyond the Antonine Wall. He died suddenly at Eboracum (York) in July the following year.

After Constantius's death, the army, perhaps at his own instigation, immediately acclaimed his son Constantine as emperor. This act contributed to the collapse of the Diocletianic tetrarchy, sparking a series of civil wars which only ended when Constantine finally united the whole Roman Empire under his rule in 324. According to the Oxford Classical Dictionary, "Constantinian propaganda bedevils assessment of Constantius, yet he appears to have been an able general and a generous ruler". His descendants, the Constantinian dynasty, ruled the Empire until the death of his grandson Julian the Apostate in 363.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constantius_Chlorus

-----

http://ancienthistory.about.com/od/emperors/a/imperialdates.htm

Rome was originally the capital of the Roman emperor. Later, it moved to Milan, and then Ravenna (A.D. 402-476). After the fall of Romulus Augustulus, in A.D. 476, Rome continued to have an emperor for almost another millennium, but that Roman emperor ruled from the East.

Julio-Claudians

(31 or) 27 B.C. - 14 A.D. Augustus 14 - 37 Tiberius 37 - 41 Caligula 41 - 54 Claudius 54 - 68 Nero Year of the 4 Emperors

(ends with Vespasian) 68 - 69 Galba 69 Otho 69 Vitellius

Flavian Dynasty

69 - 79 Vespasian 79 - 81 Titus 81 - 96 Domitian 5 Good Emperors

96 - 98 Nerva 98 - 117 Trajan 117 - 138 Hadrian 138 - 161 Antoninus Pius 161 - 180 Marcus Aurelius (161 - 169 Lucius Verus)

(The next cluster of emperors is not part of a specific dynasty or other common grouping, but includes 4 from the year of the 5 emperors, 193.) 177/180 - 192 Commodus 193 Pertinax 193 Didius Julianus 193 - 194 Pescennius Niger 193 - 197 Clodius Albinus

Severans

193 - 211 Septimius Severus 198/212 - 217 Caracalla 217 - 218 Macrinus 218 - 222 Elagabalus 222 - 235 Severus Alexander (More emperors without a dynastic label, although it includes the year of the 6 emperors, 238.) For more on this age of chaos, read Brian Campbell's excellent synopsis in The Romans and Their World.

235 - 238 Maximinus 238 Gordian I and II 238 Balbinus and Pupienus 238 - 244 Gordian III 244 - 249 Philip the Arab 249 - 251 Decius 251 - 253 Gallus 253 - 260 Valerian 254 - 268 Gallienus 268 - 270 Claudius Gothicus 270 - 275 Aurelian 275 - 276 Tacitus 276 - 282 Probus 282 - 285 Carus Carinus Numerian

Tetrarchy

285-ca.310 Diocletian 295 L. Domitius Domitianus 297-298 Aurelius Achilleus 303 Eugenius 285-ca.310 Maximianus Herculius 285 Amandus 285 Aelianus Iulianus 286?-297? British Emperors 286/7-293 Carausius 293-296/7 Allectus

293-306 Constantius I Chlorus Dynasty of Constantine

293-311 Galerius 305-313 Maximinus Daia 305-307 Severus II 306-312 Maxentius 308-309 L. Domitius Alexander 308-324 Licinius 314? Valens 324 Martinianus 306-337 Constantinus I 333/334 Calocaerus 337-340 Constantinus II 337-350 Constans I 337-361 Constantius II 350-353 Magnentius 350 Nepotian 350 Vetranio 355 Silvanus 361-363 Julianus 363-364 Jovianus

(More emperors without a dynastic label) 364-375 Valentinianus I 375 Firmus 364-378 Valens 365-366 Procopius 366 Marcellus 367-383 Gratian 375-392 Valentinianus II 378-395 Theodosius I 383-388 Magnus Maximus 384-388 Flavius Victor 392-394 Eugenius

[See: Table of Eastern and Western Emperors]

395-423 Honorius [Division of the Empire - Honorius' brother Arcadius ruled the East 395-408] 407-411 Constantine III usurper 421 Constantius III 423-425 Johannes 425-455 Valentinian III 455 Petronius Maximus 455-456 Avitus 457-461 Majorian 461-465 Libius Severus 467-472 Anthemius 468 Arvandus 470 Romanus 472 Olybrius 473-474 Glycerius 474-475 Julius Nepos 475-476 Romulus Augustulus

Table of Eastern and Western Emperors

Print Resources Chris Scarre: Chronicle of the Roman Emperors Adkins and Adkins: Handbook to Life in Ancient Rome

Rome and Roman Empire Maps Related Articles

Roman Battles Here's Why These Are the Most Important People in Ancient History How Taxes Led to the Fall of Rome Dates of the Roman Emperors A Timeline of the 5 Eras of Ancient Roman History Age at Accession of the Roman Emperors Our Expert Recommends

Emperors Age At Accession Roman Emperors Names and Dates from Diocletian to A.D. 476. Second Century Timeline of the Roman Emperors Roman Emperors Timeline of the Third Century Roman Emperors Timeline of the 4th Century DIR An Online Encyclopedia of Roman Emperors Fifth Century Roman Timeline Byzantine Emperors Other Third Century Chaos Emperors

'''Constantius Chlorus (Gaius Flavius Valerius Constantius Chlorus)'''. The ''Historia Augusta'' says Constantius Chlorus was the son of Eutropius, a noble from northern Dardania in modern Kosovo, and Claudia, a niece of the emperors Claudius II and Quintillus. Historians, however, suspect this maternal connection to be a genealogical fabrication created by his son Constantine I, thus connecting his family to two rather highly regarded predecessors. His father, however, might have been the brother of Eutropia, wife of Maximian.

He claimed descent from the Greco-Roman god Apollon (Apollo). His original social standing is unclear, but he was an army officer by the time his son Constantine was born in 272/273. By 284 he was Governor of Dalmatia. Early in his career he contracted some form of marriage with Helena, but by 289 had divorced her and married Theodora, step-daughter of Maximian. On 1 March 293 he entered the imperial collegium as a Caesar, with responsibility for Gaul, Spain and Britain. Because Britain was held by Carausius, formerly commander of the Roman Channel fleet, Constantius began preparations for an invasion. Carausius died in 293 or 294, Constantius landed in Kent in 296, and re-took Britain. In 304 he held a triumphal procession at Rome, the last such celebration in the empire. In 305 the Emperors Diocletian and Maximian retired, and Constantius and Galerius became joint Emperors, with Constantius as the senior of the two. Galerius named two new Caesars and hoped to get the entire empire when Constantius died at York the following year, but within 18 months Constantius' son Constantine was elevated. According to a highly suspect local tradition, the church of Saint Helen's-on-the-Walls at York was built on the site of his tomb.

He is often called Constantius "Chlorus" from the pallor of his complexion. However, some contemporary sources refer to the rubor of his complexion. Therefore, the epithet "Chlorus" must be either a contemporary jest or a late tradition.

--------------------

NameConstantius Flavius Valerius Emperor of Rome Birth31 Mar 242, Britian Death25 Jul 306, Eboracum (York), Britain FatherEutropius MotherClaudia Crispina Misc. Notes Constantius I Chlorus (305-306 A.D.)

Michael DiMaio, Jr. Salve Regina University

Constantius' Early Life and Marriage

Born March 31st, Emperor Flavius Valerius Constantius may have come into the world ca. 250. His family was from Illyricum. In the army he served as a protector ,tribunus , and a praeses Dalmatiarum . During the 270s or the 280s, he became the father of Constantine by Helena , his first spouse. By 288 he was the Praetorian Prefect of the western emperor Maximianus Herculius. 1

Constantius' Reign as Caesar

On 1 March 293 Diocletian appointed Galerius as his Caesar (junior emperor) in the east and Constantius as the Caesar of Maximianus Herculius. Caesar in the west. Both Caesars had the right of succession. In order to strengthen the dynastic relationship between himself and Herculius. , Constantius put aside his wife Helena and married Theodora , the daughter, or perhaps stepdaughter, of Maximianus Herculius. . The union was fruitful and of it there were six issue: Flavius Dalmatius ,Julius Constantius ,Hannibalianus ,Constantia ,Anastasia , and Eutropia . To strengthen his bond with Galerius and Diocletian in the east, Constantius allowed Galerius to keep his son Constantine as a hostage for his good behavior. 2

In the remainder of the time that he was a Caesar , Constantius spent much of his time engaged in military actions in the west. In the summer of 293 Constantius expelled the troops of the usurper Carausius from northern Gaul; after Constantius' attack on Bononia (Boulogne), Carausius was murdered. At the same time he dealt with the unrest of the Germans. In 296 he invaded Britain and put down the revolt of the usurper Allectus . Between 300 and 305 A.D. the Caesar campaigned successfully several times with various German tribes. 3 It is worth noting in passing, that while his colleagues rigidly enforced the "Great Persecution in 303," Constantius limited his action to knocking down a few churches. 4

Constantius as Augustus and His Untimely Death

On 1 May 305 Diocletian , at Nicomedia, and Maximianus Herculius , at Mediolanum (Milan), divested themselves of the purple, probably because of the almost fatal illness that Diocletian contracted toward the end of 304. Diocletian forced Maximianus to abdicate. They appointed as their successors Constantius and Galerius , with Severus and Maximinus Daia as the new Caesars. The retired emperors then returned to private life. Constantius, as had his predecessor, ruled in the west, while Galerius and Daia ruled in the east. 5 Almost as soon as he was appointed Augustus, he crossed to Britain to face incursions by the Picts where he died at York on 25 July 306 with his son at his side. 6

Bibliography

Barnes, T.D . Constantine and Eusebius, , Cambridge, 1980.

________. New Empire of Diocletian and Constantine . Cambridge, 1981.

DiMaio, Michael. Zonaras' Account of the Neo-Flavian Emperors , (Ph.D. diss., University of Missouri-Columbia, 1977).

Jones, A.H.M. J.R. Martindale, and J. Morris. "Fl. Val. Constantius 12." the Prosopography of the Later Roman Empire , (Cambridge, 1971), 1.227-228.

Kienast, Dietmar. Römische Kaisertabelle: Grundzüge einer römischen Kaiserchronologie . Darmstadt, 1990.

MacMullen, R. Constantine , New York, 1969.

Mattingly, Harold, and B.H. Warmington ."Constantius (Chlorus)." OCD .2281-282.

Seeck, Otto. "Constantius 1." RE 4, col.1040ff.

Notes 1Constantius' full name: ILS , 630, 641-3, 648, 650-52; such variations as Marcus Flavius Valerius Constantius( ibid , 637), Valerius Constantius ( ibid. , 640), Gaius Valerius Constantius ( ibid , 649), and Gaius Fabius Constantius ( ibid. , 650a) appear on inscriptions.

Constantius' date of birth, homeland, and career: Michael DiMaio, Zonaras' Account of the Neo-Flavian Emperors: A Commentary , (Ph.D diss., University of Missouri-Columbia, 1977), 97-98, nn 11-14; Constantius as Maxiamianus' Praetorian prefect: T.D. Barnes, Constantine and Eusebius, , (Cambridge, 1980), 3, 7-8, New Empire of Diocletian and Constantine , (Cambridge, 1981), 36-37.

For a discussion of Constantius' marriage to Helen, see infra , n.2.

2For a listing of the sources on the dating Constantius rise to the rank of Caesar, see A.H.M. Jones, J.R. Martindale, and J. Morris, the Prosopography of the Later Roman Empire , (Cambridge, 1971), s.v. "Fl. Val. Constantius 12," 1.227-228, and Dietmar Kienast, Römische Kaisertabelle , (Darmstadt, 1990), 276ff

The Caesarship of Constantius is discussed, for example, by O. Seeck, RE 4, s.v. "Constantius 1," col.1041.57ff, and Ramsey MacMullen, Constantine , (New York, 1969), 35ff.

Barnes has summarized the problems and the sources surrounding the marriages of Constantius to Helen and to Theodora ( New Empire ), 33, 36-37.

3Constantius' campaigns are discussed by Barnes, Constantine and Eusebius , 15ff, and by Harold Mattingly and B.H. Warmington, OCD ,2s.v ."Constantius (Chlorus)," 281-282.

4Lact., Mort. Pers. , 15.7

5For a listing of sources which treat the acclamation of Constantius to the rank of Augustus, see Barnes, New Empire , 4ff.

6For a discussion of the death of Constantius and the sources that treat it, see DiMaio, 96ff.

Copyright (C) 1996, Michael DiMaio, Jr. This file may be copied on the condition that the entire contents, including the header and this copyright notice, remain intact. Spouses

1St. Helena (Elaine) of Colchester Birth248, Drepanum, Bithynia , Britain Death328, Constantinople, Turkey FatherCoilus King of Colchester (Camulod) (<125-170) MotherStrada "the Fair" ChildrenConstantine the Great (272-337)
Constantina 2Theorda

--------------------

CONSTANTIUS I Chlorus Emperor of the West Born : 242 Died : 25 Jul 306 Eboracum (present-day York) Marriage - Helena Britannica ferch Princess of Britain Children 27 Feb 272 - Constantine I the Great Emperor of Rome Marriage - Theodora Empress of the West Children - - Constantia Princess of the West  - - Julius Constantinus Prince of the West - - Flavius Dalmatius Prince of the West Forrás / Source: http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per02549.htm#0
------------------------------
Constantius Chlorus From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search Reign 293 – 305 (as Caesar with Maximian); 305 – 306 (as Augustus in the west, with Galerius as Augustus in the east) Full name Marcus Flavius Valerius Constantius Born 31 March c. 250 Birthplace Dardania (Serbia) Died 25 July 306 Place of death Eboracum, Britannia Predecessor Maximian (with Diocletian in the East) Successor Flavius Valerius Severus (with Galerius in the East) Wives Helena (?–293) Theodora (293–306) Offspring Constantine the Great Flavius Dalmatius Julius Constantius Flavia Julia Constantia Eutropia Anastasia Dynasty Constantinian Father Eutropius Mother Claudia Flavius Valerius Constantius[1] (March 31 c. 250 – July 25, 306), also Constantius I, was an emperor of the Western Roman Empire (305–306). He was commonly called Chlorus (the Pale)[2] an epithet given to him by Byzantine historians. He was the father of Constantine the Great and initiator of the Constantinian dynasty.

Contents [hide] 1 History 2 Legend 2.1 Christian legends 2.2 British legends 3 Notes 4 External links

[edit] History The Historia Augusta says Constantius was the son of Eutropius, a noble from northern Dardania in modern Kosovo, and Claudia, a niece of the emperors Claudius II and Quintillus.[3] Historians, however, suspect this maternal connection to be a genealogical fabrication created by his son Constantine I, thus connecting his family to two rather highly regarded predecessors. His father, however, might have been the brother of Eutropia, wife of Maximian.

Under the emperor Carus, he was governor of Dalmatia, and Carus is said to have considered adopting him as his heir in place of his dissolute son, Carinus.[4]

In 293 the emperor Diocletian created the Tetrarchy, dividing the Roman Empire into Western and Eastern portions. Each would be ruled by an Augustus, supported by a Caesar. Diocletian became Augustus of the Eastern empire, with Galerius as his Caesar. Constantius was appointed Caesar to the Western Augustus, Maximian, and married Theodora, Maximian's stepdaughter. They had six children. Constantius divorced his first wife (or concubine), Helena, by whom he already had a son, Constantine. Helena was probably from Nicomedia in Asia Minor.[5] He was given command of Gaul, Britain and possibly Hispania. In 293, Constantius defeated the forces of Carausius, who had declared himself emperor in Britain and northern Gaul in 286, near Bononia. Carausius was killed by his rationalis Allectus, who took command of Britain until 296, when Constantius sent Asclepiodotus, a prefect of the Praetorian Guard, to invade the island. Allectus was defeated and killed, and Roman rule in Britain restored.[6]

Also in 296, Constantius fought a battle against the Alamanni at the city of Lingonae (Langres) in Gaul. He was shut up in the city, but was relieved by his army after six hours, and defeated the enemy.[7] He defeated them again at Vindonissa (Windisch, Switzerland),[8] thereby strengthening the defenses of the Rhine frontier.

Medal of Constantius I capturing Londinium (inscribed as LON) after defeating Allectus. Beaurains hoard.Diocletian and Maximian stepped down as co-emperors in 305, possibly due to Diocletian's poor health, and the Caesars, Constantius and Galerius, became co-emperors. Constantius ruled the western empire, Galerius the eastern. Severus and Maximinus Daia were appointed Caesars. Constantine, who had hoped to be a Caesar, joined his father's campaigns in Gaul and Britain.[9] Constantius died in Britain, at York, in 306, and Constantine was declared emperor by the army.[10]

Forrás / Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constantius_Chlorus
--------------------
Roman emperor and father of Constantine I. A member of the tetrarchy (four-man ruling body) with his adoptive father Maximian, Diocletian, and Galerius, he was made caesar (subemperor) in the West (293-305) and later caesar augustus (senior emperor) (305-6). As ruler of Gaul, he subdued rebellion in Britain (296), ended piracy, restored the frontier, and largely ignored edicts against Christians.
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constantius_Chlorus
--------------------
`Chlorus' means `Pale' (`den Bleke')

Reference: http://fabpedigree.com/s040/f000008.htm

--------------------
Anmärkning: Flavius Valerius Constantius I " Chlorus " i Rom alias Aurelius Valerius Constantius ( I), kejsare av romerska riket , " Chlorus " medel "
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constantius_Chlorus
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constantius_Chlorus
--------------------
Constantius I Chlorus (305-306 A.D.)

Michael DiMaio, Jr.

Salve Regina University

Constantius' Early Life and Marriage

Born March 31st, Emperor Flavius Valerius Constantius may have come into the world ca. 250. His family was from Illyricum. In the army he served as a protector ,tribunus , and a praeses Dalmatiarum . During the 270s or the 280s, he became the father of Constantine by Helena , his first spouse. By 288 he was the Praetorian Prefect of the western emperor Maximianus Herculius. 1

Constantius' Reign as Caesar

On 1 March 293 Diocletian appointed Galerius as his Caesar (junior emperor) in the east and Constantius as the Caesar of Maximianus Herculius. Caesar in the west. Both Caesars had the right of succession. In order to strengthen the dynastic relationship between himself and Herculius. , Constantius put aside his wife Helena and married Theodora , the daughter, or perhaps stepdaughter, of Maximianus Herculius. . The union was fruitful and of it there were six issue: Flavius Dalmatius ,Julius Constantius ,Hannibalianus ,Constantia ,Anastasia , and Eutropia . To strengthen his bond with Galerius and Diocletian in the east, Constantius allowed Galerius to keep his son Constantine as a hostage for his good behavior. 2

In the remainder of the time that he was a Caesar , Constantius spent much of his time engaged in military actions in the west. In the summer of 293 Constantius expelled the troops of the usurper Carausius from northern Gaul; after Constantius' attack on Bononia (Boulogne), Carausius was murdered. At the same time he dealt with the unrest of the Germans. In 296 he invaded Britain and put down the revolt of the usurper Allectus . Between 300 and 305 A.D. the Caesar campaigned successfully several times with various German tribes. 3 It is worth noting in passing, that while his colleagues rigidly enforced the "Great Persecution in 303," Constantius limited his action to knocking down a few churches. 4

Constantius as Augustus and His Untimely Death

On 1 May 305 Diocletian , at Nicomedia, and Maximianus Herculius , at Mediolanum (Milan), divested themselves of the purple, probably because of the almost fatal illness that Diocletian contracted toward the end of 304. Diocletian forced Maximianus to abdicate. They appointed as their successors Constantius and Galerius , with Severus and Maximinus Daia as the new Caesars. The retired emperors then returned to private life. Constantius, as had his predecessor, ruled in the west, while Galerius and Daia ruled in the east. 5 Almost as soon as he was appointed Augustus, he crossed to Britain to face incursions by the Picts where he died at York on 25 July 306 with his son at his side. 6

Bibliography

Barnes, T.D . Constantine and Eusebius, , Cambridge, 1980.

________. New Empire of Diocletian and Constantine . Cambridge, 1981.

DiMaio, Michael. Zonaras' Account of the Neo-Flavian Emperors , (Ph.D. diss., University of Missouri-Columbia, 1977).

Jones, A.H.M. J.R. Martindale, and J. Morris. "Fl. Val. Constantius 12." the Prosopography of the Later Roman Empire , (Cambridge, 1971), 1.227-228.

Kienast, Dietmar. Römische Kaisertabelle: Grundzüge einer römischen Kaiserchronologie . Darmstadt, 1990.

MacMullen, R. Constantine , New York, 1969.

Mattingly, Harold, and B.H. Warmington ."Constantius (Chlorus)." OCD .2281-282.

Seeck, Otto. "Constantius 1." RE 4, col.1040ff.

Notes

1Constantius' full name: ILS , 630, 641-3, 648, 650-52; such variations as Marcus Flavius Valerius Constantius( ibid , 637), Valerius Constantius ( ibid. , 640), Gaius Valerius Constantius ( ibid , 649), and Gaius Fabius Constantius ( ibid. , 650a) appear on inscriptions.

Constantius' date of birth, homeland, and career: Michael DiMaio, Zonaras' Account of the Neo-Flavian Emperors: A Commentary , (Ph.D diss., University of Missouri-Columbia, 1977), 97-98, nn 11-14; Constantius as Maxiamianus' Praetorian prefect: T.D. Barnes, Constantine and Eusebius, , (Cambridge, 1980), 3, 7-8, New Empire of Diocletian and Constantine , (Cambridge, 1981), 36-37.

For a discussion of Constantius' marriage to Helen, see infra , n.2.

2For a listing of the sources on the dating Constantius rise to the rank of Caesar, see A.H.M. Jones, J.R. Martindale, and J. Morris, the Prosopography of the Later Roman Empire , (Cambridge, 1971), s.v. "Fl. Val. Constantius 12," 1.227-228, and Dietmar Kienast, Römische Kaisertabelle , (Darmstadt, 1990), 276ff

The Caesarship of Constantius is discussed, for example, by O. Seeck, RE 4, s.v. "Constantius 1," col.1041.57ff, and Ramsey MacMullen, Constantine , (New York, 1969), 35ff.

Barnes has summarized the problems and the sources surrounding the marriages of Constantius to Helen and to Theodora ( New Empire ), 33, 36-37.

3Constantius' campaigns are discussed by Barnes, Constantine and Eusebius , 15ff, and by Harold Mattingly and B.H. Warmington, OCD ,2s.v ."Constantius (Chlorus)," 281-282.

4Lact., Mort. Pers. , 15.7

5For a listing of sources which treat the acclamation of Constantius to the rank of Augustus, see Barnes, New Empire , 4ff.

6For a discussion of the death of Constantius and the sources that treat it, see DiMaio, 96ff.

Copyright (C) 1996, Michael DiMaio, Jr. This file may be copied on the condition that the entire contents, including the header and this copyright notice, remain intact.
--------------------
His full name is Flavius Valerius Constantius, called Constantius Chlorus. He was a general and administrator under Emperor Maximian, who adopted him and gave him the government of Gaul and the rank of caesar in 293. When his coemperors, Maximian and Diocletian, abdicated in 305, Constantius became emperor in the West and prepared to conquer the Picts of Scotland. He died during the campaign, after proclaiming his son Constantine his successor as emperor.
--------------------
He died as a war casualty at the age of 64 on July 25th, 0306 in Eboracum, Yorkshire, England.
--------------------
The Historia Augusta says Constantius was the son of Eutropius, a noble from northern Dardania in modern Serbia, and Claudia, a niece of the emperors Claudius II and Quintillus.[3] Historians, however, suspect this maternal connection to be a genealogical fabrication created by his grandson Constantine II, thus connecting his family to two rather highly regarded predecessors. Under the emperor Carus, he was governor of Dalmatia, and Carus is said to have considered adopting him as his heir in place of his dissolute son, Carinus.[4]

In 293 the emperor Diocletian created the Tetrarchy, dividing the Roman Empire into Western and Eastern portions. Each would be ruled by an Augustus, supported by a Caesar. Diocletian became Augustus of the Eastern empire, with Galerius as his Caesar. Constantius was appointed Caesar to the Western Augustus, Maximian, and married Theodora, Maximian's stepdaughter. They had six children. Constantius divorced his first wife (or concubine), Helena, by whom he already had a son, Constantine. Helena was probably from Nicomedia in Asia Minor.[5] He was given command of Gaul, Britain and possibly Hispania.

In 293, Constantius defeated the forces of Carausius, who had declared himself emperor in Britain and northern Gaul in 286, near Bononia. Carausius was killed by his rationalis Allectus, who took command of Britain until 296, when Constantius sent Asclepiodotus, a prefect of the Praetorian Guard, to invade the island. Allectus was defeated and killed, and Roman rule in Britain restored.[6]

Also in 296, Constantius fought a battle against the Alamanni at the city of Lingonae (Langes) in Gaul. He was shut up in the city, but was relieved by his army after six hours, and defeated the enemy.[7] He defeated them again at Vindonissa (Windisch, Switzerland),[8] thereby strengthening the defenses of the Rhine frontier.

Diocletian and Maximian stepped down as co-emperors in 305, due to Diocletian's poor health, and the Caesars, Constantius and Galerius, became co-emperors. Constantius ruled the western empire, Galerius the eastern. Severus and Maximinus were appointed Caesars. Constantine, who had hoped to be a Caesar, joined his father's campaigns in Gaul and Britain.[9] Constantius died in Britain, at York, in 306, and Constantine was declared emperor by the army.[10]

As the father of Constantine, a number of Christian legends have grown up around Constantius. Eusebius's Life of Constantine claims that Constantius was himself a Christian, although he pretended to be a pagan, and while Caesar under Diocletian, took no part in the emperor's persecutions.[11] His first wife, Helena, is the subject of many legends, including the finding of the True Cross.

Constantius's activities in Britain were remembered in medieval British legend. In Geoffrey of Monmouth's History of the Kings of Britain (1136), he is sent to Britain by the Senate after Asclepiodotus, here a British king, is overthrown by Coel of Colchester. Coel submits to Constantius and agrees to pay tribute to Rome, but dies only eight days later. Constantius marries Coel's daughter Helena and becomes king of Britain. He and Helena have a son, Constantine, who succeeds to the throne of Britain when his father dies at York eleven years later.[12] The identification of Helena as British had previously been made by Henry of Huntingdon,[13] but has no historical validity: Constantius had divorced Helena before he went to Britain.

--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constantius_Chlorus
--------------------
•ID: I122463

•Name: CONSTANTIUS I (NOTES) EMPEROR (L) ROMAN EMPIRE

•Sex: M

•ALIA: CONSTANTIUS I (NOTES) EMPEROR (L) /ROME/

•Name: AKA CONSTANTIUS (NOTES) (L) CHLORUS

•Name: AKA CONSTANTIUS (NOTES) (L) CHLORUS

•Birth: BET 230 AND 31 MAR 250 1 2

•Death: BET 25 JUL AND 3 OCT 306 1 2

•Event: 1 AKA CONSTANTIUS I (NOTES) EMPEROR (L) DE ROME

•Event: 2 AKA (NOTES) 1ST EMPEROR OF ROME (L) CONSTANTIUS

•Event: 3 AKA CONSTANTIUS I (NOTES) CHLORUS EMPEROR (L) ROMAN EMPIRE

•Event: 4 AKA CONSTANTIUS I (NOTES) "FLAVIUS VALERIUS" (L) ROME

•Event: 5 AKA GAIUS (NOTES) FLAVIUS VALERIUS (L) CONSTANTIUS

•Event: 6 AKA FLAVIUS (NOTES) VALERIUS CONSTANTIUS I (L) ROMAN EMPEROR

•Event: 8 AKA FLAVIUS (NOTES) AURELIUS VALERIUS (L) CONSTANTIUS

•Event: .1. AKA FLAVIUS (NOTES) VALERIUS I CLOVIS (L) CONSTANTANUS

•Note:

SOME SOURCES SAY GAIUS'S PARENTS WERE EUTROPIUS (NOTES) OR FLAVIUS (L) DE ROME AND CLAUDIA CRISPINA (L) ILLYRIA

OTHER POSSIBLE PARENTS ARE SHOWN BELOW BUT THIS INDIVIDUAL IS NOT SHOWN AS A CHILD ON THE FOLLOWING POSSIBLE PARENTS' FAMILY PAGES, TO DO SO WOULD BE CONSIDERED ERRORS BY THIS PROGRAM. EVEN THOUGH THESE LAST POSSIBLE PARENTS MAY BE THE CORRECT ONES, SHOWING MORE THAN ONE SET OF PARENTS COULD CAUSE MY "FAMILY TREE" PROGRAM TO MALFUNCTION.

OTHER SOURCES SAY HIS FATHER WAS EUTROPIUS (NOTES) OF (L) DARDANIA ANOTHER OF HIS MOTHER CLAUDIA'S HUSBANDS.

STILL OTHER SOURCES SAY HIS PARENTS WERE COLIUS II (NOTES) "OLD KING COLE" (L) COLCHESTER AND STRADA YSTRADWEL (NOTES) VERCH (L) CADFAN AND HIS SISTER WAS THEN HELENA "SAINT" (NOTE)OF THE CROSS (L) COLCHESTERWHILE STILL OTHER SOURCES SAY HIS WIFE WAS (HIS SISTER?) THE SAME.HELENA "SAINT" (NOTE)OF THE CROSS (L) COLCHESTER.

I SHOW HELENA AS HIS WIFE NOT AS HIS SISTER HERE.

Father: EUTROPIUS (NOTES) OR FLAVIUS (L) DE ROME b: BET 200 AND 240

Mother: CLAUDIA (NOTES) CRISPINA (L) ILLYRIA b: BET 192 AND 230

Marriage 1 HELENA "SAINT"(NOTE) OF THE CROSS (L) COLCHESTER b: BET 248 AND 273 in Colchester, Britain or Drepanum, Bithynia, Asia Minor

Children

1. CONSTANTINE I (NOTES) 2ND EMP (L) ROMAN EMPIRE b: BET 17 FEB 265 AND 27 FEB 288

2. (NOTES) (L) CONSTANTINA b: BET 270 AND 280

Marriage 2 THEODORA (NOTES) PRINCESS OF (L) ROME b: BET 265 AND 272

Children

1. CONSTANTINA OF ROME OR (L) CONSTANIA b: BET 270 AND 280

2. JULIUS "CONSTANTIUS" CONSUL OF (L) ROME b: ABT 290

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=pusch&id=I122463
--------------------
His ancestry is found elsewhere in this chart...

Gaius was born on March 31st, 0250 in Eboracum, York, England.1 Gaius' father was Flavius Eutropius of the Gordiani and his mother was Claudia Crispina Illyria. His paternal grandparents were Titus Flavius and Gordiana Balba; his maternal grandparents were Marcus Aurelius Commodus Antonius of Rome and Bruttia Crispin.

He died at the age of 56 on October 3rd, 0306 in Eboracum, York, England
--------------------
Wikipedia:

Flavius Valerius Constantius (March 31 c. 250 – July 25, 306), also Constantius I, was an emperor of the Western Roman Empire (305–306). He was commonly called Chlorus (the Pale) an epithet given to him by Byzantine historians. He was the father of Constantine the Great and initiator of the Constantinian dynasty.

History

The Historia Augusta says Constantius was the son of Eutropius, a noble from northern Dardania in modern Serbia, and Claudia, a niece of the emperors Claudius II and Quintillus. Historians, however, suspect this maternal connection to be a genealogical fabrication created by his son Constantine I, thus connecting his family to two rather highly regarded predecessors. His father, however, might have been the brother of Eutropia, wife of Maximian.

Under the emperor Carus, he was governor of Dalmatia, and Carus is said to have considered adopting him as his heir in place of his dissolute son, Carinus.

In 293 the emperor Diocletian created the Tetrarchy, dividing the Roman Empire into Western and Eastern portions. Each would be ruled by an Augustus, supported by a Caesar. Diocletian became Augustus of the Eastern empire, with Galerius as his Caesar. Constantius was appointed Caesar to the Western Augustus, Maximian, and married Theodora, Maximian's stepdaughter. They had six children. Constantius divorced his first wife (or concubine), Helena, by whom he already had a son, Constantine. Helena was probably from Nicomedia in Asia Minor. He was given command of Gaul, Britain and possibly Hispania.

n 293, Constantius defeated the forces of Carausius, who had declared himself emperor in Britain and northern Gaul in 286, near Bononia. Carausius was killed by his rationalis Allectus, who took command of Britain until 296, when Constantius sent Asclepiodotus, a prefect of the Praetorian Guard, to invade the island. Allectus was defeated and killed, and Roman rule in Britain restored.

Also in 296, Constantius fought a battle against the Alamanni at the city of Lingonae (Langres) in Gaul. He was shut up in the city, but was relieved by his army after six hours, and defeated the enemy. He defeated them again at Vindonissa (Windisch, Switzerland), thereby strengthening the defenses of the Rhine frontier.

Medal of Constantius I capturing Londinium (inscribed as LON) after defeating Allectus. Beaurains hoard.

Diocletian and Maximian stepped down as co-emperors in 305, possibly due to Diocletian's poor health, and the Caesars, Constantius and Galerius, became co-emperors. Constantius ruled the western empire, Galerius the eastern. Severus and Maximinus Daia were appointed Caesars. Constantine, who had hoped to be a Caesar, joined his father's campaigns in Gaul and Britain. Constantius died in Britain, at York, in 306, and Constantine was declared emperor by the army.

Legend

Christian legends

As the father of Constantine, a number of Christian legends have grown up around Constantius. Eusebius's Life of Constantine claims that Constantius was himself a Christian, although he pretended to be a pagan, and while Caesar under Diocletian, took no part in the emperor's persecutions. His first wife, Helena, is the subject of many legends, including the finding of the True Cross.

British legends

Constantius's activities in Britain were remembered in medieval British legend. In Geoffrey of Monmouth's History of the Kings of Britain (1136), he is sent to Britain by the Senate after Asclepiodotus, here a British king, is overthrown by Coel of Colchester. Coel submits to Constantius and agrees to pay tribute to Rome, but dies only eight days later. Constantius marries Coel's daughter Helena and becomes king of Britain. He and Helena have a son, Constantine, who succeeds to the throne of Britain when his father dies at York eleven years later. The identification of Helena as British had previously been made by Henry of Huntingdon, but has no historical validity: Constantius had divorced Helena before he went to Britain.
--------------------
Reference: http://familytrees.genopro.com/318186/jarleslekt/default.htm?page=toc_families.htm
--------------------
Occupation: Emperor of Rome
--------------------
Occupation: Emperor of Rome
--------------------
Flavius Valerius Constantius[1] (March 31 c. 250 – July 25, 306), also Constantius I, was an emperor of the Western Roman Empire (305–306). He was commonly called Chlorus (the Pale)[2] an epithet given to him by Byzantine historians. He was the father of Constantine the Great and initiator of the Constantinian dynasty.

he Historia Augusta says Constantius was the son of Eutropius, a noble from northern Dardania in modern Kosovo, and Claudia, a niece of the emperors Claudius II and Quintillus.[3] Historians, however, suspect this maternal connection to be a genealogical fabrication created by his son Constantine I, thus connecting his family to two rather highly regarded predecessors. His father, however, might have been the brother of Eutropia, wife of Maximian.

Under the emperor Carus, he was governor of Dalmatia, and Carus is said to have considered adopting him as his heir in place of his dissolute son, Carinus.[4]

In 293 the emperor Diocletian created the Tetrarchy, dividing the Roman Empire into Western and Eastern portions. Each would be ruled by an Augustus, supported by a Caesar. Diocletian became Augustus of the Eastern empire, with Galerius as his Caesar. Constantius was appointed Caesar to the Western Augustus, Maximian, and married Theodora, Maximian's stepdaughter. They had six children. Constantius divorced his first wife (or concubine), Helena, by whom he already had a son, Constantine. Helena was probably from Nicomedia in Asia Minor.[5] He was given command of Gaul, Britain and possibly Hispania.

In 293, Constantius defeated the forces of Carausius, who had declared himself emperor in Britain and northern Gaul in 286, near Bononia. Carausius was killed by his rationalis Allectus, who took command of Britain until 296, when Constantius sent Asclepiodotus, a prefect of the Praetorian Guard, to invade the island. Allectus was defeated and killed, and Roman rule in Britain restored.[6]

Also in 296, Constantius fought a battle against the Alamanni at the city of Lingonae (Langres) in Gaul. He was shut up in the city, but was relieved by his army after six hours, and defeated the enemy.[7] He defeated them again at Vindonissa (Windisch, Switzerland),[8] thereby strengthening the defenses of the Rhine frontier.

Medal of Constantius I capturing Londinium (inscribed as LON) after defeating Allectus. Beaurains hoard.

Diocletian and Maximian stepped down as co-emperors in 305, possibly due to Diocletian's poor health, and the Caesars, Constantius and Galerius, became co-emperors. Constantius ruled the western empire, Galerius the eastern. Severus and Maximinus Daia were appointed Caesars. Constantine, who had hoped to be a Caesar, joined his father's campaigns in Gaul and Britain.[9] Constantius died in Britain, at Eboracum (York), in 306, and Constantine was declared emperor by the army.[10]

[edit] Legend

[edit] Christian legends

As the father of Constantine, a number of Christian legends have grown up around Constantius. Eusebius's Life of Constantine claims that Constantius was himself a Christian, although he pretended to be a pagan, and while Caesar under Diocletian, took no part in the emperor's persecutions.[11] His first wife, Helena, found the True Cross.

[edit] British legends

Constantius's activities in Britain were remembered in medieval British legend. In Geoffrey of Monmouth's History of the Kings of Britain (1136), he is sent to Britain by the Senate after Asclepiodotus, here a British king, is overthrown by Coel of Colchester. Coel submits to Constantius and agrees to pay tribute to Rome, but dies only eight days later. Constantius marries Coel's daughter Helena and becomes king of Britain. He and Helena have a son, Constantine, who succeeds to the throne of Britain when his father dies at York eleven years later.[12] The identification of Helena as British had previously been made by Henry of Huntingdon,[13] but has no historical validity: Constantius had divorced Helena before he went to Britain.
--------------------
Gaius was born on March 31st, 0250 in Eboracum, York, England.1 Gaius' father was Flavius Eutropius of the Gordiani and his mother was Claudia Crispina Illyria. His paternal grandparents were Titus Flavius and Gordiana Balba; his maternal grandparents were Marcus Aurelius Commodus Antonius of Rome and Bruttia Crispin. He was an only child. He died at the age of 56 on October 3rd, (or July 25th) 0306 in Eboracum, York, England.1
--------------------
Caesar Flavius Valerius Aurelius Constantinus Augustus (27 February c. 272[2] – 22 May 337), commonly known in English as Constantine I, Constantine the Great, or (among Eastern Orthodox, Coptic Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox and Byzantine Catholic Christians) Saint Constantine (pronounced /ˈkɒnstɛntaɪn/), was Roman emperor from 306, and the undisputed holder of that office from 324 until his death in 337. Best known for being the first Christian Roman emperor, Constantine reversed the persecutions of his predecessor, Diocletian, and issued (with his co-emperor Licinius) the Edict of Milan in 313, which proclaimed religious toleration throughout the empire.

The Byzantine liturgical calendar, observed by the Eastern Orthodox Church and Eastern Catholic Churches of Byzantine rite, lists both Constantine and his mother Helena as saints. Although he is not included in the Latin Church's list of saints, which does recognize several other Constantines as saints, he is revered under the title "The Great" for his contributions to Christianity.

Constantine also transformed the ancient Greek colony of Byzantium into a new imperial residence, Constantinople, which would remain the capital of the Byzantine Empire for over one thousand years.

As the emperor who empowered Christianity throughout the Roman Empire and moved the Roman capital to the banks of the Bosphorus, Constantine was a ruler of major historical importance, but he has always been a controversial figure. The fluctuations in Constantine's reputation reflect the nature of the ancient sources for his reign. These are abundant and detailed, but have been strongly influenced by the official propaganda of the period, and are often one-sided. There are no surviving histories or biographies dealing with Constantine's life and rule. The nearest replacement is Eusebius of Caesarea's Vita Constantini, a work that is a mixture of eulogy and hagiography. Written between 335 and circa 339, the Vita extols Constantine's moral and religious virtues. The Vita creates a contentiously positive image of Constantine, and modern historians have frequently challenged its reliability. The fullest secular life of Constantine is the anonymous Origo Constantini. A work of uncertain date, the Origo focuses on military and political events, to the neglect of cultural and religious matters.

Lactantius' De Mortibus Persecutorum, a polemical Christian pamphlet on the reigns of Diocletian and the Tetrarchy, provides valuable but tendentious detail on Constantine's predecessors and early life. The ecclesiastical histories of Socrates, Sozomen, and Theodoret describe the ecclesiastic disputes of Constantine's later reign. Written during the reign of Theodosius II (408–50), a century after Constantine's reign, these ecclesiastic historians obscure the events and theologies of the Constantinian period through misdirection, misrepresentation and deliberate obscurity. The contemporary writings of the Orthodox Christian Athanasius and the ecclesiastical history of the Arian Philostorgius also survive, though their biases are no less firm.

The epitomes of Aurelius Victor (De Caesaribus), Eutropius (Breviarium), Festus (Breviarium), and the anonymous author of the Epitome de Caesaribus offer compressed secular political and military histories of the period. Although pagan, the epitomes paint a favorable image of Constantine, but omit reference to Constantine's religious policies. The Panegyrici Latini, a collection of panegyrics from the late third and early fourth centuries, provide valuable information on the politics and ideology of the tetrarchic period and the early life of Constantine. Contemporary architecture, like the Arch of Constantine in Rome and palaces in Gamzigrad and Córdoba, epigraphic remains, and the coinage of the era complement the literary sources.

Constantine, named Flavius Valerius Constantinus, was born in the Moesian military city of Naissus (Niš, Serbia) on the 27th of February of an uncertain year, probably near 272. His father was Flavius Constantius, a native of Moesia Superior (later Dacia Ripensis). Constantius was a tolerant and politically skilled man. Constantine probably spent little time with his father. Constantius was an officer in the Roman army in 272, part of the Emperor Aurelian's imperial bodyguard. Constantius advanced through the ranks, earning the governorship of Dalmatia from Emperor Diocletian, another of Aurelian's Illyrian companions, in 284 or 285. Constantine's mother was Helena, a Bithynian Greek of humble origin. It is uncertain whether she was legally married to Constantius or merely his concubine.

In July 285, Diocletian declared Maximian, another colleague from Illyricum, his co-emperor. Each emperor would have his own court, his own military and administrative faculties, and each would rule with a separate praetorian prefect as chief lieutenant. Maximian ruled in the West, from his capitals at Mediolanum (Milan, Italy) or Augusta Treverorum (Trier, Germany), while Diocletian ruled in the East, from Nicomedia (İzmit, Turkey). The division was merely pragmatic: the Empire was called "indivisible" in official panegyric, and both emperors could move freely throughout the Empire. In 288, Maximian appointed Constantius to serve as his praetorian prefect in Gaul. Constantius left Helena to marry Maximian's stepdaughter Theodora in 288 or 289.

Diocletian divided the Empire again in 293, appointing two Caesars (junior emperors) to rule over further subdivisions of East and West. Each would be subordinate to their respective Augustus (senior emperor) but would act with supreme authority in his assigned lands. This system would later be called the Tetrarchy. Diocletian's first appointee for the office of Caesar was Constantius; his second was Galerius, a native of Felix Romuliana (Gamzigrad, Serbia). According to Lactantius, Galerius was a brutal, animalistic man. Although he shared the paganism of Rome's aristocracy, he seemed to them an alien figure, a semi-barbarian. On 1 March, Constantius was promoted to the office of Caesar, and dispatched to Gaul to fight the rebels Carausius and Allectus. In spite of meritocratic overtones, the Tetrarchy retained vestiges of hereditary privilege, and Constantine became the prime candidate for future appointment as Caesar as soon as his father took the position. Constantine left the Balkans for the court of Diocletian, where he lived as his father's heir presumptive.

--------------------
Han var av Romersk avstamning
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constantius_Chlorus

Father of Constantine I (The Great)

http://larryvoyer.com/genealogy/getperson.php?personID=I141644&tree=v7_28
--------------------
Empereur de Rome (305-306) -

Keizer van Rome (305-306) -

Emperor of Rome (305-306)
--------------------
Bio at Wikipedia His full name is Flavius Valerius Constantius, called Constantius Chlorus. He was a general and administrator under Emperor Maximian, who adopted him and gave him the government of Gaul and the rank of caesar in 293. When his co emperor, Maximian and Diocletian, abdicated in 305, Constantius became emperor in the West and prepared to conquer the Picts of Scotland. He died during the campaign, after proclaiming his son Constantine his successor as emperor. --Other Fields Ref Number: + EVEN: Reigned Date: 305/306
--------------------
His full name was Gaius Flavius Valerius Constantius Chlorus. He was Emperor of Rome (305).

The ''Historia Augusta'' says Constantius Chlorus was the son of Eutropius, a noble from northern Dardania in modern Kosovo, and Claudia, a niece of the emperors Claudius II and Quintillus. Historians, however, suspect this maternal connection to be a genealogical fabrication created by his son Constantine I, thus connecting his family to two rather highly regarded predecessors. His father, however, might have been the brother of Eutropia, wife of Maximian.

He claimed descent from the Greco-Roman god Apollon (Apollo). His original social standing is unclear, but he was an army officer by the time his son Constantine was born in 272/273. By 284 he was Governor of Dalmatia. Early in his career he contracted some form of marriage with Helena, but by 289 had divorced her and married Theodora, step-daughter of Maximian. On 1 March 293 he entered the imperial collegium as a Caesar, with responsibility for Gaul, Spain and Britain. Because Britain was held by Carausius, formerly commander of the Roman Channel fleet, Constantius began preparations for an invasion. Carausius died in 293 or 294,

Constantius landed in Kent in 296, and re-took Britain. In 304 he held a triumphal procession at Rome, the last such celebration in the empire. In 305 the Emperors Diocletian and Maximian retired, and Constantius and Galerius became joint Emperors, with Constantius as the senior of the two. Galerius named two new Caesars and hoped to get the entire empire when Constantius died at York the following year, but within 18 months Constantius' son Constantine was elevated. According to a highly suspect local tradition, the church of Saint Helen's-on-the-Walls at York was built on the site of his tomb.

He is often called Constantius "Chlorus" from the pallor of his complexion. However, some contemporary sources refer to the rubor of his complexion. Therefore, the epithet "Chlorus" must be either a contemporary jest or a late tradition.
--------------------

1 NAME Constantius Angelus of /Rome/ 2 SOUR S033320 3 DATA 4 TEXT Date of Import: Jan 17, 2001 1 BIRT 2 PLAC ,Britain 2 SOUR S033320 3 DATA 4 TEXT Date of Import: Jan 17, 2001 1 DEAT 2 PLAC ,York 2 SOUR S033320 3 DATA 4 TEXT Date of Import: Jan 17, 2001

[De La Pole.FTW]

Sources: Ancestral Roots 45; Kraentzler 1669, 1680, 1795. K-1795: Constantius I, Emperor of Britain, Gaul, Spain and Rome ("Chlorus"). His British name appears to have been Cystennan. K-1669: Flavius Constantius "Chlore," Emperor of Britain, Rome and Gaul.
Roots: Theodora Comnena, married Constantinus Angelus.

=========================

Constantinos was the governor of Dalmatia, and appointed Caesar to
rule Gaul and Britain March 1, 293. Born in Illyria 214, he was trained in the hard school of warfare on the Danube frontier. Constantius I became Emperor of Rome in May 305, and in right of his wife, King of England. He was born in 242 and died at Eboracum (present day York, England) on July 25, 306. The son of Helen and Constantius I was Constantine the Great.

=================

file:///E:/E-S009/genealogy/Grab_A_Site_downloads/stirnet/romans2.htm#link4

1. Constantius Chlorus, Emperor of Rome (b 242, d 07.306)
m1. (div) Helena 'of the Cross' (d 328, possibly dau of Coilus, King of Cochester)
...
m2. Theodora (dau of Maximianus Herculius, Emperor of Rome) @@4@@ above
...

_____________________________________

Constantius I (Flavius Valerius Constantius Chlorus) "the Pale", Emperor of Rome

Governor of Dalmatia, appointed Caesar to rule Gaul and Britain March 1, 293. He was the son of *Eutropious, a Dardanian nobleman descended from the *Gordiani, and his wife, *Claudia, daughter of *Claudius II (Marcus Aurelius Flavius Claudius Gothicus), a virtuous and worthy Roman Emperor (268-270), who was a soldier, statesman, and a distinguished officer. Born in Illyria 214, he was trained in the hard school of warfare on the Danube frontier, and died of the Plague in 270, aged 55, whereupon his brother Marcus Aurelius Claudius Quintillus became Emperor. Constantius I became Emperor of Rome in May 305, and in right of his wife, King of England. He was born in 242 and died at Eboracum (present day York, England) on July 25, 306. On becoming "Caesar," he was required by Diocletian to put aside *Helena and to take Maximian's stepdaughter, Theodora, as his wife. From the first union, *Helena and *Constantius I had an illegitimate son, *Constantine the Great. He married (2) Theodora, daughter of Maximinus, Roman Emperor.
Gibbon says *Claudia was the niece of *Claudius II (Marcus Aurelius Flavius Claudius Gothicus).
Encyclopedia Brittanica maintains Constantius I's descent from Claudius Gothicus was a fiction.

SOURCES: "Neuman-Smith-Goodale Family and Ancestors" Michael R. Neuman michaelneuman@@earthlink.net (who has generously shared the above narrative at AWTP.)

Sources

[S395] royal_lineage.ged, June 2006.

[S2119] rootsweb, Mark Willis-Ballard, Willis-Ballard, Markrootsweb, (http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=SHOW&db=mwballard&surname=Ballard%2C+Living : 2014 feb 01).
--------------------
http://ancienthistory.about.com/od/emperors/a/imperialdates.htm

Rome was originally the capital of the Roman emperor. Later, it moved to Milan, and then Ravenna (A.D. 402-476). After the fall of Romulus Augustulus, in A.D. 476, Rome continued to have an emperor for almost another millennium, but that Roman emperor ruled from the East.

Julio-Claudians

(31 or) 27 B.C. - 14 A.D. Augustus 14 - 37 Tiberius 37 - 41 Caligula 41 - 54 Claudius 54 - 68 Nero Year of the 4 Emperors

(ends with Vespasian) 68 - 69 Galba 69 Otho 69 Vitellius

Flavian Dynasty

69 - 79 Vespasian 79 - 81 Titus 81 - 96 Domitian 5 Good Emperors

96 - 98 Nerva 98 - 117 Trajan 117 - 138 Hadrian 138 - 161 Antoninus Pius 161 - 180 Marcus Aurelius (161 - 169 Lucius Verus)

(The next cluster of emperors is not part of a specific dynasty or other common grouping, but includes 4 from the year of the 5 emperors, 193.) 177/180 - 192 Commodus 193 Pertinax 193 Didius Julianus 193 - 194 Pescennius Niger 193 - 197 Clodius Albinus

Severans

193 - 211 Septimius Severus 198/212 - 217 Caracalla 217 - 218 Macrinus 218 - 222 Elagabalus 222 - 235 Severus Alexander (More emperors without a dynastic label, although it includes the year of the 6 emperors, 238.) For more on this age of chaos, read Brian Campbell's excellent synopsis in The Romans and Their World.

235 - 238 Maximinus 238 Gordian I and II 238 Balbinus and Pupienus 238 - 244 Gordian III 244 - 249 Philip the Arab 249 - 251 Decius 251 - 253 Gallus 253 - 260 Valerian 254 - 268 Gallienus 268 - 270 Claudius Gothicus 270 - 275 Aurelian 275 - 276 Tacitus 276 - 282 Probus 282 - 285 Carus Carinus Numerian

Tetrarchy

285-ca.310 Diocletian 295 L. Domitius Domitianus 297-298 Aurelius Achilleus 303 Eugenius 285-ca.310 Maximianus Herculius 285 Amandus 285 Aelianus Iulianus 286?-297? British Emperors 286/7-293 Carausius 293-296/7 Allectus

293-306 Constantius I Chlorus Dynasty of Constantine

293-311 Galerius 305-313 Maximinus Daia 305-307 Severus II 306-312 Maxentius 308-309 L. Domitius Alexander 308-324 Licinius 314? Valens 324 Martinianus 306-337 Constantinus I 333/334 Calocaerus 337-340 Constantinus II 337-350 Constans I 337-361 Constantius II 350-353 Magnentius 350 Nepotian 350 Vetranio 355 Silvanus 361-363 Julianus 363-364 Jovianus

(More emperors without a dynastic label) 364-375 Valentinianus I 375 Firmus 364-378 Valens 365-366 Procopius 366 Marcellus 367-383 Gratian 375-392 Valentinianus II 378-395 Theodosius I 383-388 Magnus Maximus 384-388 Flavius Victor 392-394 Eugenius

[See: Table of Eastern and Western Emperors]

395-423 Honorius [Division of the Empire - Honorius' brother Arcadius ruled the East 395-408] 407-411 Constantine III usurper 421 Constantius III 423-425 Johannes 425-455 Valentinian III 455 Petronius Maximus 455-456 Avitus 457-461 Majorian 461-465 Libius Severus 467-472 Anthemius 468 Arvandus 470 Romanus 472 Olybrius 473-474 Glycerius 474-475 Julius Nepos 475-476 Romulus Augustulus

Table of Eastern and Western Emperors

Print Resources Chris Scarre: Chronicle of the Roman Emperors Adkins and Adkins: Handbook to Life in Ancient Rome

Rome and Roman Empire Maps Related Articles

Roman Battles Here's Why These Are the Most Important People in Ancient History How Taxes Led to the Fall of Rome Dates of the Roman Emperors A Timeline of the 5 Eras of Ancient Roman History Age at Accession of the Roman Emperors Our Expert Recommends

Emperors Age At Accession Roman Emperors Names and Dates from Diocletian to A.D. 476. Second Century Timeline of the Roman Emperors Roman Emperors Timeline of the Third Century Roman Emperors Timeline of the 4th Century DIR An Online Encyclopedia of Roman Emperors Fifth Century Roman Timeline Byzantine Emperors Other Third Century Chaos Emperors
--------------------
http://www.friesian.com/romania.htm#constan

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constantius_Chlorus

Constantius I (Latin: Marcus Flavius Valerius Constantius Herculius Augustus;[2][3] 31 March c. 250 – 25 July 306) was Roman Emperor from 293 to 306, commonly known as Constantius Chlorus (Greek: Κωνστάντιος Χλωρός, Kōnstantios Khlōrós, literally "Constantius the Pale").[4] He was the father of Constantine the Great and founder of the Constantinian dynasty.

As Caesar, he defeated the usurper Allectus in Britain and campaigned extensively along the Rhine frontier, defeating the Alamanni and Franks. Upon becoming Augustus in 305, Constantius launched a successful punitive campaign against the Picts beyond the Antonine Wall.[5] However, Constantius died suddenly in Eboracum (York) the following year. His death sparked the collapse of the tetrarchic system of government inaugurated by the Emperor Diocletian.

Please see Darrell Wolcott: Maxen Wledig and the Welsh Legends; http://www.ancientwalesstudies.org/id18.html. (Steven Ferry, February 4, 2020.)

Please see Darrell Wolcott; Harleian Ms 3859; http://www.ancientwalesstudies.org/id129.html. (Steven Ferry, March 10, 2021.)

AKA:
CONSTANTIUS CHLORUS
CONSTANTIUS CHLORUS
CONSTANTIUS I EMPEROR DE ROME
1ST EMPEROR OF ROME CONSTANTIUS
CONSTANTIUS I CHLORUS EMPEROR ROMAN EMPIRE
CONSTANTIUS I "FLAVIUS VALERIUS" ROME
GAIUS FLAVIUS VALERIUS CONSTANTIUS
FLAVIUS VALERIUS CONSTANTIUS I ROMAN EMPEROR
FLAVIUS AURELIUS VALERIUS CONSTANTIUS
FLAVIUS VALERIUS I CLOVIS CONSTANTANUS

Tribune, Provincial Governor, Raised to Augustus Caesar in the first tetrachy.
Died at York, Britain in battle.

From 292 The Western Caesar was Constantius who had Gaul, Britian and Spain while Maximian had Italy and Africa. Diocletian had Asia and Egypt while his Caesar,(son in law Galerius) had the Balkans.
Maximian made Milan focus of empire rather than Rome.. Diocletian made focus of Empire Eastern Empire not Rome/west.
In 305 Constantius became Augustus of the West, at Treves (Augusta Trevirorium), Galerius took the Danube and Asia Minor, the two new Ceasars were Daza- better known as Maximan nephew of Galerius, and Severus. This was confirmed by Diocletian as his last public act, ignoring the son of Constantius - Constantine (later "The Great") and Maxentius son of Maxentius. Daza/Maximan was sent to the East, Severus to the Milan.
The empire went to pot. The rich evaded/ avoided not only the old taxes but all new taxes ruining the middle class- the rich got Very Rich and the middle class disappeared into the very poor.
In 306 Constantius died at York.
Constantine informed Galerius that the Legions had compelled him to assume the title, and Galerius only dared to confirm ratify the appointment/title.
Thew senate of Rome wanted to reasert itself and appointed Maxentius as Augustus and a power thirsty Maximan emerged from "retirement" to support this title. Severus marched "hot foot" from Milan, found Rome already lost and eventually was tricked into surrender by Maximan who allowed him to commit "honorable suicide". Maximianus gave his daughter Fausta in marriage to Constantine to cement the status quo and Constantine accepted both offers.

Constantinius of Britain
http://trees.ancestry.com/rd?f=document&guid=01a9e1d6-f915-43fb-b085-d0b1c36b5769&tid=2440653&pid=-1813507500

const_chlor
http://trees.ancestry.com/rd?f=image&guid=93aa2fef-b26f-42c8-ab2c-8180121e57bb&tid=904323&pid=-2029334919

AKA:
CONSTANTIUS I EMPEROR DE ROME
CONSTANTIUS I CHLORUS EMPEROR ROMAN EMPIRE
CONSTANTIUS I "FLAVIUS VALERIUS" ROME
GAIUS FLAVIUS VALERIUS CONSTANTIUS
FLAVIUS VALERIUS CONSTANTIUS I ROMAN EMPEROR
FLAVIUS AURELIUS VALERIUS CONSTANTIUS
FLAVIUS VALERIUS I CLOVIS CONSTANTANUS

_P_CCINFO 1-20792

KNOWN AS "CLORUS"; AN ILLYRIAN; ROMAN EMPORER (CAESAR 293, AUGUSTUS 305)

His full name is Flavius Valerius Constantius, called Constantius Chlorus.
He was a general and administrator under Emperor Maximian, who adopted
him and gave him the government of Gaul and the rank of caesar in 293.
When his coemperors, Maximian and Diocletian, abdicated in 305,
Constantius became emperor in the West and prepared to conquer the Picts
of Scotland. He died during the campaign, after proclaiming his son
Constantine his successor as emperor.

_P_CCINFO 1-20792
Original individual @@P2203775237@@ (@@MS_NHFETTERLYFAMIL0@@) merged with @@P2203775113@@ (@@MS_NHFETTERLYFAMIL0@@)

SOME SOURCES SAY GAIUS'S PARENTS WERE EUTROPIUS (NOTES) OR FLAVIUS ( L) DE ROME AND CLAUDIA CRISPINA (L) ILLYRIA

OTHER POSSIBLE PARENTS ARE SHOWN BELOW BUT THIS INDIVIDUAL IS NOT SHO WN AS A CHILD ON THE FOLLOWING POSSIBLE PARENTS' FAMILY PAGES, TO DO SO W OULD BE CONSIDERED ERRORS BY THIS PROGRAM. EVEN THOUGH THESE LAST POSSIB LE PARENTS MAY BE THE CORRECT ONES, SHOWING MORE THAN ONE SET OF PARENTS C OULD CAUSE MY "FAMILY TREE" PROGRAM TO MALFUNCTION.

OTHER SOURCES SAY HIS FATHER WAS EUTROPIUS (NOTES) OF (L) DARDANIA ANOTH ER OF HIS MOTHER CLAUDIA'S HUSBANDS.

STILL OTHER SOURCES SAY HIS PARENTS WERE COLIUS II (NOTES) "OLD KING COL E" (L) COLCHESTER AND STRADA YSTRADWEL (NOTES) VERCH (L) CADFAN AND HIS SI STER WAS THEN HELENA "SAINT" (NOTE)OF THE CROSS (L) COLCHESTERWHILE STI LL OTHER SOURCES SAY HIS WIFE WAS (HIS SISTER?) THE SAME.HELENA "SAINT" (N OTE)OF THE CROSS (L) COLCHESTER.

I SHOW HELENA AS HIS WIFE NOT AS HIS SISTER HERE.

Downloaded from the Bruce Cooley Pusch RootsWeb site. Please remove the symbols I've inserted in many of the names like (L),(P) and(BCP). Also please delete the (NOTES)I've written in some entries in the first person, the notes that refer just to me.

1 NAME Constantius Angelus of /Rome/ 2 SOUR S033320 3 DATA 4 TEXT Date of Import: Jan 17, 2001 1 BIRT 2 PLAC ,Britain 2 SOUR S033320 3 DATA 4 TEXT Date of Import: Jan 17, 2001 1 DEAT 2 PLAC ,York 2 SOUR S033320 3 DATA 4 TEXT Date of Import: Jan 17, 2001


[De La Pole.FTW]

Sources: Ancestral Roots 45; Kraentzler 1669, 1680, 1795. K-1795: Constantius I, Emperor of Britain, Gaul, Spain and Rome ("Chlorus"). His British name appears to have been Cystennan. K-1669: Flavius Constantius "Chlore," Emperor of Britain, Rome and Gaul.
Roots: Theodora Comnena, married Constantinus Angelus.

1 NAME Constantius Angelus of /Rome/ 2 SOUR S033320 3 DATA 4 TEXT Date of Import: Jan 17, 2001 1 BIRT 2 PLAC ,Britain 2 SOUR S033320 3 DATA 4 TEXT Date of Import: Jan 17, 2001 1 DEAT 2 PLAC ,York 2 SOUR S033320 3 DATA 4 TEXT Date of Import: Jan 17, 2001


[De La Pole.FTW]

Sources: Ancestral Roots 45; Kraentzler 1669, 1680, 1795. K-1795: Constantius I, Emperor of Britain, Gaul, Spain and Rome ("Chlorus"). His British name appears to have been Cystennan. K-1669: Flavius Constantius "Chlore," Emperor of Britain, Rome and Gaul.
Roots: Theodora Comnena, married Constantinus Angelus.

1 NAME Constantius Angelus of /Rome/ 2 SOUR S033320 3 DATA 4 TEXT Date of Import: Jan 17, 2001 1 BIRT 2 PLAC ,Britain 2 SOUR S033320 3 DATA 4 TEXT Date of Import: Jan 17, 2001 1 DEAT 2 PLAC ,York 2 SOUR S033320 3 DATA 4 TEXT Date of Import: Jan 17, 2001


[De La Pole.FTW]

Sources: Ancestral Roots 45; Kraentzler 1669, 1680, 1795. K-1795: Constantius I, Emperor of Britain, Gaul, Spain and Rome ("Chlorus"). His British name appears to have been Cystennan. K-1669: Flavius Constantius "Chlore," Emperor of Britain, Rome and Gaul.
Roots: Theodora Comnena, married Constantinus Angelus.

<blank>

Constantius Chlorus
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Constantius Chlorus
Caesar then Augustus of the west
Reign 293 - 305 (as Caesar with Maximian);
305 - 306 (as Augustus in the west, with Galerius as Augustus in the east)
Full name Marcus Flavius Valerius Constantius
Born 31 March c. 250
Dardania (Serbia)
Died 25 July 306
Eboracum, Britannia
Predecessor Maximian (with Diocletian in the East)
Successor Flavius Valerius Severus (with Galerius in the East)
Wife/wives Helena (?-293)
Theodora (293-306)
Issue Constantine I
Flavius Dalmatius
Julius Constantius
Flavia Julia Constantia
Eutropia
Anastasia
Dynasty Constantinian
Father Eutropius
Mother Claudia

Flavius Valerius Constantius[1] (March 31 c. 250–July 25, 306) was an emperor of the Western Roman Empire (305–306). He was commonly called Chlorus (the Pale)[2] an epithet given to him by Byzantine historians. He was the father of Constantine I and initiator of the Constantinian dynasty.
Contents
[hide]

* 1 History
* 2 Legend
o 2.1 Christian legends
o 2.2 British legends
* 3 Notes
* 4 External links

[edit] History

The Historia Augusta says Constantius was the son of Eutropius, a noble from northern Dardania in modern Serbia, and Claudia, a niece of the emperors Claudius II and Quintillus.[3] Historians, however, suspect this maternal connection to be a genealogical fabrication created by his grandson Constantine II, thus connecting his family to two rather highly regarded predecessors. Under the emperor Carus, he was governor of Dalmatia, and Carus is said to have considered adopting him as his heir in place of his dissolute son, Carinus.[4]

In 293 the emperor Diocletian created the Tetrarchy, dividing the Roman Empire into Western and Eastern portions. Each would be ruled by an Augustus, supported by a Caesar. Diocletian became Augustus of the Eastern empire, with Galerius as his Caesar. Constantius was appointed Caesar to the Western Augustus, Maximian, and married Theodora, Maximian's step-daughter. They had six children. Constantius divorced his first wife (or concubine), Helena, by whom he already had a son, Constantine. Helena was probably from Nicomedia in Asia Minor.[5] He was given command of Gaul, Britain and possibly Hispania.
On the reverse of this argenteus struck in Antioch under Constantius Chlorus, the tetrarchs are sacrificing to celebrate a victory against the Sarmatians.
On the reverse of this argenteus struck in Antioch under Constantius Chlorus, the tetrarchs are sacrificing to celebrate a victory against the Sarmatians.

In 293, Constantius defeated the forces of Carausius, who had declared himself emperor in Britain and northern Gaul in 286, near Bononia. Carausius was killed by his rationalis Allectus, who took command of Britain until 296, when Constantius sent Asclepiodotus, a prefect of the Praetorian Guard, to invade the island. Allectus was defeated and killed, and Roman rule in Britain restored.[6]

Also in 296, Constantius fought a battle against the Alamanni at the city of Lingonae (Langes) in Gaul. He was shut up in the city, but was relieved by his army after six hours, and defeated the enemy.[7] He defeated them again at Vindonissa (Windisch, Switzerland),[8] thereby strengthening the defenses of the Rhine frontier.

Diocletian and Maximian stepped down as co-emperors in 305, due to Diocletian's poor health, and the Caesars, Constantius and Galerius, became co-emperors. Constantius ruled the western empire, Galerius the eastern. Severus and Maximinus were appointed Caesars. Constantine, who had hoped to be a Caesar, joined his father's campaigns in Gaul and Britain.[9] Constantius died in Britain, at York, in 306, and Constantine was declared emperor by the army.[10]

[edit] Legend

[edit] Christian legends

As the father of Constantine, a number of Christian legends have grown up around Constantius. Eusebius's Life of Constantine claims that Constantius was himself a Christian, although he pretended to be a pagan, and while Caesar under Diocletian, took no part in the emperor's persecutions.[11] His first wife, Helena, is the subject of many legends, including the finding of the True Cross.

[edit] British legends

Constantius's activities in Britain were remembered in medieval British legend. In Geoffrey of Monmouth's History of the Kings of Britain (1136), he is sent to Britain by the Senate after Asclepiodotus, here a British king, is overthrown by Coel of Colchester. Coel submits to Constantius and agrees to pay tribute to Rome, but dies only eight days later. Constantius marries Coel's daughter Helena and becomes king of Britain. He and Helena have a son, Constantine, who succeeds to the throne of Britain when his father dies at York eleven years later.[12] The identification of Helena as British had previously been made by Henry of Huntingdon,[13] but has no historical validity: Constantius had divorced Helena before he went to Britain.

[edit] Notes

1. ^ "Marcus Flavius Valerius Constantius", "Valerius Constantius", "Gaius Valerius Constantius", and "Gaius Fabius Constantius" have been found on inscriptions
2. ^ From the Greek ??????, meaning pale/yellow-greenish
3. ^ Historia Augusta, Claudius 13
4. ^ Historia Augusta, Carus 17
5. ^ Eutropius, Breviarum 9.22; Zosimus, Historia Nova 2; Exerpta Valesiana 1.2
6. ^ Aurelius Victor, Liber de Caesaribus, 39
7. ^ Eutropius, Breviarum 9.23
8. ^ UNRV History: Battle of the Third Century AD
9. ^ Eutropius, Breviarum 10.1; Aurelius Victor, Epitome de Caesaribus 39; Zosimus, Historia Nova 2
10. ^ Eutropius, Breviarum 10.1-2
11. ^ Eusebius, Vita Constantini 1.13-18
12. ^ Geoffrey of Monmouth, Historia Regum Britanniae 5.6
13. ^ Henry of Huntingdon, Historia Anglorum 1.37

[edit] External links

* DiMaio, Robert, "Constantius I Chlorus (305-306 A.D.)", DIR

* Wikimedia Commons logo Media related to Constantius Chlorus from the Wikimedia Commons.

Preceded by
Maximian (with Diocletian in the east) Roman Emperor
Co-emperor with Galerius in the east
305 (Caesar from 293)-306 Succeeded by
Flavius Valerius Severus (with Galerius in the east)
Preceded by
Coel Legendary British Kings
305-306 Succeeded by
Constantine

From 292 The Western Caesar was Constantius who had Gaul, Britian and Spain while Maximian had Italy and Africa. Diocletian had Asia and Egypt while his Caesar,(son in law Galerius) had the Balkans.
Maximian made Milan focus of empire rather than Rome.. Diocletian made focus of Empire Eastern Empire not Rome/west.
In 305 Constantius became Augustus of the West, at Treves (Augusta Trevirorium), Galerius took the Danube and Asia Minor, the two new Ceasars were Daza- better known as Maximan nephew of Galerius, and Severus. This was confirmed by Diocletian as his last public act, ignoring the son of Constantius - Constantine (later "The Great") and Maxentius son of Maxentius. Daza/Maximan was sent to the East, Severus to the Milan.
The empire went to pot. The rich evaded/ avoided not only the old taxes but all new taxes ruining the middle class- the rich got Very Rich and the middle class disappeared into the very poor.
In 306 Constantius died at York.
Constantine informed Galerius that the Legions had compelled him to assume the title, and Galerius only dared to confirm ratify the appointment/title.
Thew senate of Rome wanted to reasert itself and appointed Maxentius as Augustus and a power thirsty Maximan emerged from "retirement" to support this title. Severus marched "hot foot" from Milan, found Rome already lost and eventually was tricked into surrender by Maximan who allowed him to commit "honorable suicide". Maximianus gave his daughter Fausta in marriage to Constantine to cement the status quo and Constantine accepted both offers.

From 292 The Western Caesar was Constantius who had Gaul, Britian and Spain while Maximian had Italy and Africa. Diocletian had Asia and Egypt while his Caesar,(son in law Galerius) had the Balkans.
Maximian made Milan focus of empire rather than Rome.. Diocletian made focus of Empire Eastern Empire not Rome/west.
In 305 Constantius became Augustus of the West, at Treves (Augusta Trevirorium), Galerius took the Danube and Asia Minor, the two new Ceasars were Daza- better known as Maximan nephew of Galerius, and Severus. This was confirmed by Diocletian as his last public act, ignoring the son of Constantius - Constantine (later "The Great") and Maxentius son of Maxentius. Daza/Maximan was sent to the East, Severus to the Milan.
The empire went to pot. The rich evaded/ avoided not only the old taxes but all new taxes ruining the middle class- the rich got Very Rich and the middle class disappeared into the very poor.
In 306 Constantius died at York.
Constantine informed Galerius that the Legions had compelled him to assume the title, and Galerius only dared to confirm ratify the appointment/title.
Thew senate of Rome wanted to reasert itself and appointed Maxentius as Augustus and a power thirsty Maximan emerged from "retirement" to support this title. Severus marched "hot foot" from Milan, found Rome already lost and eventually was tricked into surrender by Maximan who allowed him to commit "honorable suicide". Maximianus gave his daughter Fausta in marriage to Constantine to cement the status quo and Constantine accepted both offers.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]