== Notes for [[Item:Q91141|Q91141]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aufidius_Lurco

Marcus Aufidius Lurco
--------------------
The wife of Lurco is unknown. We now, he had a daughter called Aufidia, who married Marcus Livius Drusus Claudianus, a future praetor. Through her daughter, he would become the maternal grandfather to Roman Empress Livia Drusilla and consul Marcus Livius Drusus. Lurco was the great-grandfather to Roman Empress Tiberius and Roman General Nero Claudius Drusus.
--------------------
'''
=Aufidius Lurco=
'''

Marcus Aufidius (or Alfidius) Lurco or known as Aufidius Lurco, was a Roman magistrate who lived in the 1st century BC. Lurco was a member of the gens Aufidia, a Roman family of plebeian status, who appeared in the Roman Republic and Roman Empire. They became a family of consular rank. Lurco originally came from Fundi (modern Fondi, Italy).

'''High office'''

According to Suetonius, Lurco held a high office at Rome. In 61 BC, he was a Tribune of the Plebs. During his time as Tribune, he was the author of the Lex Aufidia or Lex Aufidia de Ambitu. The Lex Aufidia was a law concerning the Roman assemblies or Comitia. If a candidate, promised and paid money to a tribe at the Comitia, he should pay yearly 3,000 sesterces during his life. However, if the candidate, merely promised and did not pay, the candidate should be exempt. This caused a witted argument between Lurco and Publius Clodius Pulcher.

Lurco in 59 BC, was one of the witnesses called for the defence at the impeachment of Lucius Valerius Flaccus. Between 52 BC-51 BC, Lurco prosecuted and procured for the acts of violence and the conviction of Sextus Clodius Pulcher for bringing the corpse of Publius Clodius Pulcher into the Curia Julia.

'''Family'''

Lurco was the first person in Rome to fatten peacocks (see peafowl) for sale and from this he became wealthy. The wife of Lurco is unknown. We know, he had a daughter called Aufidia, who married Marcus Livius Drusus Claudianus, a future praetor. He was therefore the maternal grandfather of their children, Roman Empress Livia Drusilla and consul Marcus Livius Drusus Libo. Lurco was the great-grandfather to Roman emperor Tiberius and Roman General Nero Claudius Drusus.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aufidius_Lurco

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]