== Notes for [[Item:Q87196|Q87196]] ==

ID: I6882

Name: Lucius Calpernius Piso

Given Name: Lucius Calpernius

Surname: Piso

Sex: M

_UID: B70B2AFA5118D811BE490080C8C142CC5612

Change Date: 26 Nov 2005

Death: Y

Father: Lucius Julius III Caesar of Rome

Mother: Fulvia of Rome

Marriage 1 Spouse Unknown

Married:

Children

Lucia Calpurnia Piso

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I6882

--------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Calpurnius_Piso_Caesoninus_(consul_58_BC)

=Lucius Calpurnius Piso Caesoninus (consul 58 BC)=
'''Lucius Calpurnius Piso Caesoninus''' was a statesman of ancient Rome and the father-in-law of '''Julius Caesar''' through his daughter '''Calpurnia Pisonis'''. He also had a son, '''Lucius Calpurnius Piso''', known as '''"the Pontifex"''', who was Consul in 15 BC.

-----------------------------------

Lucius Julius Caesar IV

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

(May 2009)

Lucius Julius Caesar was the son of the consul of 90 BC, Lucius Julius Caesar. He was the father of another Lucius Julius Caesar, the brother** of Julia Antonia, and the uncle of the Brothers*** Antonii, Marcus, Gaius, and Lucius. He won the consulship of 64 BC.

[edit]Career

During the debate in the senate with regards to the punishment of the Catalinarian conspirators, he voted for the death penalty, although his own brother-in-law Publius Cornelius Lentulus (Sura) was amongst them. Sometime after his consulship, he became an augur. He was a legate in Gaul in 52 BC, working for his cousin Gaius Julius. After the conquest of Gaul, when the Senate, under the influence of Marcus Porcius Cato, moved to strip Julius Caesar of his army and provinces. When Julius Caesar crossed the Rubicon, Lucius Caesar sided with his cousin against Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus and the optimates. However, he took no active part in the war effort against the optimates.

After the Battle of Pharsalus, Caesar rotated some of his veteran legions to Italy. However, the legions became mutinous, obliging Mark Antony, by this point Caesar's Master of the Horse, to leave Rome to deal with them. In his absence, Lucius Caesar was put in charge. Unfortunately, Lucius Caesar proved too old to prevent Rome from falling into turmoil.

Caesar's assassination in 44 BC created an unstable atmosphere throughout the Roman Republic. Striving to remain neutral while the contentions between the Caesareans and the Liberators grew worse, he retired to Neapolis. This retirement was brief, as Lucius Caesar was back in Rome before the end of the year. He openly joined Marcus Tullius Cicero's senatorial faction, leading the Senate in repealing Antony's agrarian law. However, he did not utterly renounce his nephew, as he refused to allow for a state of civil war to be declared against Antony. More than anything else, he sought to avoid another civil war, and worked toward re conciliating the various factions. After Antony suffered several defeats, Lucius Caesar was one of the first to say Antony should be declared an enemy of the state. He paid for this, for when the Second Triumvirate was formed, his nephew had him proscribed. Fleeing to his sister's house, he remained there until she obtained a pardon for him from her son, a difficult task. He died sometime after 43 BC.

Forrás / Source:

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Julius_Caesar_IV

Note (from FARKAS Mihály László):

**nephew of Julia

***first cousin of the sons Antonii: Marcus, Gaius, and Lucius
--------------------
'''
=Lucius Calpurnius Piso Caesoninus =
'''

Lucius Calpurnius Piso Caesoninus (c. 100-43 BC) was a Roman statesman and the father-in-law of Julius Caesar through his daughter Calpurnia Pisonis. He also had a son, Lucius Calpurnius Piso, known as "the Pontifex", who was Consul in 15 BC. He was reportedly a follower of a school of Epicureanism that had been modified to befit politicians, as Epicureanism itself favored withdrawal from politics.

'''Biography'''

In 58 BC, when consul, Piso and his colleague, Aulus Gabinius, entered into a compact with Publius Clodius, with the object of getting Marcus Tullius Cicero out of the way. Piso's reward was the province of Macedonia, which he administered from 57 BC to the beginning of 55 BC, when he was recalled and the province was given to Quintus Ancharius. Piso's recall was perhaps in consequence of the violent attack made upon him by Cicero in the Senate in his speech "De provinciis consularibus".

Caesar mentions his father-in-law in his Gallic Commentaries. Piso's grandfather, also named L. Calpurnius Piso, was killed by the same Gauls that Caesar would later conquer.

On his return, Piso addressed the Senate in his defence, and Cicero replied with the coarse and exaggerated invective known as "In Pisonem". Piso issued a pamphlet by way of rejoinder, and there the matter ended. Cicero may have been afraid to bring the father-in-law of Julius Caesar to trial. At the outbreak of the civil war, Piso offered his services as mediator. However, when Caesar marched upon Rome, he left the city by way of protest of Caesar. Piso did not openly declare support for Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus and remained neutral but is widely believed he secretly supported Pompey but still did not forfeit the respect of Caesar when Pompey was defeated.

After the murder of Caesar, Piso insisted on the provisions of Caesar's will being strictly carried out and, for a time, he opposed Mark Antony. Subsequently, he became one of Anthony's supporters and is mentioned as taking part in an embassy to Antony's camp at Mutina with the object of bringing about a reconciliation with Octavian.

He is believed to have been the owner of the Villa of the Papyri at Herculaneum.

The maxim fiat justitia ruat caelum ("let justice be done, though the heavens fall"), used by Lord Mansfield in Somerset's Case and in reversing the outlawry of John Wilkes, and in the alternate form fiat iustitia, et pereat mundus by Ferdinand of Habsburg, is sometimes attributed to Piso (more often to Gnaeus Calpurnius Piso), but this is disputed.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Calpurnius_Piso_Caesoninus_(consul_58_BC)

LUCIUS JULIUS IV became Consul in UC 690/BC 63, and fought in Gaul underthe dictator Julius Caesar but afterwards revolted to Pompey.

CONSUL; DIED 40 BC

WROTE (ca. 60) "UR MARCUS", THE PROTOTYPE FOR THE BOOK "MARK" (LATER TO BE
RE-WRITTEN BY ARRIUS CALPERNIUS PISO); DIED 73 AD

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]