== Notes for [[Item:Q111010|Q111010]] ==

'''Marcus Antonius''', commonly known in English as Mark Antony (January 14, 83 BC – August 1, 30 BC), was a Roman politician and general. As a military commander and administrator, he was an important supporter and loyal friend of his mother's cousin Julius Caesar. After Caesar's assassination, Antony formed an official political alliance with Octavian (the future Augustus) and Lepidus, known to historians today as the Second Triumvirate.

The triumvirate broke up in 33 BC. Disagreement between Octavian and Antony erupted into civil war, the Final War of the Roman Republic, in 31 BC. Antony was defeated by Octavian at the naval Battle of Actium, and in a brief land battle at Alexandria. He and his lover Cleopatra committed suicide shortly thereafter. His career and defeat are significant in Rome's transformation from Republic to Empire.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mark_Antony

https://spartacus-educational.com/ROMmarkantony.htm

http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/28832/Mark-Antony
--------------------
Mark Antony, Marcus Antonius, General of Rome, was born January 14, 83 BC, Roma, Italy; died August 1, 30 BC, Alexandria, Egypt (suicide). Roman statesman and general, who defeated the assassins of Julius Caesar and, with Gaius Octavius and Marcus Aemilius Lepidus, formed the Second Triumvirate, which ultimately secured the end of the Roman Republic. Antony was born in Rome and educated for a short time in Greece. From 58 to 56 bc he served as a leader of cavalry in Roman campaigns in Palestine and Egypt, and from 54 to 50 bc he served in Gaul under Julius Caesar. Subsequently, with Caesar's aid, he attained the offices of quaestor, augur, and tribune of the people. At the outbreak of the civil war between Caesar and the Roman soldier and statesman Pompey the Great, Antony was appointed Caesar's commander in chief in Italy. He commanded the left wing of Caesar's army at the Battle of Pharsalus in 48 bc, and in 44 bc he shared the consulship with Caesar. After the assassination of Caesar in 44 bc, Antony's skillful oratory, immortalized by Shakespeare in the play Julius Caesar, turned the Roman people against the conspirators, leaving Antony for a time with almost absolute power in Rome. A rival soon appeared, however, in the person of Gaius Octavius, later the Roman emperor Augustus, who was grandnephew of Caesar and Caesar's designated heir. A struggle for power broke out when Antony, Octavius, and a third contender for the throne, the Roman general Marcus Aemilius Lepidus, formed the Second Triumvirate and agreed to divide the Roman Empire among themselves. In 42 bc, at Philippi, the triumvirate crushed the forces led by two assassins of Caesar, the Roman statesmen Marcus Junius Brutus and Gaius Cassius Longinus, who sought to restore the Roman Republic. Later in the same year, Antony summoned the Egyptian queen Cleopatra to attend him in the city of Tarsus, in Cilicia (now in Turkey), and explain her refusal to aid the triumvirate in the civil war. Instead of punishing Cleopatra, however, Antony fell in love with her and returned with her to Egypt in 41 bc. In 40 bc he attended meetings of the triumvirate in Italy, at which a new division of the Roman world was arranged, with Antony receiving the eastern portion, from the Adriatic Sea to the Euphrates River; in the same year he attempted to cement his relations with Octavius by marrying the latter's sister Octavia. Nevertheless, Antony soon returned to Egypt and resumed his life with Cleopatra. Octavius made use of this fact to excite the indignation of the Roman people against Antony. When, in 36 bc, Antony was defeated in a military expedition against the Parthians, popular disapproval of his conduct deepened in Rome, and a new civil war became inevitable. In 31 bc the forces of Antony and Cleopatra were decisively defeated by those of Octavius in a naval engagement near Actium. The couple returned to Egypt, deserted by the Egyptian fleet and by most of Antony's own army. In the following year, besieged by the troops of Octavius in Alexandria and deceived by a false report of Cleopatra's suicide, Antony killed himself by falling on his sword. Mark Antony (who had long been Caesar's right-hand man and was consul along with Caesar in 44) soon took charge of matters, leaving Lepidus to depart for Gaul. Antony was in nominal control of state affairs, but virtually everyone was on eggshells. Antony wielded a good deal of power as consul and as Caesar's second in command, but enjoyed little personal authority and dared not assert himself too strongly, lest he meet a fate similar to that of Caesar. The Senate, on the other hand, was concerned about popular reaction to Caesar's death, particularly on the part of Caesar's veterans. Most importantly, the official constitutional machinery, although it had continued to operate during the turbulent years 49-44, had been a virtual dead letter under Caesar's rule: his death created a vacuum in which no one quite knew how to behave. An uneasy truce was arrived at. An official amnesty was granted to the conspirators, but Antony's speech at Caesar's funeral -- along with the generous gifts to the plebs included in the terms of Caesar's will -- so stirred the urban mob that a riot ensued and the conspirators fled Rome in fear for their safety. [Caesar's funeral is the occasion for the famous speech in Shakespeare's play: "I have come to bury Caesar, not to praise him...."] Antony then quickly retrieved Caesar's private papers from his widow and employed them to govern in Caesar's name, claiming to find there Caesar's plans for Rome's future. This charade soon wore thin with the Senate, all the more so due to Antony's high-handed manner and his wanton extravagance. Octavian and Antony. When Caesar's will was read, however, Antony received a nasty shock. In it Caesar named as his chief heir a virtual Unknown by the name of *C. Octavius, adopting him (posthumously) as his son. Octavius was Caesar's grand-nephew on his sister's side, a rather sickly 18-year-old with only limited political and military experience. Upon his adoption, Octavius became *C. Julius Caesar Octavianus (or, in English, simply Octavian). Antony might well have expected little trouble in dealing with a youth of so little experience, few political connections, and virtually no personal authority. Unfortunately, Antony failed to recognize that in Octavian he was dealing with a natural born politician. Octavian never was an imposing figure physically, and he owed his military victories largely to the skill of his able lieutenants. In the political realm, however, he was without peer, rising from a virtual Unknown in 44 B.C. to become the first of the Julio-Claudian emperors by 27 AD. Tensions immediately arose between Octavian and Antony, as each vied for the right to employ Caesar's substantial financial resources, to call upon the loyalty of his troops, and, above all, to invoke the authority of Caesar's name. On the one hand was Antony, Caesar's second in command who had served him so ably since the 50s, who had been named magister equitum under Caesar, and who had been appointed priest (flamen) in Caesar's honor; on the other was Octavian, who could claim to be Caesar's son and heir. Tensions between the two soon reached the boiling point, only to be checked by senior officers in command of Caesar's troops, who were united by their common loyalty to the dead Caesar and were unwilling to fight against one another in the name of Caesar's bickering heirs. By the middle of 44 B.C. an uneasy truce was established between Antony, Octavian, the Senate, and those involved in Caesar's assassination. Unfortunately Antony, while an able commander, was no Caesar when it came to the delicate art of politics. In 44-43 he soon alienated virtually all of the other factions listed above, uniting them against him. He began by foolishly attacking the orator and statesman Cicero, a leader of the senatorial faction (the optimates). These personal attacks led Cicero to denounce Antony in a series of damning speeches, known as the *Philippics. Not content with alienating Cicero and the Senate, Antony renewed his attacks against Octavian, charging him with plots against his (Antony's) life. Octavian saw that his position in Rome was far from secure and withdrew to central Italy, where he began to raise troops on his authority as Caesar's son and heir. At the end of 44, Antony stepped over the line altogether. As consul in 44 he had been assigned the province of Macedonia for 43. Antony realized, however, that departing from Rome at this particular juncture would be political suicide and so passed a law that awarded him a five-year command in Cisalpine Gaul and Gallia Comata (Gaul proper) instead. This would allow him to keep tabs on affairs in Rome and had the added advantage of providing him with an army camped just north of Italy. (Clearly Antony had the precedent of Caesar's own career in mind.) The threat now posed by Octavian led Antony to speed up his plans: he decided to proceed to Cisalpine Gaul and assume command of his new provinces early. At this point the Senate was still unwilling to defy Antony too openly, but it did direct the current governor of Cisalpine Gaul, D. Junius Brutus Albinus (who had been involved in the conspiracy against Caesar), to maintain his position. When matters reached a crisis the Senate, at Cicero's urging, turned to Octavian for help. Octavian had his own forces; more importantly, he could invoke the name of Caesar, thus undercutting Antony's claims to represent Caesar's legacy. Cicero hoped that the young Octavian would be malleable -- a tool that the Senate could employ and then discard at its will. The plan was to have Octavian support the consuls for 43 (A. Hirtius and C. Vibius Pansa) in driving Antony off, then to have Octavian surrender his troops to Brutus, the lawful governor of the region. The first part of the plan worked: Antony was compelled to retire further into Gaul, where he joined up with Lepidus (see above). Unfortunately for Cicero and the Senate, however, Octavian was neither malleable nor stupid. He realized that, were he to surrender his troops to Brutus, he would not only lose an important bargaining chip but, given Brutus' association with Caesar's murder, would fatally undermine his claims to be Caesar's loyal son. As it happened, through one of those twists of fate that seem to occur so often in Roman history, the two consuls Hirtius and Pansa had been killed in the battle against Antony: Octavian saw a vacuum and marched south with his forces, determined to fill it. Confronted with Octavian's troops, the Senate was compelled to allow him to run for the office of consul, to which he was duly elected for the year 42. His adoption by Caesar was officially ratified and Caesar's assassins outlawed: thus Octavian could assume the role of the loyal son attempting to avenge his father's murder and continue his father's work in "reforming" the state. (The leaders of the opposition to Caesar, M. Junius Brutus and C. Cassius Longinus, had already fled to the East, planning, like Pompey earlier, to raise troops and challenge Antony and Octavian.) The Second Triumvirate. Suddenly Octavian was no longer a youthful outsider but a major force with which to reckon. He realized, however, that his own position vis a vis the Senate was far from secure and decided to make common cause with his former enemy, Antony. Thus, in 43, Octavian, Antony, and Lepidus were officially appointed as a panel of three (a triumvirate) to govern Rome with consular authority for a period of five years for the purpose of restoring constitutional order. This alliance is known as the *Second Triumvirate. Through a curious twist of fate, Caesar who originally had been viewed as a dangerous, power-seeking popularis and a traitor -- now became the beloved leader whose legacy was being threatened and in whose name Octavian, Antony, and Lepidus must seize control of state affairs. Despite its official standing, the Second Triumvirate was in reality a military junta. Following the precedent of Sulla, its first order of business was to pay back its political enemies and raise some much-needed cash (necessary if the junta's troops were to be kept happy). Proscriptions were held in which some 300 senators and 2000 equites were dispatched, as much for their property as for their political sympathies. The most famous victim was Cicero, whose head and hands were cut off and hung from the speaker's platform (the Rostra) in the forum. [The Triumvirate also raised taxes, aiming first (as was the Romans' won't) at wealthy and "extravagant" women. This policy led to a woman named Hortensia presenting a public speech in the forum in which, we are told, she sounded the now familiar theme of no taxation without representation (i.e., without granting women the franchise). The next order of business, once matters had been settled in Rome, was to deal with the forces of Brutus and Cassius in the East. The official line was that these forces were traitors to Rome, led by Caesar's assassins. Viewed objectively, however, they represented one of the last hopes of the Roman Republic, fighting a cause that was utterly unrealistic -- the days when the traditional constitutional machinery could cope with the economic, social, and political realities in Rome were long past -- but noble nonetheless. The final confrontation occurred in 42 at *Philippi in Macedonia (see Map 3 in Dudley), where Brutus' and Cassius' forces were quickly defeated in a series of battles by the combined forces of Antony and Octavian. The victory led to an immediate rise in Antony's fortunes: never much of a general, Octavian had presented a poor showing at Philippi, losing one important battle and spending a good deal of the time sick in his tent. For the moment, at least, Antony was very much the senior partner among the triumvirs. With their enemies subdued both at Rome and abroad, the two leading members of the Triumvirate soon returned to their old personal rivalries. Lepidus was quickly gotten out of the way: accused of treason, he was deprived of his provinces and allowed to remain a member of the Triumvirate only on sufferance. The other two triumvirs divided Rome's holdings between them: Octavian got Spain, Antony Gaul. Antony, however, had larger ambitions. Encouraged by his success at Philippi, he revived Caesar's plans for a grand military campaign in the East. His intentions clearly were to follow the precedent set by Sulla, Pompey, and Caesar himself: to win power, fame, and money through a series of military triumphs abroad and then return to Rome and oust his political rivals once and for all. In 41, therefore, he set out for the East, where he soon became entangled with the Egyptian Cleopatra. Cleopatra VII left three children by Marcus Antonius: the twins Alexander Helios and Cleopatra Selene, born in 40 B.C. and Ptolemy Philadelphus, born in 36 B.C. In 33 B.C. Antonius designated Alexander to be king of Armenia and overlord of Parthia and Media. He designated Ptolemy to be ruler of all Egyptian possessions in Syria and Cilicia and overlord of all client-kings and dynasts west of the Euphrates, as far as the Hellespont. After the death of Antonius, both boys were taken in by Augustus's sister Octavia to be raised with her own children. They appear soon after in Augustus's Triumph in Rome and thereafter disappear from history. Speculation is that both died in childhood. Cleopatra Selene was married in 29 B.C. to Juba II, a Roman client-king who ruled over Numidia c30-25 B.C. and over Mauretania 25 B.C.-cA.D. 23 when he died in his mid-70s. Cleopatra had long before predeceased him, though the date is not known. They had two (known) children: Ptolemy succeeded his father as king of Mauretania in A.D. 23. In 40, he was called to Rome to appear before the Emperor Caligula. Tacitus reports he had the misfortune of presenting himself wearing such a sumptious purple robe that in envy Caligula had him put to death. One simply did not appear before Caligula wearing better duds than the boss. Although Ptolemy was certainly of a marriageable age, no wife or children are known, and none succeeded him as king. Ptolemy's sister Drusilla was married to Marcus Antonius Felix. Nothing has survived in recorded history to point to any issue of this marriage. Octavian, by contrast, was given the thankless task of dealing with affairs in Italy, particularly the necessity of finding land for his and Antony's veterans. Antony clearly hoped that Octavian would become embroiled in Italian politics, squandering both his time and, more important, his popularity with the masses. In the end, this was a poor strategy on Antony's part. Not only did his own military ventures not fare well, but, by leaving Octavian in Rome, he allowed his rival to ply his considerable political skills in waging a propaganda war against Antony. At first, however, Antony's plan appeared to succeed. Octavian's problem was to find land for his and Antony's veterans; his solution was to confiscate land throughout Italy. The Italian cities were outraged, and this sense of outrage was encouraged by Antony's wife Fulvia and his brother L. Antonius, who incited a civil war. The rebels were suppressed through a combination of Antony's delay in supporting them and the brutality of Octavian's reprisals (particularly against the city of Perusia, in the so-called Perusine War). Antony eventually returned to Italy in 40, landing at Brundisium, but by then Octavian had not only secured Italy but had seized Gaul. War nearly broke out between Antony and Octavian, but their troops refused to fight against one another. At last a deal was cut: Antony was to pursue his ambitions in the East, while Octavian was granted the western half of Rome's empire. To cement the deal, Antony married Octavian's sister *Octavia (Fulvia having died of natural causes in the meantime). Antony accordingly returned east, where from 40-35 he was engaged in a series of largely unsuccessful campaigns against the Parthians. His desperate need for financial and military support drove him into the arms of Cleopatra (literally and figuratively) and he became her official consort. Antony had 3 children by Cleopatra. In 36, despite their age (6, 6, and 2, respectively), he granted each of these children, as well as Cleopatra herself, territories in the East as their official realms; he also lent his support to the claims of Caesarion (then 13 years old) to be Caesar's true son and heir. To Roman eyes these moves were troubling, suggesting that Antony was becoming a champion of Egypt and its oriental queen. Meanwhile, Octavian was busy in the West fighting *Sextus Pompeius, a son of Pompey the Great. Sextus had gathered the last of the Republican opposition about him in Spain and by 42 controlled Sicily. With his fleet, Sextus was able to harass Roman shipping, nearly cutting off Rome's grain supplies. To the degree that Sextus could claim to be fighting for the cause of his father, Pompey, he represented the last forces of the old Republic; in reality, he was as much a military overlord/adventurer as Antony and Octavian. Octavian once again showed his lack of military experience, suffering a series of humiliating defeats, and, in 38, was forced to meet with Antony in order to ask for reinforcements. (At the same time the term of the Triumvirate, originally slated to expire in 38, was extended for another five years.) In 36 Octavian -- or, rather, his general *M. Vipsanius Agrippa, working in tandem with Lepidus -- finally defeated Sextus at the battle of Naulochus. Lepidus made an attempt to seize Sicily for himself, but was soon deserted by his supporters and captured. As pontifex maximus Lepidus could not be killed (as we shall see, Octavian was beginning to develop scruples!), so he was merely stripped of his official powers and placed under permanent house arrest in Rome. Actium. The year 36 marks something of a turning point in Octavian's career. From this point on he began to doff the role of ruthless military warlord and instead present himself as a defender of the Republic (such as it was!). This strategy was to stand him in good stead in the propaganda war against Antony. Antony, Octavian could claim, had become the thrall of a depraved eastern monarch: he had "gone native" and (Octavian claimed) planned to reduce Rome to a mere subject state, transferring the capital of the empire to Egypt. The Romans would be slaves to a mongrel horde of oriental eunuchs and their lascivious queen, compelled to worship Egypt's decadent, bestial gods and to adopt the perverse religious practices of a land whose rulers regularly married their own siblings. Tensions between Antony and Octavian began to reach a head in 35, when Antony formally repudiated Octavia, who had remained loyal to him despite the repeated humiliation to which he had subjected her. In 33, when the Triumvirate officially expired, Octavian held the consulship: he was then able to present Antony as a private Roman citizen acting without the authority of the state and to contrast his own position as loyal servant of the Republic. There followed, in 32, the public reading of Antony's will (which, according to custom, had been deposited in Rome for safe keeping): the provisions it contained were not outrageous -- for example, Antony asked to be buried with Cleopatra and requested official recognition for his children by Cleopatra and for Caesarion but they furthered the impression that Antony now regarded himself as an Egyptian. n the end war was inevitable. The issue was decided in 31 at the naval battle of *Actium (in northwest Greece). Antony had established camp in the bay of Actium in late 32, hoping to use it as a base of operations against Octavian. He became mired there, however, his lines of supply cut off and his forces steadily shrinking due to disease and desertion. As time wore on, his troops became ever more demoralized, in part due to the presence of Cleopatra in their camp: Roman soldiers did not like the idea of being the servants of a foreign queen (think of Livy's portrayal of Tanaquil). Moreover, Antony's Egyptian fleet was outnumbered and out-generaled by Octavian's fleet, led by Agrippa. By September of 31 Antony had realized that his position was untenable and attempted to slip away with his fleet to Asia Minor. His plans were poorly executed by his demoralized troops, however, and only Cleopatra's ships managed to escape, followed by Antony with a few Roman stragglers. The remainder of Antony's forces surrendered after only token resistance. The battle of Actium was, then, something of a fiasco: a failed tactical retreat. Octavian and his supporters, however, presented it as a glorious triumph, spreading the story that Antony, accompanied by Cleopatra, had intended a full-scale naval battle but had turned tail and deserted his troops when he saw Cleopatra's ship fleeing in fear. In this version, Antony is betrayed by his besotted obsession with the cowardly and depraved Egyptian queen. Antony and Cleopatra fled to Egypt, where they committed suicide. Octavian, however, hailed his triumph as belonging to the Roman Senate and people a victory for Rome's political and religious traditions over a nefarious threat from the decadent East. (Notice that once again Octavian held the consulship his third in this crucial year, allowing him once more to present himself as the servant of the Roman people fighting in defense of the Republic, rather than as a military despot intent on wiping out a hated rival.) He claimed to have been supported in this victory by the god *Apollo, who had a small temple on a nearby promontory. Apollo, the god of Actium, became a prominent figure in Octavian/Augustus' reign. A god of poetry, music, and culture, he provided a fitting contrast to the "degenerate" Egyptian culture championed by Antony. He also embodied two contrary features that Octavian found useful, for Apollo was both a powerful god of retribution, smiting those who strayed beyond the proper bounds set for mortal ambitions, and a gentle god of refinement and culture. (These two contrasting features are symbolized by two of Apollo's attributes: the bow and the lyre.) As we shall see, the poets and artists who celebrated Octavian/Augustus' achievements presented his career as displaying these same two contrasting features, with Actium as the turning point. Before Actium, we find the stern triumvir who employs violence to punish his father's murderers, restore "order" to Italy, and check the wild ambitions of Antony and Cleopatra; after Actium, we find the benign ruler who oversees a political, moral, and cultural renaissance at Rome.
--------------------
Marco Antonio n. el 14 de Enero del año 83 AC. en Roma. Militar y Político de la República de Roma. Fue inmediato a Julio César en Galias y la Guerra Civil.Después del asesinato del César, pacto con Octaviano el segundo Trinvirato derrotando a los rebeldes en la batalla de Filipo. Al recibir el control del Oriente del Imperio Romano. Comenzó a relacionarse con Cleopatra VII,con lo cual entró en pugna con Octavio César. Se enfrentando en la batalla naval de Accio el 31 AC., siendo derrotado. De regresó a Alejandria siguio apoyando a Cleopatra, hasta llegar al suicidio , 30 AC.
--------------------
'''
=Mark Antony=
'''

Marcus Antonius (Latin: M·ANTONIVS·M·F·M·N; January 14, 83 BC-August 1, 30 BC), commonly known in English as Mark or Marc Antony, was a Roman politician and general who played a critical role in the transformation of the Roman Republic from an oligarchy into the autocratic Roman Empire.

Antony was a supporter of Julius Caesar, and served as one of his generals during the conquest of Gaul and the Civil War. Antony was appointed administrator of Italy while Caesar eliminated political opponents in Greece, North Africa, and Spain. After Caesar's death in 44 BC, Antony joined forces with Marcus Aemilius Lepidus, another of Caesar's generals, and Octavian, Caesar's nephew and adopted son, forming a three-man dictatorship known to historians as the Second Triumvirate. The Triumvirs defeated Caesar's murderers, the Liberatores, at the Battle of Philippi in 42 BC, and divided the government of the Republic between themselves. Antony was assigned Rome's eastern provinces, including the client kingdom of Egypt, then ruled by Cleopatra VII Philopator, and was given the command in Rome's war against Parthia.

Relations among the Triumvirs were strained as the various members sought greater political power. Civil war between Antony and Octavian was averted in 40 BC, when Antony married Octavian's sister, Octavia. Despite this marriage, Antony carried on a love affair with Cleopatra, who bore him three children, further straining Antony's relations with Octavian. Lepidus was expelled from the association in 36 BC, and in 33 BC disagreements between Antony and Octavian caused a split between the remaining Triumvirs. Their ongoing hostility erupted into civil war in 31 BC, as the Roman Senate, at Octavian's direction, declared war on Cleopatra and proclaimed Antony a traitor. Later that year, Antony was defeated by Octavian's forces at the Battle of Actium. Defeated, Antony and Cleopatra fled to Egypt, where they committed suicide.

With Antony dead, Octavian was the undisputed master of the Roman world. In 27 BC, he was granted the title of Augustus, marking the final stage in the transformation of the Roman Republic into an empire, with himself as the first Roman emperor.

'''Early life'''
----

A member of the plebeian Antonia gens, Antony was born in Rome on January 14, 83 BC. His father and namesake was Marcus Antonius Creticus, son of the noted orator by the same name who had been murdered during the Marian Terror of the winter of 87–86 BC. His mother was Julia Antonia, a distant cousin of Julius Caesar. Antony was an infant at the time of Lucius Cornelius Sulla's march on Rome in 82 BC.

According to the Roman orator Marcus Tullius Cicero, Antony's father was incompetent and corrupt, and was only given power because he was incapable of using or abusing it effectively. In 74 BC he was given military command to defeat the pirates of the Mediterranean, but he died in Crete in 71 BC without making any significant progress. The elder Antony's death left Antony and his brothers, Lucius and Gaius, in the care of their mother, Julia, who later married Publius Cornelius Lentulus Sura, an eminent member of the old Patrician nobility. Lentulus, despite exploiting his political success for financial gain, was constantly in debt due to the extravagance of his lifestyle. He was a major figure in the Second Catilinarian Conspiracy and was summarily executed on the orders of the Consul Cicero in 63 BC for his involvement. His death resulted in a feud between the Antonia and the famous orator.

Antony's early life was characterized by a lack of proper parental guidance. According to the historian Plutarch, he spent his teenage years wandering through Rome with his brothers and friends gambling, drinking, and becoming involved in scandalous love affairs. According to Cicero, he had a homosexual relationship with Gaius Scribonius Curio. There is little reliable information on his political activity as a young man, although it is known that he was an associate of Publius Clodius Pulcher and his street gang. He may also have been involved in the Lupercal cult as he was referred to as a priest of this order later in life. By age twenty, Antony had amassed an enormous debt. Hoping to escape his creditors, Antony fled to Greece in 58 BC, where he studied philosophy and rhetoric at Athens.

'''Early career'''

''Military service''

In 57 BC, Antony joined the military staff of Aulus Gabinius, the Proconsul of Syria, as chief of the cavalry. This appointment marks the beginning of his military career. As Consul the previous year alongside Antony's mentor Publius Clodius Pulcher, Gabinius had exiled Cicero.

Hyrcanus II, the Roman-supported Hasmonean High Priest of Judea, fled Jerusalem to Gabinius to seek protection against his rival and son-in-law Alexander. Years earlier in 63 BC, the Roman general Pompey had captured him and his father, King Aristobulus II, during his war against the remnant of the Seleucid Empire. Pompey had deposed Aristobulus and installed Hyrcanus as Rome’s client ruler over Judea. Antony achieved his first military distinctions after securing important victories at Alexandrium and Machaerus. With the rebellion defeated by 56 BC, Gabinius restored Hyrcanus to his position as High Priest in Judea.

The following year, in 55 BC, Gabinius intervened in the political affairs of Ptolemaic Egypt. Pharaoh Ptolemy XII Auletes had been deposed in a rebellion led by his daughter Berenice IV in 58 BC, forcing him to seek asylum in Rome. During Pompey’s conquests years earlier, Ptolemy had received the support of Pompey, who named him an ally of Rome. Gabinius’ invasion sought to restore Ptolemy to his throne. This was done against the orders of the Senate but with the approval of Pompey, then Rome’s leading politician, and only after the deposed king provided a 10,000 talent bribe. The Greek historian Plutarch records it was Antony who convinced Gabinius to finally act. After defeating the frontier forces of the Egyptian kingdom, Gabinius's army proceeded to attack the palace guards but they surrendered before a battle commenced. With Ptolemy XII restored as Rome’s client king, Gabinius garrisoned two thousand Roman soldiers, later known as the Gabiniani, in Alexandria to ensure Ptolemy’s authority. In return for its support, Rome exercised considerable power over the kingdom’s affairs, particularly control of the kingdom’s revenues and crop yields.

During the campaign in Egypt, Antony first met Cleopatra, the 14-year-old daughter of Ptolemy XII. Roman historian Appian of Alexandria later recorded Antony's desire for the Egyptian princess began at this meeting.

While Antony was serving Gabinius in the East, the domestic political situation had changed in Rome. In 60 BC, a secret agreement (known as the "First Triumvirate") was entered into between three men to control the Republic: Marcus Licinius Crassus, Gnaeus Pompey Magnus, and Gaius Julius Caesar. Crassus, Rome's wealthiest man, had defeated the slave rebellion of Spartacus in 70 BC; Pompey conquered much of the Eastern Mediterranean in the 60's BC; Caesar was Rome's Pontifex Maximus and a former general in Spain. In 59 BC, Caesar, with funding from Crassus, was elected Consul to pursue legislation favorable to Crassus and Pompey's interests. In return, Caesar was assigned the governorship of Illyricum, Cisalpine Gaul, and Transalpine Gaul for five years beginning in 58 BC. Caesar used his governorship as a launching point for his conquest of free Gaul. In 55 BC, Crassus and Pompey served as Consuls while Caesar's command was extended for another five years. Rome was effectively under the absolute power of these three men. The Triumvirate used the demagogue Publius Clodius Pulcher, Antony's patron, to exile their political rivals, notably Cicero and Cato the Younger.

During his early military service, Antony married his cousin Antonia Hybrida Minor, the daughter of Gaius Antonius Hybrida. Sometime between 54 and 30 BC, the union produced a single daughter, Antonia Prima. It is unclear if this was Antony's first marriage.

''Service under Caesar''
''Gallic Wars''

Antony's association with Publius Clodius Pulcher allowed him to achieve greater prominence. Clodius, through the influence of his benefactor Marcus Licinius Crassus, had developed a positive political relationship with Julius Caesar. Clodius secured Antony a position on Caesar's military staff in 54 BC, joining his conquest of Gaul. Serving under Caesar, Antony demonstrated excellent military leadership. Despite a temporary alienation later in life, Antony and Caesar developed friendly relations which would continue until Caesar's assassination in 44 BC. Caesar's influence secured greater political advancement for Antony. After a year of service in Gaul, Caesar dispatched Antony to Rome to formally begin his political career, receiving election as Quaestor for 52 BC as a member of the Populares faction. Assigned to assist Caesar, Antony returned to Gaul and commanded Caesar's cavalry during his victory at the Battle of Alesia against the Gallic High King Vercingetorix. Following his year in office, Antony was promoted by Caesar to the rank of Legate and assigned command of two legions (approximately 7,500 total soldiers).

During this time, the alliance between Caesar, Pompey, and Crassus had effectively ended. Caesar's daughter Julia, who had married Pompey to secure the alliance, died in 54 BC while Crassus was killed at the Battle of Carrhae in 53 BC. Without the stability they provided, the divide between Caesar and Pompey grew ever larger. Caesar's glory in conquering Gaul had served to further strain his alliance with Pompey, who, having grown jealous of his former ally, had drifted away from Caesar's democratic Populares party towards the oligarchic Optimates faction led by Cato. The supporters of Caesar, led by Clodius, and the supporters of Pompey, led by Titus Annius Milo, routinely clashed. In 52 BC, Milo succeeded in assassinating Clodius, resulting in widespread riots and the burning of the Senate meeting house, the Curia Hostilia, by Clodius' street gang. Anarchy resulted, causing the Senate to look to Pompey. Fearing the persecutions of Lucius Cornelius Sulla only thirty-years earlier, they avoided granting Pompey the dictatorship by instead naming him sole Consul for the year, giving him extraordinary but limited powers. Pompey ordered armed soldiers into the city to restore order and to eliminate the remnants of Clodius' gang.

Antony remained on Caesar's military staff until 50 BC, helping mopping-up actions across Gaul to secure Caesar's conquest. With the war over, Antony was sent back to Rome to act as Caesar's protector against Pompey and the other Optimates. With the support of Caesar, who as Pontifex Maximus was head of the Roman religion, Antony was appointed the College of Augurs, an important priestly office responsible for interpreting the will of the Roman gods by studying the flight of birds. All public actions required favorable auspices, granting the college considerable influence. Antony was then elected as one of the ten People's Tribunes for 49 BC. In this position, Antony could protect Caesar from his political enemies by vetoing any actions unfavorable to his patron.

''Civil War''

The feud between Caesar and Pompey erupted into open confrontation by early 49 BC. The Consuls for the year, Gaius Claudius Marcellus Maior and Lucius Cornelius Lentulus Crus, were firm Optimates opposed to Caesar. Pompey, though remaining in Rome, was then serving as the governor of Spain and commanded several legions. Upon assuming office in January, Antony immediately summoned a meeting of the Senate to resolve the conflict: he proposed both Caesar and Pompey lay down their commands and return to the status of mere private citizens. His proposal was well received by most of the senators but the Consuls and Cato vehemently opposed it. Antony then made a new proposal: Caesar would retain only two of his eight legions and the governorship of Illyrium if he was allowed to stand for the Consulship in absentia. This arrangement ensured his immunity from suit would continue, he had needed the Consulship to protect himself from prosecution by Pompey. Though Pompey found the concession satisfactory, Cato and Lentulus refused to back down, with Lentulus even expelling Antony from the Senate meeting by force. Antony fled Rome, fearing for his life, and returned to Caesar's camp on the banks of the Rubicon River, the southern limit of Caesar's lawful command.

Within days of Antony's expulsion, on 7 January 49 BC, the Senate reconvened. Under the leadership of Cato and with the tacit support of Pompey, the Senate passed the “final decree” (senatus consultum ultimum) stripping Caesar of his command and ordering him to return to Rome and stand trial for war crimes. The Senate further declared Caesar a traitor and a public enemy if he did not immediately disband his army. With all hopes of finding a peaceful solution gone after Antony's expulsion, Caesar used Antony as a pretext for marching on Rome. As Tribune, Antony's person was sacrosanct and therefore it was unlawful to harm him or refuse to recognize his veto. Three days later, on 10 January, Caesar crossed the Rubicon River, starting a civil war. During the southern march, Caesar placed Antony as his second in command.

Caesar's rapid advance surprised Pompey, who, along with the other chief members of the Optimates, fled Italy for Greece. After entering Rome, instead of pursuing Pompey, Caesar marched to Spain to defeat Pompeian-loyalists there. Meanwhile, Antony, with the rank of Propraetor despite never having served as Praetor, was installed as governor of Italy and commander of the army, stationed there while Marcus Lepidus, one of Caesar's staff officers, ran the provisional administration of Rome itself. Though Antony was well liked by his soldiers, most other citizens despised him for his lack of interest in the hardships they faced from the civil war.

By the end of the year 49 BC, Caesar, already the ruler of Gaul, had captured Italy, Spain, Sicily, and Sardinia out of Optimates control. In early 48 BC, he prepared to sail with seven legions to Greece to face Pompey. Caesar had entrusted the defense of Illyricum to Gaius Antonius, Antony's younger brother, and Publius Cornelius Dolabella. Pompey's forces, however, defeated them and assumed control of the Adriatic Sea along with it. Additionally, the two legions they commanded defected to Pompey. Without their fleet, Caesar lacked the necessary transport ships to cross into Greece with his seven legions. Instead, he sailed with only two and placed Antony in command of the remaining five at Brundisium with instructions to join him as soon as he was able. In early 48 BC, Lucius Scribonius Libo was given command of Pompey's fleet, comprising some fifty galleys. Moving off to Brundisium, he blockaded Antony. Antony, however, managed to trick Libo into pursuing some decoy ships, causing Libo’s squadron to be trapped and attacked. Most of Libo’s fleet managed to escape, but several of his troops were trapped and captured. With Libo gone, Antony joined Caesar in Greece by March 48 BC.

During the Greek campaign, Plutarch records Antony was Caesar's top general and second to only him in reputation. Antony joined Caesar at the western Balkan Peninsula and besieged Pompey's larger army at Dyrrhachium. With food sources running low, Caesar, in July, ordered a nocturnal assault on Pompey's camp, but Pompey's larger forces pushed back the assault. Though an indecisive result, the victory was a tactical win for Pompey. Pompey, however, did not order a counter-assault on Caesar's camp, allowing Caesar to retreat unhindered. Caesar would later remark the civil war would have ended that day if Pompey had only attacked him. Caesar managed to retreat to Thessaly, with Pompey in pursuit.

Assuming a defensive position at the plain of Pharsalus, Caesar's army prepared for pitched battle with Pompey's, which outnumbered his own two to one. At the Battle of Pharsalus on 9 August 48 BC, Caesar commanded the right wing opposite Pompey while Antony commanded the left, indicating Antony's status as Caesar's top general. The resulting battle was a decisive victory for Caesar. Though the civil war had not ended at Pharsulus, the battle marked the pinnacle of Caesar's power and effectively ended the Republic. The battle gave Caesar a much needed boost in legitimacy, as prior to the battle much of the Roman world outside Italy supported Pompey and the Optimates as the legitimate government of Rome. After Pompey's defeat, most of the Senate defected to Caesar, including many of the soldiers who had fought under Pompey. Pompey himself fled to Ptolemaic Egypt, but Pharaoh Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator feared retribution from Caesar and had Pompey assassinated upon his arrival.

''Governor of Italy''

Instead of immediately pursuing Pompey and the remaining Optimates, Caesar returned to Rome and was appointed Dictator with Antony as his Master of the Horse and second in command. Caesar presided over his own election to a second Consulship for 47 BC and then, after eleven days in office, resigned this dictatorship. Caesar then sailed to Egypt, where he deposed Ptolemy XIII in favor of his sister Cleopatra in 47 BC. The young Cleopatra became Caesar's mistress and bore him a son, Caesarion. Caesar's actions further strengthened Roman control over the already Roman-dominated kingdom.

While Caesar was away in Egypt, Antony remained in Rome to govern Italy and restore order.] Without Caesar to guide him, however, Antony quickly faced political difficulties and proved himself unpopular. The chief cause of his political challenges concerned debt forgiveness. One of the Tribunes for 47 BC, Publius Cornelius Dolabella, a former general under Pompey, proposed a law which would have canceled all outstanding debts. Antony opposed the law for political and personal reasons: he believed Caesar would not support such massive relief and suspected Dolabella had seduced his wife Antonia Hybrida Minor. When Dolabella sought to enact the law by force and seized the Roman Forum, Antony responded by unleashing his soldiers upon the assembled mass. The resulting instability, especially among Caesar's veterans who would have benefited from the law, forced Caesar to return to Italy by October 47 BC.

Antony's handling of the affair with Dolabella caused a cooling of his relationship with Caesar. Antony's violent reaction had caused Rome to fall into a state of anarchy. Caesar sought to mend relations with the populist leader; he was elected to a third term as Consul for 46 BC, but proposed the Senate should transfer the consulship to Dolabella. When Antony protested, Caesar was forced to withdraw the motion out of shame. Later, Caesar sought to exercise his prerogatives as Dictator and directly proclaim Dolabella as Consul instead. Antony again protested and, in his capacity as an Augur, declared the omens were unfavorable and Caesar again backed down. Seeing the expediency of removing Dolabella from Rome, Caesar ultimately pardoned him for his role in the riots and took him as one of his generals in his campaigns against the remaining Optimates resistance. Antony, however, was stripped of all official positions and received no appointments for the year 46 BC or 45 BC. Instead of Antony, Caesar appointed Marcus Aemilius Lepidus to be his Consular colleague for 46 BC. While Caesar campaigned in North Africa, Antony remained in Rome as a mere private citizen. After returning victorious from North Africa, Caesar was appointed Dictator for ten years and brought Cleopatra and their son to Rome. Antony again remained in Rome while Caesar, in 45 BC, sailed to Spain to defeat the final opposition to his rule. When Caesar returned in late 45 BC, the civil war was over.

During this time Antony married his third wife, Fulvia. Following the scandal with Dolabella, Antony had divorced his second wife and quickly married Fulvia. Fulvia had previously been married to both Publius Clodius Pulcher and Gaius Scribonius Curio, having been a widow since Curio's assassination in 52 BC. Though Antony and Fulvia were formally married in 47 BC, Cicero suggests the two had been in a relationship since at least 58 BC. The union produced two children: Marcus Antonius Antyllus (b. 47) and Iullus Antonius (b. 45).

''Assassination of Caesar'' ''The Ides of March''

Whatever conflicts existed between himself and Caesar, Antony remained faithful to Caesar, ensuring their estrangement did not last long. Antony reunited with Caesar at Narbo in 45 BC with full reconciliation coming in 44 BC when Antony was elected Consul alongside Caesar. Caesar planned a new invasion of Parthia and desired to leave Antony in Italy to govern Rome in his name. The reconciliation came soon after Antony rejected an offer by Gaius Trebonius, one of Caesar's generals, to join a conspiracy to assassinate Caesar.

Soon after assuming office together, the Lupercalia festival was held on 15 February 44 BC. The festival was held in honor of Lupa, the she-wolf who suckled the infant orphans Romulus and Remus, the founders of Rome. The political atmosphere of Rome at the time of the festival was deeply divided. Caesar had enacted a number of constitutional reforms which centralized effectively all political powers within his own hands. He was granted further honors, including a form of semi-official cult, with Antony as his high priest. Additionally, the day before the festival, Caesar had been named Dictator for Life, effectively granting unlimited power. Caesar's political rivals feared these reforms were his attempts at transforming the Republic into an open monarchy. During the festival's activities, Antony publicly offered Caesar a diadem, which Caesar refused. The event presented a powerful message: a diadem was a symbol of a king. By refusing it, Caesar demonstrated he had no intention of making himself King of Rome. Antony's motive for such actions is not clear and it is unknown if he acted with Caesar's prior approval or on his own.

A group of Senators resolved to kill Caesar to prevent him from seizing the throne. Chief among them were Marcus Junius Brutus and Gaius Cassius Longinus. Although Cassius was "the moving spirit" in the plot, winning over the chief assassins to the cause of tyrannicide, Brutus, with his family's history of deposing Rome's kings, became their leader. Cicero, though not personally involved in the conspiracy, later claimed Antony's actions sealed Caesar's fate as such an obvious display of Caesar's preeminence motivated them to act. Originally, the conspirators had planned to eliminate not only Caesar but also many of his supporters, including Antony, but Brutus rejected the proposal, limiting the conspiracy to Caesar alone. With Caesar preparing to depart for Parthia in late March, the conspirators prepared to act when Caesar appeared for the Senate meeting on the Ides of March (15 March).

Antony, having learned of the plot the night before, went to stop Caesar from attending the meeting. However, a group of senators intercepted Caesar just as he was passing the Theater of Pompey, where the Senate was temporarily meeting, and directed him towards the meeting before Antony could reach him. According to the Greek historian Plutarch, as Caesar arrived at the Senate, Lucius Tillius Cimber presented him with a petition to recall his exiled brother. The other conspirators crowded round to offer their support. Within moments, the entire group, including Brutus, was striking out at the dictator. Caesar attempted to get away, but, blinded by blood, he tripped and fell; the men continued stabbing him as he lay defenseless on the lower steps of the portico. According to Roman historian Eutropius, around 60 or more men participated in the assassination. Caesar was stabbed 23 times and died from the blood loss attributable to multiple stab wounds.

''Leader of the Caesarian Party''

In the turmoil surrounding the assassination, Antony escaped Rome dressed as a slave, fearing Caesar's death would be the start of a bloodbath among his supporters. When this did not occur, he soon returned to Rome. The conspirators, who styled themselves the Liberatores ("The Liberators"), had barricaded themselves on the Capitoline Hill for their own safety. Though they believed Caesar's death would restore the Republic, Caesar had been immensely popular with the Roman middle and lower classes, who became enraged upon learning a small group of aristocrats had killed their champion.

Antony, as the sole Consul, soon took the initiative and seized the state treasury. Calpurnia Pisonis, Caesar's widow, presented him with Caesar's personal papers and custody of his extensive property, clearly marking him as Caesar's heir and leader of the Caesarian faction. Caesar's Master of the Horse Marcus Aemilius Lepidus marched over 6,000 troops into Rome on 16 March to restore order and to act as the bodyguards of the Caesarian faction. Lepidus wanted to storm the Capitol, but Antony preferred a peaceful solution as a majority of both the Liberators and Caesar's own supporters preferred a settlement over civil war. On 17 March, at Antony's arrangement, the Senate met to discuss a compromise, which, due to the presence of Caesar's veterans in the city, was quickly reached. Caesar's assassins would be pardoned of their crimes and, in return, all of Caesar's actions would be ratified. In particular, the offices assigned to both Brutus and Cassius by Caesar were likewise ratified. Antony also agreed to accept the appointment of his rival Dolabella as his Consular colleague to replace Caesar. Having neither troops, money, nor popular support, the Liberatores were forced to accept Antony's proposal. This compromise was a great success for Antony, who managed to simultaneously appease Caesar's veterans, reconcile the Senate majority, and appear to the Liberatores as their partner and protector.

On 19 March, Caesar's will was opened and read. In it, Caesar posthumously adopted his great-nephew Gaius Octavius and named him his principal heir. Then only 19 years old and stationed with Caesar's army in Macedonia, the youth became a member of Caesar's Julian clan, changing his name to "Gaius Julius Caesar Octavianus" (Octavian) in accordance with the conventions of Roman adoption. Though not the chief beneficiary, Antony did receive some bequests.

Shortly after the compromise was reached, as a sign of good faith, Brutus, against the advice of Cassius and Cicero, agreed Caesar would be given a public funeral and his will would be validated. Caesar's funeral was held on 20 March. Antony, as Caesar's faithful lieutenant and reigning Consul, was chosen to preside over the ceremony and to recite the elegy. During the demagogic speech, he enumerated the deeds of Caesar and, publicly reading his will, detailed the donations Caesar had left to the Roman people. Antony then seized the blood-stained toga from Caesar's body and presented it to the crowd. Worked into a fury by the bloody spectacle, the assembly rioted. Several buildings in the Forum and some houses of the conspirators were burned to the ground. Panicked, many of the conspirators fled Italy.[66] Under the pretext of not being able to guarantee their safety, Antony relieved Brutus and Cassius of their judicial duties in Rome and instead assigned them responsibility for procuring wheat for Rome from Sicily and Asia. Such an assignment, in addition to being unworthy of their rank, would have kept them far from Rome and shifted the balance towards Antony. Refusing such secondary duties, the two traveled to Greece instead. Additionally, Cleopatra left Rome to return to Egypt.

Despite the provisions of Caesar's will, Antony proceeded to act as leader of the Caesarian faction, including appropriating for himself a portion of Caesar's fortune rightfully belonging to Octavian. Antony enacted the Lex Antonia, which formally abolished the Dictatorship, in an attempt to consolidate his power by gaining the support of the Senatorial class. He also enacted a number of laws he claimed to have found in Caesar's papers to ensure his popularity with Caesar's veterans, particularly by providing land grants to them. Lepidus, with Antony's support, was named Pontifex Maximus to succeed Caesar. To solidify the alliance between Antony and Lepidus, Antony's daughter Antonia Prima was engaged to Lepidus's son, also named Lepidus. Surrounding himself with a bodyguard of over six thousand of Caesar's veterans, Antony presented himself as Caesar's true successor, largely ignoring Octavian.

''First Conflict with Octavian''

Octavian arrived in Rome in May to claim his inheritance. Although Antony had amassed political support, Octavian still had opportunity to rival him as the leading member of the Caesarian faction. The Senatorial Republicans increasingly viewed Antony as a new tyrant. Antony had lost the support of many Romans and supporters of Caesar when he opposed the motion to elevate Caesar to divine status. When Antony refused to relinquish Caesar's vast fortune to him, Octavian borrowed heavily to fulfill the bequests in Caesar's will to the Roman people and to his veterans, as well as to establish his own bodyguard of veterans. This earned him the support of Caesarian sympathizers who hoped to use him as a means of eliminating Antony. The Senate, and Cicero in particular, viewed Antony as the greater danger of the two. By summer 44 BC, Antony was in a difficult position due to his actions regarding his compromise with the Liberatores following Caesar's assassination. He could either denounce the Liberatores as murderers and alienate the Senate or he could maintain his support for the compromise and risk betraying the legacy of Caesar, strengthening Octavian's position. In either case, his situation as ruler of Rome would be weakened. Roman historian Cassius Dio later recorded that while Antony, as reigning Consul, maintained the advantage in the relationship, the general affection of the Roman people was shifting to Octavian due to his status as Caesar's son.

Supporting the Senatorial faction against Antony, Octavian, in September 44 BC, encouraged the leading Senator Marcus Tullius Cicero to attack Antony in a series of speeches portraying him as a threat to the Republican order. Risk of civil war between Antony and Octavian grew. Octavian continued to recruit Caesar's veterans to his side, away from Antony, with two of Antony's legions defecting in November 44 BC. At that time, Octavian, only a private citizen, lacked legal authority to command the Republic's armies, making his command illegal. With popular opinion in Rome turning against him and his Consular term nearing its end, Antony attempted to secure a favorable military assignment to secure an army to protect himself. The Senate, as was custom, assigned Antony and Dolabella the provinces of Macedonia and Syria, respectively, to govern in 43 BC after their Consular terms expired. Antony, however, objected to the assignment, preferring to govern Cisalpine Gaul which had been assigned to Decimus Junius Brutus Albinus, one of Caesar's assassins. When Decimus refused to surrender his province, Antony marched north in December 44 BC with his remaining soldiers to take the province by force, besieging Decimus at Mutina. The Senate, led by a fiery Cicero, denounced Antony's actions and declared him an outlaw.

Ratifying Octavian's extraordinary command on 1 January 43 BC, the Senate dispatched him along with Consuls Hirtius and Pansa to defeat Antony and his five legions. Antony's forces were defeated at the Battle of Mutina in April 43 BC, forcing Antony to retreat to Transalpine Gaul. Both consuls were killed, however, leaving Octavian in sole command of their armies, some eight legions.

''The Second Triumvirate'' ''Forming the Alliance''

With Antony defeated, the Senate, hoping to eliminate Octavian and the remainder of the Caesarian party, assigned command of the Republic's legions to Decimus. Sextus Pompey, son of Caesar's old rival Pompey Magnus, was given command of the Republic's fleet from his base in Sicily while Brutus and Cassius were granted the governorships of Macedonia and Syria respectively. These appointments attempted to renew the "Republican" cause. However, the eight legions serving under Octavian, composed largely of Caesar's veterans, refused to follow one of Caesar's murderers, allowing Octavian to retain his command. Meanwhile, Antony recovered his position by joining forces with Marcus Aemilius Lepidus, who had been assigned the governorship of Transalpine Gaul and Nearer Spain. Antony sent Lepidus to Rome to broker a conciliation. Though he was an ardent Caesarian, Lepdius had maintained friendly relations with the Senate and with Sextus Pompey. His legions, however, quickly joined Antony, giving him control over seventeen legions, the largest army in the West.

By mid-May, Octavian began secret negotiations to form an alliance with Antony to provide a united Caesarian party against the Liberators. Remaining in Cisalpine Gaul, Octavian dispatched emissaries to Rome in July 43 BC demanding he be appointed Consul to replace Hirtius and Pansa and that the decree declaring Antony a public enemy be rescinded. When the Senate refused, Octavian marched on Rome with his eight legions and assumed control of the city in August 43 BC. Octavian proclaimed himself Consul, rewarded his soldiers, and then set about prosecuting Caesar's murderers. By the lex Pedia, all of the conspirators and Sextus Pompey were convicted in absentia and declared public enemies. Then, at the instigation of Lepidus, Octavian went to Cisalpine Gaul to meet Antony.

In November 43 BC, Octavian, Lepidus, and Antony met near Bononia.[86] After two days of discussions, the group agreed to establish a three man dictatorship to govern the Republic for five years, known as the "Three Man for the Restoration of the Republic" (Latin: "Triumviri Rei publicae Constituendae"), known to modern historians as the Second Triumvirate. In addition, they divided amongst themselves military command of the Republic's armies and provinces: Antony received Gaul, Lepidus Spain, and Octavian (as the junior partner) Africa. The Government of Italy was undivided between the three. The Triumvirate would have to conquer the rest of Rome's holdings, whilst the Eastern Mediterranean remained in the hands of Brutus and Cassius and control of the Mediterranean islands rested with Sextus Pompey. On 27 November 43 BC, the Triumvirate was formally established by law, the lex Titia. To finalize their alliance, Octavian married Antony's step-daughter Clodia Pulchra.

The primary objective of the Triumvirate was to avenge Caesar's death and to make war upon his murderers. Before marching against Brutus and Cassius in the East, the Triumvirs decided to eliminate their enemies in Rome. To do so, they employed a legalized form of mass murder: proscription. First used by the Dictator Lucius Cornelius Sulla in 82 BC, Sulla drew up a list of his political enemies to purge Rome of opposition to his rule. Any man whose name appeared on the list was stripped of his citizenship and excluded from all protection under the law. Furthermore, reward money was given to anyone who gave information leading to the death of a proscribed man, and any person who killed a proscribed man was entitled to keep part of his property, with the remainder going to the state. No person could inherit money or property from proscribed men, nor could any woman married to a proscribed man remarry after his death.

Like Sulla's proscription before it, the Triumvirate's proscription produced deadly results: one third of the Senate and two thousand Roman knights were killed. Among the most famous outlaws condemned was Cicero, who was executed on December 7. In addition to the political consequences of eliminating opposition, the proscription also restored the State Treasury, which had been depleted by Caesar's civil war the decade before. The fortune of a proscribed man would be confiscated by the state, giving the Triumvirate the funds they needed to pay for the coming war against Brutus and Cassius. When the proceeds from the sale of confiscated estates of the proscribed were insufficient to finance the war, the Triumvirs imposed new taxes, especially on the wealthy. By January 42 BC the proscription officially ended. Though only lasting two months and far less bloody than that of Sulla, the episode traumatized Roman society. To avoid being killed, a number of outlaws fled to either Sextus Pompey in Sicily or to the Liberators in the East.[88] In order to legitimize their own rule, all Senators who survived the proscription were allowed to keep their positions if they swore allegiance to the Triumvirate. In addition, to justify their war of vengeance against the murderers of Caesar, on 1 January 42 BC, the Triumvirate officially deified Caesar as "The Divine Julius".

''War against the Liberators''

Due to the infighting within the Triumvirate during 43 BC, Brutus and Cassius had assumed control of much of Rome's eastern territories, including amassing a large army. Before the Triumvirate could cross the Adriatic Sea into Greece where the Liberators had stationed their army, the Triumvirate had to address the threat posed by Sextus Pompey and his fleet. From his base in Sicily, Sextus raided the Italian coast and blockaded the Triumvirs. Octavian's friend and admiral Quintus Rufus Salvidienus thwarted an attack by Sextus against the southern Italian mainland at Rhegium, but Salvidienus was then defeated in the resulting naval battle because of the inexperience of his crews. Only when Antony arrived with his fleet was the blockade broken. Though the blockade was defeated, control of Sicily remained in Sextus's hand, but the defeat of the Liberators was the Triumvirate's first priority.

In the summer of 42 BC, Octavian and Antony sailed for Macedonia to face the Liberators with nineteen legions, the vast majority of their army. (approximately 100,000 regular infantry plus supporting cavalry and irregular auxiliary units), leaving Rome under the administration of Lepidus. Likewise, the army of the Liberators also commanded an army of nineteen legions; their legions, however, were not at full strength while the legions of Antony and Octavian were. While the Triumvirs commanded a larger number of infantry, the Liberators commanded a larger cavalry contingent. The Liberators, who controlled Macedonia, did not wish to engage in a decisive battle, but rather to attain a good defensive position and then use their naval superiority to block the Triumvirs’ communications with their supply base in Italy. They had spent the previous months plundering Greek cities to swell their war-chest and had gathered in Thrace with the Roman legions from the Eastern provinces and levies from Rome's client kingdoms.

Brutus and Cassius held a position on the high ground along both sides of the via Egnatia west of the city of Philippi. The south position was anchored to a supposedly impassable marsh, while the north was bordered by impervious hills. They had plenty of time to fortify their position with a rampart and a ditch. Brutus put his camp on the north while Cassius occupied the south of the via Egnatia. Antony arrived shortly and positioned his army on the south of the via Egnatia, while Octavian put his legions north of the road. Antony offered battle several times, but the Liberators were not lured to leave their defensive stand. Thus, Antony tried to secretly outflank the Liberators' position through the marshes in the south. This provoked a pitched battle on 3 October 42 BC. Antony commanded the Triumvirate's army due to Octavian's sickness on the day, with Antony directly controlling the right flank opposite Cassius. Because of his health, Octavian remained in camp while his lieutenants assumed a position on the left flank opposite Brutus. In the resulting first battle of Philippi, Antony defeated Cassius and captured his camp while Brutus overran Octavian's troops and penetrated into the Triumvirs' camp but was unable to capture the sick Octavian. The battle was a tactical draw but due to poor communications Cassius believed the battle was a complete defeat and committed suicide to prevent being captured.

Brutus assumed sole command of the Liberator army and preferred a war of attrition over open conflict. His officers, however, were dissatisfied with these defensive tactics and his Caesarian veterans threatened to defect, forcing Brutus to give battle at the second battle of Philippi on 23 October. While the battle was initially evenly matched, Antony's leadership routed Brutus's forces. Brutus committed suicide the day after the defeat and the remainder of his army swore allegiance to the Triumvirate. Over fifty thousand Romans died in the two battles. While Antony treated the losers mildly, Octavian dealt cruelly with his prisoners and even beheaded Brutus's corpse.

The battles of Philippi ended the civil war in favor of the Caesarian faction. With the defeat of the Liberators, only Sextus Pompey and his fleet remained to challenge the Triumvirate's control over the Republic.

'''Master of the Roman East'''
----

''Division of the Republic''

The victory at Philippi left the members of the Triumvirate as masters of the Republic, save Sextus Pompey in Sicily. Upon returning to Rome, the Triumvirate repartioned rule of Rome's provinces between themselves, with Antony as the clear senior partner. He received the largest distribution, governing all of the Eastern provinces while retaining Gaul in the West. Octavian's position improved, as he received Spain, which was taken from Lepidus. Lepdius was then reduced to holding only Africa, and he assumed a clearly tertiary role in the Triumvirate. Rule over Italy remained undivided, but Octavian was assigned the difficult and unpopular task of demobilizing their veterans and providing them with land distributions in Italy. Antony assumed direct control of the East while he installed one of his lieutenants as the ruler of Gaul. During his absence, several of his supporters held key positions at Rome to protect his interests there.

The East was in need of reorganization after the rule of the Liberators in the previous years. In addition, Rome contended with Parthian Empire for dominance of the Near East. The Parthian threat to the Triumvirate's rule was urgent due to the fact that the Parthians supported the Liberators in the recent civil war, which aid included the supply troops at Philippi. As ruler of the East, Antony also assumed responsibility for overseeing Caesar's planned invasion of Parthia to avenge the defeat of Marcus Licinius Crassus at the Battle of Carrhae in 53 BC.

In 42 BC, the Roman East was composed of a few directly controlled provinces. The provinces included Macedonia, Asia, Bithynia, Cilicia, Cyprus, Syria, and Cyrenaica. Approximately half of the Eastern territory was controlled by Rome's client kingdoms, nominally independent kingdoms subject to Roman direction. These kingdoms included:

* Odrysian Thrace in Eastern Europe
* The Bosporan Kingdom along the northern coast of the Black Sea
* Galatia, Pontus, Cappadocia, Armenia, and several smaller kingdoms in Asia Minor
* Judea, Commagene, and the Nabataean Kingdom in the Middle East
* Ptolemaic Egypt in Africa

''Activities in the East''

Antony spent the winter of 42 BC in Athens, where he ruled generously towards the Greek cities. A proclaimed philhellene ("Friend of all things Greek"), Antony supported Greek culture to win the loyalty of the inhabitants of the Greek East. He attended religious festivals and ceremonies, including initiation into the Eleusinian Mysteries, a secret cult dedicated to the worship of the goddesses Demeter and Persephone. Beginning in 41 BC, he traveled across the Aegean Sea to Anatolia, leaving his friend Lucius Marcius Censorius as governor of Macedonia and Achaea. Upon his arrival in Ephesus in Asia, Antony was worshiped as the god Dionysus born a new. He demanded heavy taxes from the Hellenic cities in return for his pro-Greek culture policies, but exempted those cities which had remained loyal to Caesar during the his civil war and compensated those cities which had suffered under Caesar's assassins, including Rhodes, Lycian, and Tarsus. He granted pardons to all Roman nobles living in the East who had supported the Republican cause, except for Caesar's assassins.

Ruling from Ephesus, Antony consolidated Rome's hegemony in the East, receiving envoys from Rome's client kingdoms and intervening in their dynastic affairs, extracting enormous financial "gifts" from them in the process. Though King Deiotarus of Galatia supported Brutus and Cassius following Caesar's assassination, Antony allowed him to retain his position. He also confirmed Ariarathes X as king of Cappadocia after the execution of his brother Ariobarzanes III of Cappadocia by Cassius before the battle of Philippi. In Hasmonean Judea, several Jewish delegations complained to Antony of the harsh rule of Phasael and Herod, the sons of Rome's assassinated chief Jewish minister Antipater the Idumaean. After Herod offered him a large financial gift, Antony confirmed the brothers in their positions. Antony also began an affair with Glaphyra, the widow of Archelaus the Elder.[99] Archelaus had served as the high priest and ruler of the temple state of Comana in Cappadocia.[100] Through her influence, Antony installed her son Archelaus the Younger as Rome's client king of Cappadocia in 36 BC after he executed Ariarathes X of Cappadocia for disloyalty.

In October 41, Antony requested Rome's chief eastern vassal, the queen of Ptolemaic Egypt Cleopatra, meet him at Tarsus in Cilicia. Antony had first met a young Cleopatra while campaigning in Egypt in 55 BC and again in 48 BC when Caesar had backed her as queen of Egypt over the claims of her half-sister Arsinoe. Cleopatra would bear Caesar a son, Caesarion, in 47 BC and the two living in Rome as Caesar's guests until his assassination in 44 BC. After Caesar's assassination, Cleopatra and Caesarion returned to Egypt, where she named the child as her co-ruler. In 42 BC, the Triumvirate, in recognition for Cleopatra's help towards Publius Cornelius Dolabella in opposition to the Liberators, granted official recognition to Caesarion's position as king of Egypt. Arriving in Tarus aboard of her magnificent ship, Cleopatra invited Antony to a grand banquet to solidify their alliance. [note 4] As the most powerful of Rome's eastern vassals, Egypt was indispensable in Rome's planned military invasion of the Parthian Empire. At Cleopatra's request, Antony ordered the execution of Arsinoe, who, though marched in Caesar's triumphal parade in 46 BC, had been granted sanctuary at the temple of Artemis in Ephesus. Antony and Cleopatra then spent the winter of 41 BC together in Alexandria. Despite his marriage to Fulvia, Cleopatra bore Antony twin children, Alexander Helios and Cleopatra Selene II, in 40 BC. Antony also granted formal control over Cyprus, which had been under Egyptian control since 47 BC during the turmoil of Caesar's civil war, to Cleopatra in 40 BC as a gift for her loyalty to Rome.

Antony, in his first months in the East, raised money, reorganized his troops, and secured the alliance of Rome's client kingdoms. He also promoted himself as Hellenistic ruler, which won him the affection of the Greek peoples of the East but also made him the target of Octavian's propaganda in Rome. According to some ancient authors, Antony led a carefree life of luxury in Alexandria. Upon learning the Parthian Empire had invaded Rome's territory in early 40 BC, Antony left Egypt for Syria to confront the invasion. However, after a short stay in Tyre, he was forced to sail with his army to Italy to confront Octavian due to Octavian's war against Antony's wife and brother.

''Fulvia's Civil War''

Following the defeat of Brutus and Cassius, while Antony was stationed in the East, Octavian was authority over the West. Octavian's chief responsibility was distributing land to tens of thousands of Caesar's veterans who had fought for the Triumvirate. Additionally, tens of thousands of veterans who had fought for the Republican cause in the war also required land grants. This was necessary to ensure they would not support a political opponent of the Triumvirate. However, the Triumvirs did not possess sufficient state-controlled land to allot to the veterans. This left Octavian with two choices: alienating many Roman citizens by confiscating their land, or alienating many Roman soldiers who might back a military rebellion against the Triumvirate's rule. Octavian choose the former. As many as eighteen Roman towns through Italy were affected by the confiscations of 41 BC, with entire populations driven out.

Led by Fulvia, the wife of Antony, the Senators grew hostile towards Octavian over the issue of the land confiscations. According to the ancient historian Cassius Dio, Fulvia was the most powerful woman in Rome at the time. According to Dio, while Publius Servilius Vatia and Lucius Antonius were the Consuls for the year 41 BC, real power was vested in Fulvia. As the mother-in-law of Octavian and the wife of Antony, no actions was taken by the Senate without her support. Fearing Octavian's land grants would cause the loyalty of the Caesarian veterans to shift away from Antony, Fulvia traveled constantly with her children to the new veteran settlements in order to remind the veterans of their debt to Antony. Fulvia also attempted to delay the land settlements until Antony returned to Rome, so that he could share credit for the settlements. With the help of Antony's brother, the Consul of 41 BC Lucius Antonius, Fulvia encouraged the Senate to oppose Octavian's land policies.

The conflict between Octavian and Fulvia caused great political and social unrest throughout Italy. Tensions escalated into open war, however, when Octavian divorced Clodia Pulchra, Fulvia's daughter from her first husband Publius Clodius Pulcher. Outraged, Fulvia, supported by Lucius, raised an army to fight for Antony's rights against Octavian. According to the ancient historian Appian, Fulvia's chief reason for the war was her jealousy of Antony's affairs with Cleopatra in Egypt and desire to draw Antony back to Rome. Lucius and Fulvia took a political and martial gamble in opposing Octavian and Lepidus, however, as the Roman army still depended on the Triumvirs for their salaries. Lucius and Fulvia, supported by their army, marched on Rome and promised the people an end to the Triumvirate in favor of Antony's sole rule. However, when Octavian returned to the city with his army, the pair was forced to retreat to Perusia in Etruria. Octavian placed the city under siege while Lucius waited for Antony's legions in Gaul to come to his aid. Away in the East and embarrassed by Fulvia's actions, Antony gave no instructions to his legions. Without reinforcements, Lucius and Fulvia were forced to surrender in February 40 BC. While Octavian pardoned Lucius for his role in the war and even granted him command in Spain as his chief lieutenant there, Fulvia was forced to flee to Greece with her children. With the war over, Octavian was left in sole control over Italy. When Antony's governor of Gaul died, Octavian took over his legions there, further strengthening his control over the West.

Despite the Parthian Empire's invasion of Rome's eastern territories, Fulvia's civil war forced Antony to leave the East and return to Rome in order to secure his position. Meeting her in Athens, Antony rebuked Fulvia for her actions before sailing on to Italy with his army to face Octavian, laying siege to Brundisium. This new conflict proved untenable for both Octavian and Antony, however. Their centurions, who had become important figures politically, refused to fight due to their shared service under Caesar, with the legions under their command followed suit. Meanwhile, in Sicyon, Fulvia died of a sudden and unknown illness. Fulvia's death and the mutiny of their soldiers allowed the triumvirs to effect a reconciliation through a new power sharing agreement in September 40 BC. The Roman world was redivided, with Antony receiving the Eastern provinces, Octavian receiving the Western provinces, and with Lepidus being relegated to a clearly junior position as governor of Africa. This agreement, known as the Treaty of Brundisium, reinforced the Triumvirate and allowed Antony begin preparing for Caesar's long-awaited campaign against the Parthian Empire. As a symbol of their renewed alliance, Antony married Octavia, Octavian's sister, in October 40 BC.

''Antony's Parthian War'' ''Roman-Parthian Relations''

The rise of the Parthian Empire in the 3rd century BC and Rome's expansion into the Eastern Mediterranean during the 2nd century BC brought the two powers into direct contact, causing centuries of tumultuous and strained relations. Though periods of peace developed cultural and commercial exchanges, war was a constant threat. Influence over the buffer state of the Kingdom of Armenia, located to the east Roman Syria in and north-western Mesopotamia, was often a central issue in the Roman-Parthian conflict. In 95 BC, Parthian Shah Mithridates II, installed Tigranes the Great as Parthian's client-king over Armenia. Tigranes would wage a series of three wars against Rome before being ultimately defeated by Pompey in 66 BC. Thereafter, with his son Artavasdes II in Rome as a hostage, Tigranes would rule Armenia as an ally of Rome until his death in 55 BC. Rome then installed Artavasdes II as king and continued its influence over Armenia.

In 53 BC, Rome's governor of Syria, Marcus Licinius Crassus, led an expedition across the Euphrates River into Parthian territory to confront the Parthian Shah Orodes II. Artavasdes II offered Crassus the aid of nearly forty thousand troops to assist his Parthian expedition on the condition that Crassus invade through Armenia as the safer route. Crassus refused, choosing instead the more direct route by crossing the Euphrates directly into desert Parthian territory. Crassus' actions proved disastrous as his army was defeated at the Battle of Carrhae by a numerically inferior Parthian force. Crassus' defeat forced Armenia to shift its loyalty to Parthia, with Artavasdes II's sister marrying Orodes' son and heir Pacorus.

In early 44 BC, Julius Caesar announced his intentions to invade Parthia and restore Roman power in the East. His reasons were to punish the Parthians for assisting Pompey in the recent civil war, to avenge Crassus' defeat at Carrhae, and especially to match the glory of Alexander the Great for himself. Before Caesar could launch his campaign, however, he was assassinated. As part of the compromise between Antony and the Republicans to restore order following Caesar's murder, Publius Cornelius Dolabella was assigning the governorship of Syria and command over Caesar's planned Parthian campaign. The compromise did not hold, however, and the Republicans were forced to flee to the East. The Republicans directed Quintus Labienus to attract the Parthians to their side in the resulting war against Antony and Octavian. After the Republicans were defeated at the Battle of Philippi, Labienus joined the Parthians. Despite Rome's internal turmoil during the time, the Parthians did not immediately benefit from the power vacuum in the East due to Orodes II's reluctance despite Labienus' urgings to the contrary.

In the summer of 41 BC, Antony, to resassert Roman power in the East, conquered Palmyra on the Roman-Parthian border. Antony then spent the winter of 41 BC in Alexandria with Cleopatra, leaving only two legions to defend the Syrian border against Parthian incursions. The legions, however, were composed of former Republican troops and Labienus convinced Orodes II to invade.

''Parthian Invasion''

A Parthian army, led by Orodes II's eldest son Pacorus, invaded Syria in early 40 BC. Labienus, the Republican ally of Brutus and Cassius, accompanied him to advise him and to rally the former Republican soldiers stationed in Syria to the Parthian cause. Labienus recruited many of the former Republican soldiers to the Parthian campaign in opposition to Antony. The joint Parthian-Roman force, after initial success in Syria, separated to lead their offensive in two directions: Pacorus marched south toward Hasmonean Judea while Labienus crossed the Taurus Mountains to the north into Cilicia. Labienus conquered southern Anatolia with little resistance. The Roman governor of Asia, Lucius Munatius Plancus, a partisan of Antony, was forced to flee his province, allowing Labienus to recruit the Roman soldiers stationed there. For his part, Pacorus advanced south to Phoenicia and Palestine. In Hasmonean Judea, the exiled prince Antigonus allied himself with the Parthians. When his brother, Rome's client king Hyrcanus II, refused to accept Parthian domination, he was deposed in favor of Antigonus as Parthia's client king in Judea. Pacorus' conquest had capture much of the Syrian and Palestinian interior, with much of the Phoenician coast occupied as well. The city of Tyre remained the last major Roman outpost in the region.

Anthony, then in Egypt with Cleopatra, did not respond immediately to the Parthian invasion. Though he left Alexandria for Tyre in early 40 BC, when he learned of the civil war between his wife and Octavian, he was forced to return to Italy with his army to secure his position in Rome rather than defeat the Pathians. Instead, Anthony dispatched Publius Ventidius Bassus to check the Parthian advance. Arriving in the East in spring 39 BC, Ventidius surprised Labienus near the Taurus Mountains, claiming victory at the Cilician Gates. Ventidius ordered Labienus executed as a traitor and the formerly rebellious Roman soldiers under his command were reincorporated under Antony's control. He then met a Parthian army at the border between Cilicia and Syria, defeating it and killing a large portion of the Parthian soldiers at the Amanus Pass. Ventidius's actions temporarily halted the Parthian advanced and restored Roman authority in the East, forcing Pacorus to abandon his conquests and return to Parthia.

In the spring of 38 BC, the Parthians resumed their offensive with Pacorus leading an army across the Euphrates. Ventidius, in order to gain time, leaked disinformation to Pacorus implying that he should cross the Euphrates River at their usual ford. Pacorus did not trust this information and decided to cross the river much farther downstream; this was what Ventidius hoped would occur and gave him time to get his forces ready. The Parthians faced no opposition and proceeded to the town of Gindarus in Cyrrhestica where Ventidius's army was waiting. At the Battle of Cyrrhestica, Ventidius inflicted an overwhelming defeat against the Parthians which resulted in the death of Pacorus. Overall, the Roman army had achieved a complete victory with Ventidius' three successive victories forcing the Parthians back across the Euphrates. Pacorus' death threw the Parthian Empire into chaos. Shah Orodes II, overwhelmed by the grief of his son's death, appointed his younger son Phraates IV as his successor. However, Phraates IV assassinated Orodes II in late 38 BC and succeeding him on the throne.

Ventidius feared Antony's wrath if he invaded Parthian territory, and thereby steal his glory, so he instead attacked and subdue the eastern kingdoms which had revolted against Rome following Rome's defeat at Carrhae. One such rebel was King Antiochus of Commagene, whom he besieged in Samosata. Antiochus tried to make peace with Ventidius, but Ventidius told him to approach Antony directly. After peace was concluded, Antony sent Ventidius back to Rome where he celebrated a triumph, the first Roman to triumph over the Parthians.

''Conflict with Sextus''

While Antony and the other Triumvirs ratified the Treaty of Brundisium to redivide the Roman world among themselves, the rebel general Sextus Pompey, the son of Caesar's rival Pompey the Great, was largely ignored. From his stronghold on Sicily, he continued his piracy activities across Italy and blocking the shipment of grain to Rome. The lack of food in Rome caused the public to blame the Triumvirate and shift its sympathies towards Pompey. This pressure forced the Triumvirs to meet with Sextus in early 39 BC.

While Octavian wanted an end to the ongoing blockade of Italy, Anthony sought peace in the West in order to make the Triumvirate's legions available for his service in his planned campaign against the Parthians. Though the Triumvirs rejected Sextus' initial request to replace Lepidus as the third man within the Triumvirate, they did grant other concessions. Under the terms of the Treaty of Misenum, Sextus was allowed to retain control over Sicily and Sardinia, with the provinces of Corsica and Greece being added to his territory. He was also promised a future position with the Priestly College of Augurs and the Consulship for 35 BC. In exchange, Sextus agreed to end his naval blockade of Italy, supply Rome with grain, and halt his piracy of Roman merchant ships.[136] However, the most important provision of the Treaty was the end of the proscription the Trimumvirate had begun in late 43 BC. Many of the proscribed Senators, rather than face death, fled to Sicily seeking Sextus' protection. With the exception of those responsible for Caesar's assassination, all those proscribed were allowed to return to Rome and promised compensation. This caused Sextus to lose many valuable allies as the formerly exiled Senators gradually aligned themselves with either Octavian or Antony. To secure the peace, Octavian betrothed his three-year-old nephew and Antony's stepson Marcus Claudius Marcellus to Sextus' daughter Pompeia. With peace in the West secured, Antony planned to retaliate against Parthia by invading their territory. Under an agreement with Octavian, Antony would be supplied with extra troops for his campaign. With this military purpose on his mind, Antony sailed to Greece with Octavia, where he behaved in a most extravagant manner, assuming the attributes of the Greek god Dionysus in 39 BC.

The peace with Sextus was short lived, however. When Sextus demanded control over Greece as the agreement provided, Antony demanded the province's tax revenues be to fund the Parthian campaign. Sextus refused. Meanwhile, Sextus' admiral Menas betrayed him, shifting his loyalty to Octavian and thereby granting him control of Corsica, Sardinia, three of Sextus' legions, and a larger naval force. These actions worked to renew Sextus' blockade of Italy, preventing Octavian from sending the promised troops to Antony for the Parthian campaign. This new delay caused Antony to quarrel with Octavian, forcing Octavia to mediate a truce between them. Under the Treaty of Tarentum, Antony provided a large naval force for Octavian's use against Sextus while Octavian promised to raise new legions for Antony to support his invasion of Parthia. As the term of the Triumvirate was set to expire at the end of 38 BC, the two unilaterally extended their term of office another five years until 33 BC without seeking approval of the Senate or the popular assemblies. To seal the Treaty, Antony's elder son Marcus Antonius Antyllus, then only 6 years old, was betrothed to Octavian's only daughter Julia, then only an infant. With the Treaty signed, Antony returned to the East, leaving Octavia in Italy.

''Reconquest of Judea''

With Publius Ventidius Bassus returned to Rome in triumph for his defensive campaign against the Parthians, Antony appointed Gaius Sosius as the new governor of Syria and Cilicia in early 38 BC. Antony, still in the West negotiating with Octavian, ordered Sosius to depose Antigonus, who had been installed in the recent Parthian invasion as the ruler of Hasmonean Judea, and to make Herod the new Roman client king in the region. Years before in 40 BC, the Roman Senate has proclaimed Herod "King of the Jews" because Herod had been a loyal supporter of Hyrcanus II, Rome's previous client king before the Parthian invasion, and was from a family with long standing connections to Rome. The Romans hoped to use Herod as a bulwark against the Parthians in the coming campaign.

Advancing south, Sosius captured the island-city of Aradus on the coast of Phoenicia by the end of 38 BC. The following year, the Romans besieged Jerusalem. After a forty-day siege, the Roman soldiers stormed the city and, despite Herod's pleas for restraint, acted without mercy, pillaging and killing all in their path, prompting Herod to complain to Antony. Herod finally resorted to bribing Sosius and his troops in order that they do not leave him "king of a desert". Antigonus was forced to surrender to Sosius, and was sent to Antony for the triumphal procession in Rome. Herod, however, fearing that Antigonus would win backing in Rome, bribed Antony to execute Antigonus. Antony, who recognized that Antigonus would remain a permanent threat to Herod, ordered him beheaded in Antioch. Now secure on his throne, Herod would rule the Herodian Kingdom until his death in 4 BC, and would be an ever-faithful client king of Rome.

''Parthian Campaign''

With the Triumvirate renewed in 38 BC, Antony returned to Athens in the winter with his new wife Octavia, the sister of Octavian. With the assassination of the Parthian Shah Orodes II by his son Phraates IV, who then seized the Parthian throne, in late 38 BC, Antony prepared to invade Parthia himself.

Antony, however, realized Octavian had no intention of sending him the additional legions he had promised under the Treaty of Tarentum. To supplement his own armies, Antony instead looked to Rome's principal vassal in the East: his lover Cleopatra. In addition to significant financial resources, Cleopatra's backing of his Parthian campaign allowed Antony to amass the largest army Rome had ever assembled in the East. Wintering in Antioch during 37, Antony's combined Roman-Egyptian army numbered some 200,000, including sixteen legions (approximately 160,000 soldiers) plus an additional 40,000 auxiliary units. Such a force was twice the size of Marcus Licinius Crassus's army from his failed Parthian invasion of 53 BC and three times those of Lucius Licinius Lucullus and Lucius Cornelius Sulla during the Mithridatic Wars. The size of his army indicated Antony's intention to conquer Parthia, or at least receive its submission by capturing the Parthian capital of Ecbatana. Antony's rear was protected by Rome's client kingdoms in Anatolia, Syria, and Judea, while the client kingdoms of Cappadocia, Pontus, and Commagne would provide supplies along the march.

Antony's first target for his invasion was the Kingdom of Armenia. Ruled by King Artavasdes II of Armenia, Armenia had been an ally of Rome since the defeat of Tigranes the Great by Pompey the Great in 66 BC during the Third Mithridatic War. However, following Marcus Licinius Crassus's defeat at the Battle of Carrhae in 53 BC, Armenia was forced into an alliance with Parthia due to Roman's weakened position in the East. Antony dispatched Publius Canidius Crassus to Armenia, receiving Artavasdes II's surrender without opposition. Canidius then led an invasion into the Transcaucasia, subduing Iberia. There, Canidius forced the Iberian King Pharnavaz II into an alliance against Zober, king of neighboring Albania, subduing the kingdom and reducing it to a Roman protectorate.

With Armenia and the Caucasus secured, Antony marched south, crossing into the Parthian province of Media Atropatene. Though Antony desired a pitched battle, the Parthians would not engage, allowing Antony to march deep into Parthian territory by mid-August of 36 BC. This forced Antony to leave his logistics train in the care of two legions (approximately 10,000 soldiers), which was then attacked and completely destroyed by the Parthian army before Antony could rescue them. Though the Armenian King Artavasdes II and his cavalry were present during the massacre, they did not intervene. Despite the ambush, Antony continued the campaign. However, Antony was soon forced to retreat in mid-October after a failed two-month siege of the provincial capital.

The retreat soon proved a disaster as Antony's demoralized army faced increasing supply difficulties in the mountainous terrain during winter while constantly being harassed by the Parthian army. According to the Greek historian Plutarch, eighteen battles were fought between the retreating Romans and the Parthians during the month-long march back to Armenia, with approximately 20,000 infantry and 4,000 calvary dying during the retreat alone. Once in Armenia, Antony quickly marched back to Syria to protect his interests there by late 36 BC, losing an additional 8,000 soldiers along the way. In all, two-fifth of his original army (some 80,000 men) had died during his failed campaign.

''Armenian Campaign'' ''Antony and Cleopatra''

Meanwhile, in Rome, the triumvirate was no more. Octavian forced Lepidus to resign after the older triumvir attempted to take control of Sicily after the defeat of Sextus. Now in sole power, Octavian was occupied in wooing the traditional Republican aristocracy to his side. He married Livia and started to attack Antony in order to raise himself to power. He argued that Antony was a man of low morals to have left his faithful wife abandoned in Rome with the children to be with the promiscuous queen of Egypt. Antony was accused of everything, but most of all, of "going native", an unforgivable crime to the proud Romans. Several times Antony was summoned to Rome, but remained in Alexandria with Cleopatra.

Again with Egyptian money, Antony invaded Armenia, this time successfully. In the return, a mock Roman Triumph was celebrated in the streets of Alexandria. The parade through the city was a pastiche of Rome's most important military celebration. For the finale, the whole city was summoned to hear a very important political statement. Surrounded by Cleopatra and her children, Antony ended his alliance with Octavian.

He distributed kingdoms among his children: Alexander Helios was named king of Armenia, Media and Parthia (territories which were not for the most part under the control of Rome), his twin Selene got Cyrenaica and Libya, and the young Ptolemy Philadelphus was awarded Syria and Cilicia. As for Cleopatra, she was proclaimed Queen of Kings and Queen of Egypt, to rule with Caesarion (Ptolemy XV Caesar, son of Cleopatra by Julius Caesar), King of Kings and King of Egypt. Most important of all, Caesarion was declared legitimate son and heir of Caesar. These proclamations were known as the Donations of Alexandria and caused a fatal breach in Antony's relations with Rome.

While the distribution of nations among Cleopatra's children was hardly a conciliatory gesture, it did not pose an immediate threat to Octavian's political position. Far more dangerous was the acknowledgment of Caesarion as legitimate and heir to Caesar's name. Octavian's base of power was his link with Caesar through adoption, which granted him much-needed popularity and loyalty of the legions. To see this convenient situation attacked by a child borne by the richest woman in the world was something Octavian could not accept. The triumvirate expired on the last day of 33 BC and was not renewed. Another civil war was beginning.

During 33 and 32 BC, a propaganda war was fought in the political arena of Rome, with accusations flying between sides. Antony (in Egypt) divorced Octavia and accused Octavian of being a social upstart, of usurping power, and of forging the adoption papers by Caesar. Octavian responded with treason charges: of illegally keeping provinces that should be given to other men by lots, as was Rome's tradition, and of starting wars against foreign nations (Armenia and Parthia) without the consent of the Senate.

Antony was also held responsible for Sextus Pompeius' execution with no trial. In 32 BC, the Senate deprived him of his powers and declared war against Cleopatra – not Antony, because Octavian had no wish to advertise his role in perpetuating Rome's internecine bloodshed. Both consuls, Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus and Gaius Sosius, and a third of the Senate abandoned Rome to meet Antony and Cleopatra in Greece.

In 31 BC, the war started. Octavian's loyal and talented general Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa captured the Greek city and naval port of Methone, loyal to Antony. The enormous popularity of Octavian with the legions secured the defection of the provinces of Cyrenaica and Greece to his side. On September 2, the naval battle of Actium took place. Antony and Cleopatra's navy was destroyed, and they were forced to escape to Egypt with 60 ships.

''Death''

Octavian, now close to absolute power, did not intend to give Antony and Cleopatra any rest. In August 30 BC, assisted by Agrippa, he invaded Egypt. With no other refuge to escape to, Antony committed suicide by stabbing himself with his sword in the mistaken belief that Cleopatra had already done so. When he found out that Cleopatra was still alive, his friends brought him to Cleopatra's monument in which she was hiding, and he died in her arms.

Cleopatra was allowed to conduct Antony's burial rites after she had been captured by Octavian. Realising that she was destined for Octavian's triumph in Rome, she made several attempts to take her life and finally succeeded in mid-August. Octavian had Caesarion murdered, but he spared Antony's children by Cleopatra, who were paraded through the streets of Rome. Antony's daughters by Octavia were spared, as was his son, Iullus Antonius. But his elder son, Marcus Antonius Antyllus, was killed by Octavian's men while pleading for his life in the Caesareum.

'''Aftermath and legacy'''

Cicero's son, Cicero Minor, announced Antony's death to the senate. Antony's honours were revoked and his statues removed (damnatio memoriae). Cicero Minor also made a decree that no member of the Antonii would ever bear the name Marcus again. “In this way Heaven entrusted the family of Cicero the final acts in the punishment of Antony.”

When Antony died, Octavian became uncontested ruler of Rome. In the following years, Octavian, who was known as Augustus after 27 BC, managed to accumulate in his person all administrative, political, and military offices. When Augustus died in AD 14, his political powers passed to his adopted son Tiberius; the Roman Principate had begun.

The rise of Caesar and the subsequent civil war between his two most powerful adherents effectively ended the credibility of the Roman oligarchy as a governing power and ensured that all future power struggles would centre upon which one individual would achieve supreme control of the government, eliminating the Senate and the former magisterial structure as important foci of power in these conflicts. Thus, in history, Antony appears as one of Caesar's main adherents, he and Octavian Augustus being the two men around whom power coalesced following the assassination of Caesar, and finally as one of the three men chiefly responsible for the demise of the Roman Republic.

'''Marriages and issue'''

Antony had been married in succession to Fadia, Antonia, Fulvia, Octavia and Cleopatra, and left behind him a number of children. Through his daughters by Octavia, he would be ancestor to the Roman Emperors Caligula, Claudius and Nero.

# Marriage to Fadia, a daughter of a freedman. According to Cicero, Fadia bore Antony several children. Nothing is known about Fadia or their children. Cicero is the only Roman source that mentions Antony’s first wife.
# Marriage to first paternal cousin Antonia Hybrida Minor. According to Plutarch, Antony threw her out of his house in Rome because

[FAVthomas.FTW]

Committed suicide in Alexandria.MARK ANTONY II. He was the son of MarkAntony and Julia, daughter of Lucius Julius III. He was born in BC 83. Hecommitted suicide in BC 30 by falling on his sword. (Wurts, 1945)
He married FADIA. (Wurts, 1945)
He married ANTONIA. (Wurts, 1945)
Child: Antonia II of Rome
He married FULVIA. (Wurts, 1945)
He married OCTAVIA THE ELDER. (Wurts, 1945)
Children: Antonia Minor of Rome, Antonia Major of Rome
He married CLEOPATRA, Queen of Egypt. (Wurts, 1945)
Children: Alexander I Helios King of Armenia and Parthia, PtolemyPhiladelphus Prince of Egypt, Cleopatra Selene Princess of Egypt, Juba IIKing of Numidia and Mauretania
He was the second Triumvirate of Rome, the other two being Lepidus andAugustus Octavius. He's known for his military successes, his affair withCleopatra of Egypt, and for stabilizing Rome after the murder of JuliusCaesar in BC 44. (Wurts, 1945)
Early in 40 BC, Antony received news that his brother Lucius Antonius andhis own wife Fulvia had revolted against Octavian, setting off thePerusine War. He also received news that the Parthians, the easternneighbors of the empire, had invaded Rome Syria. Antony went to Italywhere he became reconciled to Octavian at Brundusium (Brindsis) and sinceFulvia had died in the meantime, he married Octavian's sister, Octavia.Accompanied by Octavia, Antony went to Athens and was greeted as the NewDionysus. In 38 BC differences between Antony and Octavian arose and theysettled then by the Treaty of Tarentum (which prolonged the triumviratefor a further five years).
When Antony's invasion of Parthia failed, Octavian sent Octavia to Antonyalong with troops and provisions. The soldiers fell far short of thenumbers Antony expected and he ordered Octavia back to Rome.
In 32 BC the trimvirate ended. Antony officially divorced Octavia. Herbrother declared war against Cleopatra. It was a war Antony continuallylost ground and morale; Cleopatra insisted on being with him and Agrippawas winning battles. On September 2, 31 BC, Antony and Cleopatraretreated to Egypt. Octavian reached them a year later and in August 30BC, Antony died by falling on his sword and Cleopatra by poisoningherself with an asp.

The Aftermath of Caesar's Death (44 B.C.). Caesar's assassins claimed tobe striking a blow for freedom in the name of the Old Republic; insteadof dancing in streets, however, the initial reaction to the news ofCaesar's murder was intense uncertainty, particularly among the rulingelite, as everyone waited to see who would make the next move. Theconspirators themselves went into hiding. *M. Aemilius Lepidus (oneCaesar's lieutenants, who had a legion of recruits ready to take to Gaul)imposed order, but Mark Antony (who had long been Caesar's right-hand manand was consul along with Caesar in 44) soon took charge of matters,leaving Lepidus to depart for Gaul. Antony was in nominal control ofstate affairs, but virtually everyone was on eggshells. Antony wielded agood deal of power as consul and as Caesar's second in command, butenjoyed little personal authority and dared not assert himself toostrongly, lest he meet a fate similar to that of Caesar. The Senate, onthe other hand, was concerned about popular reaction to Caesar's death,particularly on the part of Caesar's veterans. Most importantly, theofficial constitutional Machinery, although it had continued to operateduring the turbulent years 49-44, had been a virtual dead letter underCaesar's rule: his death created a vacuum in which no one quite knew howto behave. An uneasy truce was arrived at. An official amnesty wasgranted to the conspirators, but Antony's speech at Caesar's funeral --along with the generous gifts to the plebs included in the terms ofCaesar's will -- so stirred the urban mob that a riot ensued and theconspirators fled Rome in fear for their safety. [Caesar's funeral is theoccasion for the famous speech in Shakespeare's play: "I
have come to bury Caesar, not to praise him...."] Antony then quicklyretrieved Caesar's private papers from his widow and employed them togovern in Caesar's name, claiming to find there Caesar's plans for Rome'sfuture. This charade soon wore thin with the Senate, all the more so dueto Antony's high-handed manner and his wanton extravagance.

Mark Antony (who had long been Caesar's right-hand man and was consulalong with Caesar in 44) soon took charge of matters, leaving Lepidus todepart for Gaul. Antony was in nominal control of state affairs, butvirtually everyone was on eggshells. Antony wielded a good deal of poweras consul and as Caesar's second in command, but enjoyed little personalauthority and dared not assert himself too strongly, lest he meet a fatesimilar to that of Caesar. The Senate, on the other hand, was concernedabout popular reaction to Caesar's death, particularly on the part ofCaesar's veterans. Most importantly, the official constitutionalMachinery, although it had continued to operate during the turbulentyears 49-44, had been a virtual dead letter under Caesar's rule: hisdeath created a vacuum in which no one quite knew how to behave. Anuneasy truce was arrived at. An official amnesty was granted to theconspirators, but Antony's speech at Caesar's funeral -- along with thegenerous gifts to the plebs included in the terms of Caesar's will -- sostirred the urban mob that a riot ensued and the conspirators fled Romein fear for their safety. [Caesar's funeral is the occasion for thefamous speech in Shakespeare's play: "I have come to bury Caesar, not topraise him...."] Antony then quickly retrieved Caesar's private papersfrom his widow and employed them to govern in Caesar's name, claiming tofind there Caesar's plans for Rome's future. This charade soon wore thinwith the Senate, all the more so due to Antony's high-handed manner andhis wanton extravagance.

Octavian and Antony. When Caesar's will was read, however, Antonyreceived a nasty shock. In it Caesar named as his chief heir a virtualunknown by the name of *C. Octavius, adopting him (posthumously) as hisson. Octavius was Caesar's grand-nephew on his sister's side, a rathersickly 18-year-old with only limited political and military experience.Upon his adoption, Octavius became *C. Julius Caesar Octavianus (or, inEnglish, simply Octavian). Antony might well have expected little troublein dealing with a youth of so little experience, few politicalconnections, and virtually no personal authority. Unfortunately, Antonyfailed to recognize that in Octavian he was dealing with a
natural born politician. Octavian never was an imposing figurephysically, and he owed his military victories largely to the skill ofhis able lieutenants. In the political realm, however, he was withoutpeer, rising from a virtual unknown in 44 B.C. to become the first of theJulio-Claudian emperors by 27 AD. Tensions immediately arose betweenOctavian and Antony, as each vied for the right to employ Caesar'ssubstantial financial resources, to call upon the loyalty of his troops,and, above all, to invoke the authority of Caesar's name. On the one handwas Antony, Caesar's second in command who had served him so ably sincethe 50s, who had been named magister equitum under Caesar, and who hadbeen appointed priest (flamen) in Caesar's honor; on the other wasOctavian, who could claim to be Caesar's son and heir. Tensions betweenthe two soon reached the boiling point, only to be checked by seniorofficers in command of Caesar's troops, who were united by their commonloyalty to the dead Caesar and were unwilling to fight against oneanother in the name of Caesar's bickering heirs. By the middle of 44 B.C.an uneasy truce was established between Antony, Octavian, the Senate, andthose involved in Caesar's assassination.

Unfortunately Antony, while an able commander, was no Caesar when it cameto the delicate art of politics. In 44-43 he soon alienated virtually allof the other factions listed above, uniting them against him. He began byfoolishly attacking the orator and statesman Cicero, a leader of thesenatorial faction (the optimates). These personal attacks led Cicero todenounce Antony in a series of damning speeches, known as the *Philippics.

Not content with alienating Cicero and the Senate, Antony renewed hisattacks against Octavian, charging him with plots against his (Antony's)life. Octavian saw that his position in Rome was far from secure andwithdrew to central Italy, where he began to raise troops on hisauthority as Caesar's son and heir.

At the end of 44, Antony stepped over the line altogether. As consul in44 he had been assigned the province of Macedonia for 43. Antonyrealized, however, that departing from Rome at this particular juncturewould be political suicide and so passed a law that awarded him afive-year command in Cisalpine Gaul and Gallia Comata (Gaul proper)instead.

This would allow him to keep tabs on affairs in Rome and had the addedadvantage of providing him with an army camped just north of Italy.(Clearly Antony had the precedent of Caesar's own career in mind.) Thethreat now posed by Octavian led Antony to speed up his plans: he decidedto proceed to Cisalpine Gaul and assume command of his new provincesearly. At this point the Senate was still unwilling to defy Antony tooopenly, but it did direct the current governor of Cisalpine Gaul, D.Junius Brutus Albinus (who had been involved in the conspiracy againstCaesar), to maintain his position. When matters reached a crisis theSenate, at Cicero's urging, turned to Octavian for help. Octavian had hisown forces; more importantly, he could invoke the name of Caesar, thusundercutting Antony's claims to represent Caesar's legacy. Cicero hopedthat the young Octavian would be malleable -- a tool that the Senatecould employ and then discard at its will. The plan was to have Octaviansupport the consuls for 43 (A. Hirtius and C. Vibius Pansa) in drivingAntony off, then to have Octavian surrender his troops to Brutus, thelawful governor of the region. The first part of the plan worked: Antonywas compelled to retire further into Gaul, where he joined up withLepidus (see above). Unfortunately for Cicero and the Senate, however,Octavian was neither malleable nor stupid. He realized that, were he tosurrender his troops to Brutus, he would not only lose an importantbargaining chip but, given Brutus' association with Caesar's murder,would fatally undermine his claims to be Caesar's loyal son. As ithappened, through one of those twists of fate that seem to occur so oftenin Roman history, the two consuls Hirtius and Pansa had been killed inthe battle against Antony: Octavian saw a vacuum and marched south withhis forces, determined to fill it. Confronted with Octavian's troops, theSenate was compelled to allow him to run for the office of consul, towhich he was duly elected for the year 42. His adoption by Caesar wasofficially ratified and Caesar's assassins outlawed: thus Octavian couldassume the role of the loyal son attempting to avenge his father's murderand continue his father's work in "reforming" the state. (The leaders ofthe opposition to Caesar, M. Junius Brutus and C. Cassius Longinus, hadalready fled to the East, planning, like Pompey earlier, to raise troopsand challenge Antony and Octavian.)

The Second Triumvirate. Suddenly Octavian was no longer a youthfuloutsider but a major force with which to reckon. He realized, however,that his own position vis a vis the Senate was far from secure anddecided to make common cause with his former enemy, Antony. Thus, in 43,Octavian,
Antony, and Lepidus were officially appointed as a panel of three (atriumvirate) to govern Rome with consular authority for a period of fiveyears for the purpose of restoring constitutional order. This alliance isknown as the *Second Triumvirate. Through a curious twist of fate, Caesar-- who originally had been viewed as a dangerous, power-seeking popularisand a traitor -- now became the beloved leader whose legacy was beingthreatened and in whose name Octavian, Antony, and Lepidus must seizecontrol of state affairs.

Despite its official standing, the Second Triumvirate was in reality amilitary junta. Following the precedent of Sulla, its first order ofbusiness was to pay back its political enemies and raise some much-neededcash (necessary if the junta's troops were to be kept happy).Proscriptions were held in which some 300 senators and 2000 equites weredispatched, as much for their property as for their political sympathies.The most famous victim was Cicero, whose head and hands were cut off andhung from the speaker's platform (the Rostra) in the forum. [TheTriumvirate also raised taxes, aiming first (as was the Romans' wont) atwealthy and "extravagant" women. This policy led to a woman namedHortensia presenting a public speech in the forum in which, we are told,she sounded the now familiar theme of no taxation without representation(i.e., without granting women the franchise).]

The next order of business, once matters had been settled in Rome, was todeal with the forces of Brutus and Cassius in the East. The official linewas that these forces were traitors to Rome, led by Caesar's assassins.Viewed objectively, however, they represented one of the last hopes ofthe Roman Republic, fighting a cause that was utterly unrealistic -- thedays when the traditional constitutional Machinery could cope with theeconomic, social, and political realities in Rome were long past -- butnoble nonetheless. The final confrontation occurred in 42 at *Philippi inMacedonia (see Map 3 in Dudley), where Brutus' and Cassius' forces werequickly defeated in a series of battles by the combined forces of Antonyand Octavian. The victory led to an immediate rise in Antony's fortunes:never much of a general, Octavian had presented a poor showing atPhilippi, losing one important battle and spending a good deal of thetime sick in his tent. For the moment, at least, Antony was very much thesenior partner among the triumvirs.

With their enemies subdued both at Rome and abroad, the two leadingmembers of the Triumvirate soon returned to their old personal rivalries.Lepidus was quickly gotten out of the way: accused of treason, he wasdeprived of his provinces and allowed to remain a member of theTriumvirate only on sufferance. The other two triumvirs divided Rome'sholdings between them: Octavian got Spain, Antony Gaul. Antony, however,had larger ambitions. Encouraged by his success at Philippi, he revivedCaesar's plans for a grand military campaign in the East. His intentionsclearly were to follow the precedent set by Sulla, Pompey, and Caesarhimself: to win power, fame, and money through a series of militarytriumphs abroad and then return to Rome and oust his political rivalsonce and for all. In 41, therefore, he set out for the East, where hesoon became entangled with the Egyptian Cleopatra.

Cleopatra VII left three children by Marcus Antonius: the twins AlexanderHelios and Cleopatra Selene, born in 40 B.C. and Ptolemy Philadelphus,born in 36 B.C. In 33 B.C. Antonius designated Alexander to be king ofArmenia and overlord of Parthia and Media. He designated Ptolemy to beruler of all Egyptian possessions in Syria and Cilicia and overlord ofall client-kings and dynasts west of the Euphrates, as far as theHellespont. After the death of Antonius, both boys were taken in byAugustus's sister Octavia to be raised with her own children. They appearsoon after in Augustus's Triumph in Rome and thereafter disappear fromhistory. Speculation is that both died in childhood. Cleopatra Selene wasmarried in 29 B.C. to Juba II, a Roman client-king who ruled over Numidiac30-25 B.C. and over Mauretania 25 B.C.-cA.D. 23 when he died in hismid-70s. Cleopatra had long before predeceased him, though the date isnot known. They had two (known) children: Ptolemy succeeded his father asking of Mauretania in A.D. 23. In 40, he was called to Rome to appearbefore the Emperor Caligula. Tacitus reports he had the misfortune ofpresenting himself wearing such a sumptious purple robe that in envyCaligula had him put to death. One simply did not appear before Caligulawearing better duds than the boss. Although Ptolemy was certainly of amarriageable age, no wife or children are known, and none succeeded himas king. Ptolemy's sister Drusilla was married to Marcus Antonius Felix.Nothing has survived in recorded history to point to any issue of thismarriage.

Octavian, by contrast, was given the thankless task of dealing withaffairs in Italy, particularly the necessity of finding land for his andAntony's veterans. Antony clearly hoped that Octavian would becomeembroiled in Italian politics, squandering both his time and, moreimportant, his popularity with the masses. In the end, this was a poorstrategy on Antony's part. Not only did his own military ventures notfare well, but, by leaving Octavian in Rome, he allowed his rival to plyhis considerable political skills in waging a propaganda war againstAntony.

At first, however, Antony's plan appeared to succeed. Octavian's problemwas to find land for his and Antony's veterans; his solution was toconfiscate land throughout Italy. The Italian cities were outraged, andthis sense of outrage was encouraged by Antony's wife Fulvia and hisbrother L. Antonius, who incited a civil war. The rebels were suppressedthrough a combination of Antony's delay in supporting them and thebrutality of Octavian's reprisals (particularly against the city ofPerusia, in the so-called Perusine War). Antony eventually returned toItaly in 40, landing at Brundisium, but by then Octavian had not onlysecured Italy but had seized Gaul. War nearly broke out between Antonyand Octavian, but their troops refused to fight against one another. Atlast a deal was cut: Antony was to pursue his ambitions in the East,while Octavian was granted the western half of Rome's empire. To cementthe deal, Antony married Octavian's sister *Octavia (Fulvia having diedof natural causes in the meantime).

Antony accordingly returned east, where from 40-35 he was engaged in aseries of largely unsuccessful campaigns against the Parthians. Hisdesperate need for financial and military support drove him into the armsof Cleopatra (literally and figuratively) and he became her officialconsort. Antony had 3 children by Cleopatra. In 36, despite their age (6,6, and 2, respectively), he granted each of these children, as well asCleopatra herself, territories in the East as their official realms; healso lent his support to the claims of Caesarion (then 13 years old) tobe Caesar's true son and heir. To Roman eyes these moves were troubling,suggesting that Antony was becoming a champion of
Egypt and its oriental queen.

Meanwhile, Octavian was busy in the West fighting *Sextus Pompeius, a sonof Pompey the Great. Sextus had gathered the last of the Republicanopposition about him in Spain and by 42 controlled Sicily. With hisfleet, Sextus was able to harass Roman shipping, nearly cutting off Rome's
grain supplies. To the degree that Sextus could claim to be fighting forthe cause of his father, Pompey, he represented the last forces of theold Republic; in reality, he was as much a military overlord/adventureras Antony and Octavian. Octavian once again showed his lack of militaryexperience, suffering a series of humiliating defeats, and, in 38, wasforced to meet with Antony in order to ask for reinforcements. (At thesame time the term of the Triumvirate, originally slated to expire in 38,was extended for another five years.) In 36 Octavian -- or, rather, hisgeneral *M. Vipsanius Agrippa, working in tande M with Lepidus -- finallydefeated Sextus at the battle of Naulochus. Lepidus made an attempt toseize Sicily for himself, but was soon deserted by his supporters andcaptured. As pontifex maximus Lepidus could not be killed (as we shallsee, Octavian was beginning to develop scruples!), so he was merelystripped of his official powers and placed under permanent house arrestin Rome.

Actium. The year 36 marks something of a turning point in Octavian'scareer. From this point on he began to doff the role of ruthless militarywarlord and instead present himself as a defender of the Republic (suchas it was!). This strategy was to stand him in good stead in thepropaganda war against Antony. Antony, Octavian could claim, had becomethe thrall of a depraved eastern
monarch: he had "gone native" and (Octavian claimed) planned to reduceRome to a mere subject state, transferring the capital of the empire toEgypt. The Romans would be slaves to a mongrel horde of oriental eunuchsand their lascivious queen, compelled to worship Egypt's decadent,bestial gods and to adopt the perverse religious practices of a landwhose rulers regularly married their own siblings.

Tensions between Antony and Octavian began to reach a head in 35, whenAntony formally repudiated Octavia, who had remained loyal to him despitethe repeated humiliation to which he had subjected her. In 33, when theTriumvirate officially expired, Octavian held the consulship: he was thenable to present Antony as a private Roman citizen acting without theauthority of the state and to contrast his own position as loyal servantof the Republic. There followed, in 32, the public reading of Antony'swill (which, according to custom, had been deposited in Rome for safekeeping): the provisions it contained were not outrageous -- for example,Antony asked to be buried with Cleopatra and requested officialrecognition for his children by Cleopatra and for Caesarion -- but theyfurthered the impression that Antony now regarded himself as an Egyptian.

n the end war was inevitable. The issue was decided in 31 at the navalbattle of *Actium (in northwest Greece). Antony had established camp inthe bay of Actium in late 32, hoping to use it as a base of operationsagainst Octavian. He became mired there, however, his lines of supply cutoff and his forces steadily shrinking due to disease and desertion. Astime wore on, his troops became ever more de Moralized, in part due tothe presence of Cleopatra in their camp: Roman soldiers did not like theidea of being the servants of a foreign queen (think of Livy's portrayalof Tanaquil). Moreover, Antony's Egyptian fleet was outnumbered andout-generaled by Octavian's fleet, led by Agrippa. By September of 31Antony had realized that his position was untenable and attempted to slipaway with his fleet to Asia Minor. His plans were poorly executed by hisde Moralized troops, however, and only Cleopatra's ships managed toescape, followed by Antony with a few Roman stragglers. The remainder ofAntony's forces surrendered after only token resistance. The battle ofActium was, then, something of a fiasco: a failed tactical retreat.Octavian and his supporters, however, presented it as a glorious triumph,spreading the story that Antony, accompanied by Cleopatra, had intended afull-scale naval battle but had turned tail and deserted his troops whenhe saw Cleopatra's ship fleeing in fear. In this version, Antony isbetrayed by his besotted obsession with the cowardly and depravedEgyptian queen.

Antony and Cleopatra fled to Egypt, where they committed suicide.Octavian, however, hailed his triumph as belonging to the Roman Senateand people -- a victory for Rome's political and religious traditionsover a nefarious threat from the decadent East. (Notice that once againOctavian held the consulship -- his third -- in this crucial year,allowing him once more to present himself as the servant of the Romanpeople fighting in defense of the Republic, rather than as a militarydespot intent on wiping out a hated rival.) He claimed to have beensupported in this victory by the god *Apollo, who had a small temple on anearby promontory. Apollo, the god of Actium, became a prominent figurein Octavian/Augustus' reign. A god of poetry, music, and culture, heprovided a fitting contrast to the "degenerate" Egyptian culturechampioned by Antony. He also embodied two contrary features thatOctavian found useful, for Apollo was both a powerful god of retribution,smiting those who strayed beyond the proper bounds set for mortalambitions, and a gentle god of refinement and culture. (These twocontrasting features are symbolized by two of Apollo's attributes: thebow and the lyre.) As we shall see, the poets and artists who celebratedOctavian/Augustus' achievements presented his career as displaying thesesame two contrasting features, with Actium as the turning point. BeforeActium, we find the stern triumvir who employs violence to punish hisfather's murderers, restore "order" to Italy, and check the wildambitions of Antony and Cleopatra; after Actium, we find the benign rulerwho oversees a political, moral, and cultural renaissance at Rome.
--------
THE ANCESTRY OF MARK ANTONY

Mark Antony was the son of Antonius Creticus and Julia. Julia was thedaughter of Lucius Julius Caesar, who was the son of another LuciusJulius Caesar, who was the son of Sextus Julius Caesar, who was the sonof Sextus Julius Caesar, who was the son of Lucius Julius Caesar, who wasthe son of Numerius Julius Caesar, who was the son of Lucius Julius Libo,who was the son of Lucius Julius Libo. There was a gap of threegenerations separating him from Lucius Julius Julus, who was the son ofLucius Julius Julus, who was the son of Caius Julius Julus, who was theson of Caius Julius Julus, who was the son of Lucius Julius Julus, whowas the son of Numerius Julius Julus. There is then another gap of about560 years separating him from Julus, who was the son of Ascanius, who wasthe son of Aeneas, famous hero of The Iliad and The Aenead.

As was stated earlier, it is the opinion of this researcher that somemyth has a basis in historical fact. And again, for whatever it may beworth, I offer the mythological genealogy of Aeneas for yourconsideration.

According to the myth, Aenaes was married to Creusa, the daughter of KingPriam of Troy. Priam was the son of Laomedon, who was the son of Ilus,for whom Ilium was named. Ilium was another name for Troy. Ilus was a sonof Tros, for whom Troy was named.

Aenaes was the son of the mortal Anchises and the goddess Venus, whosprang from Zeus' forehead.. Anchises was the son of Capys, who was theson of Assaracus, who was the son of Tros, for whom the city of Troy wasnamed. Tros was the son of Ericthonius, who was the son of Dardanus andBatieia. Batieia was the daughter of Teucer, who was the son ofScamander. Dardanus was a son of Zeus. Zeus was a son of the titansCronus and Rhea. Cronus was the son of Uranus. Uranus was supposed tohave been the beginning of all things. This is certainly not Christiantheology. It is offered only as a mythological genealogy and nothing more.

http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.com/~fosterfamily/foster4.html

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per03735.htm#0

RESEARCH NOTES:
Triumvir of Rome; Friend of Julius C‘sar; Husband of Cleopatra VII Thea

Alias/AKA Mark Anthony

OR "MARC ANTONY"; TRIUMVIR; FAMOUS IN HISTORY FOR SETLLING THE ROMAN REPUBLIC
AFTER THE MURDER OF JULIUS CAESAR; DIED 30 BC

Marcus Antonius1 (Roma, circa 83 adC - Alejandría, 1 de agosto de 30 adC), fue un militar y político romano de la época final de la República, conocido también como Marco Antonio el Triunviro. Fue un importante colaborador de Julio César, como c
omandante militar y administrador, y tras el asesinato del mismo, en 43 adC se alió con Octaviano y Lépido para formar el Segundo Triunvirato. Éste se disolvió en el año 33 adC y, apartado Lépido de la escena, las disensiones entre Octaviano y Ma
rco Antonio se trocaron en abierta guerra civil en el año 31 adC Marco Antonio, aliado con la reina Cleopatra VII de Egipto, fue finalmente derrotado en la batalla de Accio en el año 30 adC. De regreso a Alejandría, fue incapaz de hacer frente a
las fuerzas de Augusto, suicidándose apenas un año después de su derrota naval.
Tabla de contenidos
ocultar

* 1 Juventud de Marco Antonio
* 2 Colaborador de César
o 2.1 La guerra de las Galias y la guerra civil
o 2.2 La dictadura de César
o 2.3 Los últimos días de César
* 3 El Segundo Triunvirato
o 3.1 Octavio y la guerra de Módena
o 3.2 El surgimiento del Segundo Triunvirato
o 3.3 El reparto del mundo romano y la guerra de Perusa
* 4 Marco Antonio y Cleopatra
o 4.1 El tratado de Tarento y la campaña parta
o 4.2 El cisma entre los triunviros
o 4.3 La campaña armenia y las donaciones de Alejandría
o 4.4 El enfrentamiento definitivo
* 5 Consecuencias y legado
* 6 Cronología de la vida de Marco Antonio
* 7 Semblanza del Triunviro
* 8 Matrimonios de Marco Antonio y descendientes
* 9 Bibliografía
o 9.1 Fuentes clásicas
o 9.2 Obras modernas
+ 9.2.1 En español
+ 9.2.2 En inglés
o 9.3 Obras de ficción
o 9.4 Filmografía relacionada
* 10 Véase también
* 11 Notas y referencias
* 12 Enlaces externos

Juventud de Marco Antonio editar

Perteneciente a la familia de origen patricio de los Antonios (gens Antonia), Marco Antonio nació en Roma en torno al año 83 adC. Su padre fue su tocayo Marco Antonio Crético (Marcus Antonius Creticus), hijo a su vez del orador Marco Antonio el O
rador (Marcus Antonius Orator), quien fuera ejecutado por los partidarios de Cayo Mario en el 87 adC.

Marco Antonio era sobrino lejano de Julio César por parte de su madre, Julia Caesaris. Su padre murió a una temprana edad, dejando a Marco Antonio, junto con sus hermanos Lucio y Cayo, alcuidado de su madre. Julia Antonia2 se casó después con Pu
blio Cornelio Léntulo Sura, un político acusado de estar involucrado en la conjura de Catilina (63 adC). Por este motivo Cicerón ordenó su ejecución, lo que originó la enemistad entre Antonio y el célebre orador.

La vida temprana de Marco Antonio se caracterizó por la falta de una adecuada orientación paterna. De acuerdo con historiadores como Plutarco, pasó sus años de adolescencia vagando por Roma con sus hermanos y amigos. Juntos se embarcaron en una c
lase de vida rebelde y despreocupada, frecuentando casas de apuestas, dándose a la bebida y viéndose involucrados en escándalos amorosos. Plutarco menciona el rumor de que antes de cumplir los veinte años de edad Antonio ya estaba endeudado, debi
endo unos 250 talentos (6 millones de sestercios), aunque asumidos por su amigo Escribonio Curión. Asimismo, hacia el año 59 adC entró en contacto con el círculo del polémico Publio Clodio Pulcro y sus bandas callejeras.

Después de este periodo de imprudencias, Antonio huyó a Grecia hacia el año 58 adC para escapar de sus acreedores. Tras un breve periodo invertido en asistir a las clases de los filósofosen Atenas, donde aprendió retórica como solían hacer otros
jóvenes nobles romanos de su época, fue convocado por Aulo Gabinio, procónsul de Siria, para participar en la campaña contra Aristóbulo de Judea, obteniendo su primera distinción militarpor ser el primero en asaltar una fortificación judía. Pos
teriormente participó en la campaña militar de Gabinio en el 55 adC para restablecer en el trono de Egipto a Ptolomeo Auletes, en la cual demostró su talento como prefecto ecuestre (comandante de la caballería), destacando por su valentía y coraj
e en la toma de Pelusio. Fue en esta ocasión cuando conoció Egipto y Alejandría por primera vez.

Colaborador de César editar

La guerra de las Galias y la guerra civil editar

La influencia de Clodio y de Curión acercaron a Marco Antonio al partido de Julio César, rival de Pompeyo y del Senado romano. En el año 54 adC Marco Antonio entró a formar parte del mando del ejército de Julio César en las Galias, probando de nu
evo su competente liderazgo militar en la guerra de las Galias y destacando en el doble asedio de Alesia, aunque su personalidad provocaba conflictos continuamente, donde quiera que fueseCésar mismo llegó a decir que su conducta le hacía irritar
frecuentemente.

Sin embargo, ascendido por la influencia de César a los cargos de cuestor (52 adC), augur (50 adC) y tribuno de la plebe (49 adC), siempre apoyó la causa de su protector con gran energía.Cuando los dos mandatos proconsulares de César expiraron (
al cabo de 10 años), el general quiso retornar a Roma para las elecciones consulares. Pero la facción conservadora del Senado romano, liderada por Pompeyo, exigió a César que renunciara previamente a su proconsulado y a la dirección de su ejércit
o antes obtener el permiso para solicitar su reelección en el consulado. César no podía permitir esto, ya que pretendía continuar las acciones que iniciara en su mandato de procónsul además, en ese caso, pasaría a ser (entre el final de su procon
sulado y su segundo consulado) un ciudadano privado, lo cual podría dejarle a merced de las tropas de Pompeyo.

Antonio sugirió entonces que todos los comandantes que compartían el mismo imperium entregaran el mando, pero la idea fue rechazada, y cuando Antonio recurrió a las amenazas y a sembrar el descontento, fue finalmente expulsado del Senado. De esta
forma, Antonio huyó de Roma, uniéndose a César, que había dejado su ejército acampado a orillas del Rubicón, el arroyo que marcaba el límite meridional de su autoridad proconsular. Con todas las esperanzas de hallar una solución pacífica desvane
cidas tras la salida de Antonio del Senado, César usó como excusa la figura de Antonio como tribuno de la plebe, y por tanto intocable aun para el Senado, para ordenar el cruce del río y la marcha de su ejército hacia Roma, comenzando así la últi
ma guerra civil. Durante esta contienda, Antonio fue el segundo al mando de César en todas las batallas contra los pompeyanos, Antonio dirigió el ala izquierda del ejército, prueba evidente de la confianza de César en él.

La dictadura de César editar

Con César como dictador, Antonio fue nombrado magister equitum, siendo la mano derecha del dictador y permaneciendo como administrador de Italia (47 adC), mientras César luchaba contra los últimos pompeyanos, quienes se habían refugiado en África
. Pero las habilidades de Antonio como administrador fueron un pobre reflejo de las que poseía como general, aferrándose a la oportunidad de satisfacer sus más extravagantes excesos (comola compañía de la actriz liberta Cytheris), que quedaron r
eflejados por Cicerón en sus Filípicas. En el año 46 adC Antonio se ofendió cuando César le insistió que pagara las propiedades de Pompeyo que Antonio había simulado comprar, ya que en verdad se había apropiado simplemente de ellas. Los problemas
pronto surgieron y, como en otras ocasiones anteriores, Antonio recurrió de nuevo a la violencia: cientos de ciudadanos fueron asesinados, mientras la ciudad de Roma caía en un estado deanarquía. César mostró su gran disgusto por todo este asun
to, y relevó a Antonio de todas sus responsabilidades políticas. Ambos dejaron de verse durante dos años, si bien el distanciamiento no fue muy continuado: Antonio se reunió con el dictador en Narbona (45 adC), rechazando la propuesta de Trebonio
para que se uniera a la conspiración que ya estaba en marcha. La reconciliación definitiva llegó en el 44 adC, cuando Antonio fue elegido colega de César durante el quinto consulado del dictador, como parte del incipiente plan de César para conq
uistar el Imperio Parto, dejando en Roma al nuevo y leal cónsul.

Los últimos días de César editar

Cualesquiera que fuesen los problemas surgidos entre ellos, Antonio permaneció fiel a César en todo momento. En febrero del 44 adC, durante las fiestas lupercales (15 de febrero), Antonioofreció públicamente una diadema a César. Este hecho poseí
a un significado preciso: la diadema era un símbolo propio de un rey, y César, al rechazarla, demostraba que no estaba interesado en asumir el trono de Roma.

En los idus de marzo (15 de marzo) de ese mismo año, César fue asesinado por un grupo de senadores, liderados por Cayo Casio Longino y Marco Junio Bruto, mientras Antonio era entretenido en la habitación contigua. Bruto rechazó la sugerencia de C
asio para acabar también con la vida de Antonio, alegando que su objetivo había sido librarse del dictador, mientras que acabar con un magistrado electo legítimamente significaría un varapalo para la causa republicana.

En el consiguiente alboroto que despertó este crimen en Roma, Antonio escapó de la ciudad vestido como un esclavo, temiendo que el asesinato del dictador fuera el inicio de un baño de sangre contra todos sus partidarios. Cuando comprobó que esto
no sucedía, regresó a Roma, concertando una tregua con la facción de los asesinos. En ese momento Antonio, como cónsul restante nombrado para ese año, simuló perseguir la paz y el final de la tensión política, a la vez que trataba de afianzarse
como líder del partido cesariano por encima de Lépido, cuyas tropas ocuparon el Foro el 16 de marzo. Tras un discurso de Cicerón pronunciado ante el Senado, reunido en el templo de Tellus a iniciativa de Antonio el día 17 de marzo, se concedió u
na amnistía a todos los conjurados, a la vez que se aprobaba un funeral en honor del dictador.

El día 20 de marzo aconteció el funeral de César, en el cual Antonio, como su fiel segundo en el mando, compañero, colega consular y pariente, fue el lógico elegido para recitar la elegíadel funeral. Durante su discurso enumeró las gestas de Cés
ar y las concesiones en su testamento en favor del pueblo romano, para acabar vertiendo sus acusaciones respecto al asesinato de César, afirmando así su distanciamiento con los conjurados. Mostrando un gran talento para la retórica y la interpret
ación dramática, Antonio asió la toga del cuerpo de César para mostrar a la muchedumbre las marcas de sus veintitrés heridas. De esta forma, esa misma noche el pueblo romano atacó las casas de los conjurados, obligándoles a huir para salvar sus v
idas y lamentando no haber acabado con el cónsul.

La posición de Antonio se vio fortalecida hasta tal punto que Calpurnia, la viuda de César, llegó a hacerle entrega de los documentos personales del dictador y a confiarle la custodia de sus bienes, valorados en 4.000 talentos. También consiguió
el apoyo de los veteranos de César tras viajar a Campania, donde habían sido asentados en premio a su lealtad tras las campañas cesarianas, y animarlos a defender la obra de César frentea sus enemigos. Rodeado así de una guardia de veteranos, A
ntonio obligó al Senado a entregarle la provincia de la Galia Cisalpina, que era en ese momento administrada por Décimo Junio Bruto Albino, uno de los conspiradores. Pretendía de esta forma trasladar las legiones allí establecidas hacia Macedonia
para preparar un ataque contra el Imperio parto. Bruto rehusó entregar la provincia, por lo que Antonio se dispuso a atacarle en octubre del 44 adC.

El Segundo Triunvirato editar

Octavio y la guerra de Módena editar
Denario emitido por Marco Antonio para pagar a sus legiones. En el reverso, el emblema de su Tercera Legión.
Denario emitido por Marco Antonio para pagar a sus legiones. En el reverso, el emblema de su Tercera Legión.

La muerte de César había dejado un gran vacío en la vida política de Roma. La República estaba agonizando, y de nuevo otra guerra civil había comenzado. Fue entonces cuando Cayo Octavio Turino, sobrino-nieto y a la vez hijo adoptivo de César, lle
gó en marzo a Brundisium desde Iliria, reclamando la herencia de su padre adoptivo, que consistía en tres cuartas partes de los bienes del César, según estipulaba en su último testamento.Tras rechazar los consejos de su madre y su padrastro Marc
io Filipo para que rechazara la adopción y la herencia, Octavio obtuvo el apoyo del Senado romano y de Cicerón, a la vez que las tropas veteranas del dictador se reunieron en torno a su bandera. Octavio se mostraba así muy dispuesto a luchar por
el poder con los otros principales aspirantes: Lépido y el propio Antonio.

Tras un primer encuentro amistoso con Antonio a finales de abril del 44 adC en Roma, en el cual Octavio le reprochó no haber perseguido a los conjurados, las desavenencias surgieron pronto cuando Octavio trató de atraerse a los veteranos campanie
nses. Antonio, quien se hallaba en Brundisium desde octubre para hacerse cargo de las legiones procedentes de Macedonia necesarias para atacar la Galia Cisalpina, comprendió el interés desu rival por desacreditarle ante las tropas, y regresó a R
oma con una legión gala, sólo para comprobar que Octavio se le había adelantado marchando hacia la Cisalpina con dos legiones. En Mutina Antonio sitió a Décimo Bruto, si bien Octavio, en calidad de propretor, llegó en ayuda de los sitiados derrot
ando en abril del 43 adC a Antonio con la ayuda de los cónsules Aulo Hircio y Cayo Vibio Pansa. No obstante, la muerte de ambos cónsules en la batalla aumentó el recelo del Senado hacia Octavio, quien, irritado ante la negativa del Senado para co
ncederle un triunfo y con el compromiso con Décimo Bruto para que mandase las tropas por encima de él, entró en Roma con ocho legiones bajo su mando, obligando al Senado a otorgarle el consulado (19 de agosto). Consiguió la promulgación de una le
x curiata que confirmó la adopción que hiciera César, pasando Octavio a llamarse Cayo Julio César, mientras que sus rivales le conocieron desde ese momento por el hiriente diminutivo de Octaviano. Entre tanto, Décimo Bruto huyó en pos de Marco Br
uto hacia Macedonia al comprender que no figuraba en los planes de Octaviano, siendo asesinado durante el viaje. Por su parte, Antonio escapó a la Galia Cisalpina, realizando un intercambio con Lépido y marchando hacia Roma con una gran fuerza de
infantería y caballería.

El surgimiento del Segundo Triunvirato editar

Ante el avance del ejército de Antonio, Octaviano traicionó finalmente al partido senatorial, consciente de que los asesinos de César esperaban en Macedonia una guerra en Italia para abalanzarse sobre el exhausto vencedor, por lo que llegó a un a
cuerdo con Antonio y Lépido. Los tres líderes se encontraron en Bononia el 11 de noviembre del 43 adC, adoptando el título de Triumviri rei publicae constituendae3 como gobernantes colegiados y aliados con potestad consular. La Galia Cisalpina fu
e adjudicada a Antonio, Hispania y la Galia Narbonense a Lépido, y África, Cerdeña y Sicilia, a Octaviano.

Los Triunviros para la organización del pueblo obtuvieron reconocimiento oficial mediante la Lex Titia, aprobada por la Asamblea el 23 de noviembre del 43 adC, la cual otorgaba virtualmente todos los poderes a los triunviros durante un periodo de
cinco años. Para fortalecer la alianza, Octaviano se casó con Clodia, la hijastra de Antonio. Necesitados de fondos para sufragar la guerra contra los conjurados, los triunviros comenzaron entonces a perseguir a la facción de los asesinos de Cés
ar, que habían huido hacia el Este, así como a ejecutar a los partidarios de la conjura que aún permanecían en Roma, desencadenando una ola de terror en la ciudad el 1 de enero del año 42adC: proscripciones, confiscaciones y ejecuciones se convi
rtieron en la norma general de aquellos días, siendo asesinados incluso algunos de los más nobles ciudadanos. Unos 2.000 caballeros y 160 senadores fueron ejecutados, siendo Cicerón la víctima más destacada en esta vorágine, pese al apoyo brindad
o a Octaviano, quien consintió su ejecución tras ser capturado al tratar de escapar. Antonio y su esposa Fulvia no perdonaron las acusaciones pasadas de Cicerón, vengándose con su cuerpo:sus manos y cabeza fueron enviadas a la Rostra, con su len
gua atravesada por las horquillas doradas de Fulvia. Finalmente, tras la doble batalla de Filipos (libradas el 3 y el 23 de octubre del 42 adC) y el suicidio de Casio y Bruto, los partidos senatorial y republicano fueron aniquilados: nadie más de
bía desafiar el poder del Triunvirato.

El reparto del mundo romano y la guerra de Perusa editar

Con el panorama militar y político aclarado, los triunviros dividieron el mundo romano entre ellos. Lépido tomó el control de las provincias occidentales, mientras Octaviano permaneció enItalia con la responsabilidad de asentar a los veteranos d
e guerra y proporcionarles tierras, una tarea fundamental ya que la lealtad de las legiones pasaba por cumplir este compromiso. Marco Antonio se dirigió a las provincias orientales, para pacificar otra revuelta acaecida en Judea, y con la idea de
atacar al imperio parto, un plan ideado previamente por César. Durante su viaje a Oriente, se encontró con la reina Cleopatra VII de Egipto en Tarsos (41 adC), tras lo cual ambos se convirtieron en amantes. Antonio pasó el invierno de ese año en
su compañía, en Alejandría.

Mientras tanto, en Italia la situación no estaba resuelta del todo. La administración de Octaviano no era satisfactoria, con el riesgo que existía de producirse una revuelta. Por otro lado, Octaviano se divorció de Clodia, la hijastra de Antonio,
dándole la curiosa excusa de que le resultaba molesta. La líder de la revuelta en ciernes fue Fulvia, la esposa de Antonio, una mujer que figura en la Historia como de tempestuoso carácter y de gran ambición política. Temiendo por la posición po
lítica de su marido y disgustada por el tratamiento recibido por su hija, fue ayudada por su cuñado Lucio Antonio para reclutar ocho legiones con su propio patrimonio. Su ejército invadióRoma, llegando a ser un verdadero problema para Octaviano.
Sin embargo, en el invierno del 41-40 adC, Fulvia fue sitiada en Perusia, siendo obligada a rendirse por hambre. Fue entonces exiliada a Sición, en Grecia, donde enfermó y murió aguardando la vuelta de Antonio.

La muerte de Fulvia fue providencial, ya que la nueva reconciliación entre los triunviros fue en gran parte cimentada en el matrimonio de Antonio con Octavia, la hermana de Octaviano, en octubre del 40 adC. Antonio se vio obligado a arreglar sus
conflictos con Octavio casándose con ella. Octavia era una hermosa e inteligente mujer que había enviudado recientemente y tenía tres niños de su primera unión. El mundo romano fue nuevamente dividido, asignando esta vez África a Lépido, las pro
vincias occidentales a Octaviano, y el Oriente a Antonio. Este pacto, conocido como el Tratado de Brundisium, reforzó el triunvirato, y permitió a Antonio empezar a preparar su tan ansiada campaña contra los partos.

Marco Antonio y Cleopatra editar
Busto de estilo griego de Cleopatra VII de Egipto
Busto de estilo griego de Cleopatra VII de Egipto

El tratado de Tarento y la campaña parta editar

Con este objetivo militar en mente, Antonio navegó hacia Grecia con su nueva esposa, donde allí se comportó de la manera más extravagante, asumiendo los atributos del dios Dioniso (39 adC). Pero la rebelión en Sicilia de Sexto Pompeyo, hijo de Po
mpeyo y último defensor de la causa de su padre, hizo que el ejército prometido a Antonio en su campaña oriental tuviera que permancer en Italia. Con sus planes de nuevo frustrados, Antonio y Octaviano se distanciaron de nuevo. Esta vez fue neces
aria la ayuda de Octavia para firmar un nuevo tratado en Tarentum (38 adC), por el cual el triunvirato fue renovado de nuevo por un periodo de cinco años (finalizando así en el 33 adC), volviendo a prometer Octaviano el envío de nuevas legiones a
Oriente.

Pero Antonio era escéptico en cuanto al apoyo de Octaviano en su campaña parta, de manera que, dejando a Octavia en Roma, embarazada de su segunda hija (Antonia Menor), navegó hacia Alejandría. Allí se reunió con su antigua amante Cleopatra, madr
e de sus dos hijos gemelos, quien le prestó el dinero necesario para reunir un ejército con el que emprender la campaña parta.

Tras reunir un importante ejército, estimado en unos 120.000 combatientes, Marco Antonio llevó a cabo el plan de ataque, que consistía en invadir el territorio parto, no directamente a través de Mesopotamia, sino internándose en Armenia siguiendo
el Éufrates y pasando por Arzen, para someterla y contar así con la obligada ayuda del rey armenio Artavasdes. Sin embargo, Antonio cometió el error de no dejar guarniciones en el territorio armenio, ante lo cual Artavasdes cambió de bando cuand
o Antonio se dirigió a la capital de la Media Atropatene, Fraaspa (la actual Takht-i Suleiman). Los jinetes partos hostigaron las líneas de abastecimiento de Antonio, dejándole sin suministros y medios de asalto para las fortalezas que había de c
onquistar. Ante esta situación, Antonio decidió regresar a Siria siguiendo el río Aras a través de Armenia en pleno invierno, retirada que fue honrosamente cubierta por los honderos y losveteranos de su ejército, y que sufrieron muchas bajas por
ello. En total Antonio perdió unos 30.000 hombres, la cuarta parte de todo su ejército, muchos de ellos veteranos difíciles de reemplazar.

El cisma entre los triunviros editar

Mientras tanto, en Roma, el triunvirato estaba a punto de llegar a su fin. Lépido fue obligado a renunciar al cargo tras una maniobra política desafortunada, y Octaviano, sólo ahora en elpoder en Roma, se ocupó de poner a la tradicional aristocr
acia romana de su parte, contrayendo matrimonio con Livia.

Ante la petición de Antonio (recurriendo al tratado de Tarento) para que le suministrara veteranos de las legiones establecidas en la Galia tras las importantes bajas sufridas en la campaña parta, Octaviano vio por fin la oportunidad de dejar a s
u rival político en una difícil situación: accedió a devolverle la mitad de la flota que había precisado para vencer a los piratas de Sexto Pompeyo (una flota inútil para la campaña parta), y le envió tan sólo 2.000 veteranos, junto con Octavia.
Al ver el escaso contingente enviado por Octaviano, Antonio comprendió que sus intenciones pasaban por iniciar un nuevo conflicto civil, por lo que aceptó las escasas tropas recibidas y repudió a su esposa, enviándola de vuelta a Roma.

De esta forma, Octaviano obtuvo la excusa que buscaba y que había provocado, y empezó a acusar a Antonio para así alejarlo cada vez más del poder político, argumentando que Antonio era unhombre de moral baja, y que había abandonado a su fiel esp
osa y a su hijos para estar con la promiscua reina de Egipto. Entre todas estas acusaciones, quizás la más grave a los ojos del pueblo fuera la de que Antonio se alejaba de las costumbresromanas y se inclinaba hacia los gustos orientales, un gra
ve crimen para el orgulloso pueblo romano.

La campaña armenia y las donaciones de Alejandría editar

En Oriente, y de nuevo con dinero egipcio, Antonio invadió Armenia en represalia por la deslealtad de Artavasdes, siendo esta vez una campaña victoriosa al capturar al rey armenio y anexionarse parte de su reino. A su regreso a Alejandría, realiz
ó una parodia de triunfo por las calles alejandrinas, siendo considerada como una burla de la más importante celebración militar romana. Al final de este evento, la población entera de laciudad fue convocada para escuchar una importante declarac
ión política: rodeado por Cleopatra y sus hijos, Antonio proclamó que declaraba disuelta su alianza con Octaviano, a la vez que distribuía varios territorios entre sus hijos. Alejandro Helios fue nombrado rey de Armenia y de Partia (aún por conqu
istar), su gemela Cleopatra Selene obtuvo Cirenaica y Libia, y al joven Ptolomeo Filadelfo se le adjudicó Siria y Cilicia. En cuanto a Cleopatra, fue nombrada Reina de Reyes y Reina de Egipto y Chipre, gobernando junto a Cesarión (Ptolomeo César,
hijo de Cleopatra y de César) como corregente y subordinado a su madre, y que fue también nombrado Rey de Reyes y Rey de Egipto, a la vez que se le anunciaba como el hijo y heredero legítimo de César. Estas proclamaciones fueron conocidas como l
as donaciones de Alejandría, y fueron la causa de la ruptura definitiva en las relaciones de Antonio con Roma.

Para Octaviano, el hecho de que Antonio distribuyera territorios entre sus propios descendientes (aunque fueran insignificantes o no conquistados aún) no había sido una maniobra que pudiera considerar precisamente como pacífica, pero lo que más l
e inquietaba era el hecho de que Cesarión hubiera sido anunciado como el hijo legítimo de César y su heredero. El poder de Octaviano descansaba fundamentalmente en el hecho de ser considerado como el heredero de César por adopción, lo cual le gar
antizaba el necesario apoyo del pueblo romano y la lealtad de las legiones. El hecho de que su ventajosa posición al frente de Roma fuera puesta en peligro por un simple niño engendrado por la mujer más rica del mundo era algo que Octaviano no po
día permitir. De esta forma, cuando el triunvirato expiró el último día del año 33 adC, no fue renovado. Otra guerra civil estaba a punto de producirse.

El enfrentamiento definitivo editar

Entre el 33 al 32 adC se desató una auténtica guerra propagandística en la arena política de Roma, con acusaciones lanzadas entre ambos bandos. Desde Egipto, Antonio anunció su divorcio de Octavia, acusando a su hermano de advenedizo, de usurpado
r del poder político y de falsificar los documentos de adopción de Julio César. Octaviano replicó con cargos de traición contra Antonio: controlar ilegalmente provincias que deberían haber sido asignadas a otros cargos como dictaba la tradición r
omana, e iniciar guerras contra otras naciones (Partia y Armenia) sin el permiso del Senado. Antonio fue también señalado como responsable de la ejecución de Sexto Pompeyo, que había sidocapturado el año 35 adC en Mileto, en la zona de influenci
a de Antonio, y ejecutado sin juicio pese a ser ciudadano romano. Finalmente, Octaviano logró hacerse con el testamento de Antonio, guardado por las vestales, en el cual se ratificaban los temores de Octaviano tal como los presentó ante el pueblo
, haciendo ver que Antonio quería reinar junto con Cleopatra en los territorios orientales romanos a toda costa, constituyendo una grave amenaza para el estado romano. De esta forma, en el año 32 adC el Senado despojó a Antonio de sus poderes y d
eclaró la guerra a Cleopatra.

La guerra dio comienzo finalmente en el 31 adC. El hábil Marco Vipsanio Agripa, leal comandante a las órdenes de Octaviano, consiguió tomar la importante ciudad y puerto griego de Methone, fiel a Antonio, asegurándose así un importante puerto en
el Peloponeso que amenazar las intenciones de Antonio por controlar la importante Vía Egnatia. La gran popularidad de Octaviano y sus legiones causó la defección de Cirenaica y Grecia hacia su bando. Finalmente, tras una serie de operaciones ter
restres, Octaviano bloqueó a Antonio y le obligó a entablar combate en el mar. El 2 de septiembre se libró la batalla naval de Accio, en la cual la flota de Antonio y Cleopatra fue vencida por la de Octaviano, retirándose ambos con sus navíos res
tantes de vuelta a Alejandría.

Octaviano, ahora ya próximo a obtener el poder absoluto, no tenía intención de dejarle un momento de paz, y a finales de julio del año 30 adC, asistido por Agripa, invadió Egipto. Sin otro lugar donde poder refugiarse, Antonio trató inútilmente d
e hacer frente a la invasión con sus once legiones, que desertaron el día 1 de agosto tras tan sólo un día de resistencia. Obligado por las circunstancias, y en la creencia de que Cleopatra se había suicidado previamente, Antonio optó por el suic
idio, arrojándose sobre su propia espada, aunque sería llevado aún con vida a su amante, muriendo en sus brazos. Pocos días más tarde, ante la deshonra de desfilar encadenada en el triunfo de Octaviano, Cleopatra se suicidó mediante la muerte rit
ual por mordedura de áspid.

Consecuencias y legado editar

Con la muerte de Antonio, Octaviano se convirtió en el gobernante incuestionable de Roma, y nadie más se atrevió a alzarse en su contra. En los años siguientes Octaviano, conocido como Caesar Augustus desde el año 27 adC, procedió a acumular en s
u persona todos los cargos administrativos, políticos y militares. Cuando Augusto murió en el año 14, todos sus poderes políticos pasaron a su hijo adoptivo, Tiberio, comenzando así el Principado romano.

El ascenso de César y la subsiguiente guerra civil entre sus dos partidarios más poderosos acabó eficazmente con la credibilidad en la oligarquía romana como forma de gobierno, y afirmó el hecho de que todas las futuras disputas por el poder se c
entrarían más sobre dos (o pocos más) individuos que lograrían el control supremo del gobierno, que sobre un individuo en conflicto con el Senado. De este modo, Antonio, como partidario clave de César y como uno de los dos hombres sobre los cuale
s el poder recayó tras el asesinato de César, fue uno de los tres hombres directamente responsables del final de la República romana.

Cronología de la vida de Marco Antonio editar

* 83 adC - Marco Antonio nace en Roma
* 54-50 adC - Lucha a las órdenes de César en la Guerra de las Galias
* 50 adC - Asciende a tribuno de la plebe
* 48 adC - Sirve como magister equitum de César
* 47 adC - Desastrosa administración de Italia: exilio político
* 44 adC - Primer consulado con César asesinato de César
* 43 adC - Guerra de Módena - formación del Segundo Triunvirato con Octaviano y Lépido
* 42 adC - Derrota de los asesinos de César en la batalla de Filipos viajes de Marco Antonio por Oriente
* 41 adC - Primer encuentro con Cleopatra
* 40 adC - Regreso a Roma boda con Octavia tratado de Brundisium
* 38 adC - Tratado de Tarentum: renovación del triunvirato por cinco años más
* 36 adC - Campaña desastrosa contra los partos
* 35 adC - Conquista de Armenia
* 34 adC - Donaciones de Alejandría
* 33 adC - Fin del Segundo Triunvirato
* 32 adC - Intercambio de acusaciones entre Octaviano y Marco Antonio
* 31 adC - Derrota ante Octaviano en la batalla de Accio
* 30 adC - Marco Antonio y Cleopatra se suicidan

Semblanza del Triunviro editar

Al decir de Plutarco:

...tenía la barba poblada, la frente espaciosa, la nariz aguileña, de modo que su aspecto en lo varonil parecía tener cierta semejanza con los retratos de Hércules pintados y esculpidos (...) procuraba él mismo acreditarlo con su modo de vest
ir, porque cuando había de mostrarse en público llevaba la túnica ceñida por las caderas, tomaba una grande espada y se cubría de un saco de los más groseros. Aun las cosas que chocaban en los demás, su aire jactancioso, sus bufonadas, el beber a
nte todo el mundo, sentarse en público a tomar un bocado con cualquiera y comer el rancho militar, no se puede decir cuánto contribuían a ganarle el amor y afición del soldado. Hasta paralos amores tenía gracia, y era otro de los medios de que s
acaba partido, terciando en los amores de sus amigos y contestando festivamente a los que se chanceaban con él acerca de los suyos. Su liberalidad y el no dar con mano encogida o escasa para socorrer a los soldados y a sus amigos fue en él un efi
caz principio para el poder, y después de adquirido le sirvió en gran manera para aumentarlo, a pesar de los millares de faltas que hubieran debido echarlo por tierra (...) con sus distracciones no cuidaba de dar oídos a los que sufrían injustici
as, trataba mal a los que iban a hablarle, y no corrían buenas voces en cuanto a abstenerse de las mujeres ajenas (...) cometió mayores violencias según el mayor poder que tenía,
Plutarco, Vida de Marco Antonio, IV y VI

Matrimonios de Marco Antonio y descendientes editar

1. Matrimonio con Fadia.
2. Matrimonio con Antonia Híbrida (prima carnal)

De acuerdo con Plutarco, Antonio expulsó a su prima fuera de su casa por ser la amante de su amigo, el tribuno Dolabella. Sin embargo, no es conocido si se divorciaron o ella murió, antesdel siguiente matrimonio de Antonio con Fulvia.

3. Matrimonio con Fulvia:

* Marco Antonio Antillo, ejecutado por Octaviano (32 adC)
* Julio Antonio, casado con Claudia Marcela Mayor, hija de Octavia

4. Matrimonio con Octavia:

* Antonia Mayor, casada con Lucio Domicio Ahenobarbo
* Antonia Menor, casada con Druso, hijo de Livia

5. Hijos con Cleopatra:

* Los gemelos Alejandro Helios (el Sol) y Cleopatra Selene (la Luna), casada con Juba II de Numidia
* Ptolomeo Filadelfo

Bibliografía editar

Fuentes clásicas editar

* Apiano de Alejandría, Bell. Civ. I.-V.
* Julio César, La guerra de las Galias (De Bello Gallico), La guerra civil (De Bella Civili)
* Cicerón, Cartas y Filípicas
* Dión Casio, XLI.-LIII
* Plutarco, en la sección Antonio de su Vidas de los nobles griegos y romanos

Obras modernas editar

En español editar

* Grimal, Pierre (1990): El mundo mediterráneo en la edad antigua III. La formación del Imperio Romano. Siglo XXI, Madrid. ISBN 84-323-0168-X
* Le Glay, Marcel (2001): Grandeza y decadencia de la República Romana. Cátedra, Madrid. ISBN 84-376-1895-9
* Roldán Hervás, José Manuel (1987): La República Romana Historia de Roma, Tomo I, pp. 625-643. Cátedra, Madrid. ISBN 84-376-0307-2
* Roldán Hervás, José Manuel Blázquez Martínez, José María Castillo, Antonio del (1989): El Imperio Romano (Siglos I-III). Historia de Roma, Tomo II. Cátedra, Madrid. Pp. 9-37
* Fuller, John Federico Charles (1954): Batallas decisivas del mundo occidental. Tomo I, pp. 235-269. RBA, Barcelona, 2005. ISBN 84-473-4604-8

En inglés editar

* Carter, John M (1970): The Battle of Actium: The rise & triumph of Augustus Caesar (Turning points in history). Hamilton, Londres. ISBN 0241015162
* Craven, Lucil (1920) Antony's oriental policy until the defeat of the parthian expedition. Universidad de Misouri, St. Louis.
* Lindsay, Jack (1970): Cleopatra. Constable, Londres. ISBN 0094570000

Obras de ficción editar

* Massie, Allan. Marco Antonio. El Triunviro. Edhasa, Barcelona, 2000. ISBN 84-350-0687-5
* Moix, Terenci. No digas que fue un sueño. Planeta, Barcelona, 1986. ISBN 84-320-0941-5
* Shakespeare, William:
o Julio César
o Antonio y Cleopatra

Filmografía relacionada editar

* Cleopatra (1934), de Cecil B. De Mille 1
* Cleopatra (1963), de Joseph Mankiewicz 2
* Roma (serie de TV 2005-7) 3

Véase también editar

* República Romana
* Julio César
* Guerra de las Galias
* Segunda Guerra Civil de la República de Roma
* Segundo Triunvirato
* Cleopatra VII
* César Augusto
* Tercera Guerra Civil de la República de Roma

Notas y referencias editar

1. ↑ Epigráficamente. M·ANTONIVS·M·F·M·N, Marcus Antonius Marci Filius Marci Nepos, es decir, "Marco Antonio, hijo de Marco, nieto de Marco" según el sistema de filiación (praenomen, nomen y patronimicus) de la nomenclatura romana.
2. ↑ Mencionada así en las fuentes por su nombre de casada, para distinguirla de otras tocayas de la familia.
3. ↑ La traducción al español sería: Triunviros para la Constitución de la República, abreviado en latín como III·VIR·R·P·C.

He comitted suicide.

He comitted suicide.

[mylogsdon.FTW]

[db021301.FTW]

[strayhorn.GED]

[rw1015.FTW]

Friend of Julius Ceaser who tried to inherit his power base when Ceaser was killed but was unable to do so. It seamed that his temper and his love of the good life made him an unlike ruler. His place of birth is not known, but it is know that he was of noble descent. He severed in the Army in Egypt and Gaul under Julius Ceaser. He was elected to the Tribune of the People as Cesear's representive and was second in command when Casear defeated Pompey the Great in the Battle of Pharsalus in 48 BC. He served as Cousul at Casear's murder and made a well known speach at Casers funeral which began "Friend, Romans, and County men, lend me your ears". The speach inspired the people to take revenge on Brutis, Cassius and the others who had murdered Casear. He lead an army into Cisalpine Gaul (Northern Italy) to fight Brutis, but the Senate support Octavian to rasie an army and stop him. Octavian was Casear's great-newphew and adopted son. Octavian and Antony meet at the Battle of Mutina in 43 bc and Antony was defeated.

Octavian used his victory to force the Senate to appoint him consul. He then mad peace with Antony and with him and Marcus Aemilus Lepidus formed the Second Triumvirate.

Octavian and Antony now completed Antony's earilier quest and went to Greece, where in two battles in 42 BC at Philippi the defeated Cassius and Brutis.

After this was completed, Antony chose to rule the eastern half of the empire and settle in Asia Minor. It was here that he met Cleopatra, Queen of Egypt. While he was falling in love with her there, his wife and brother where attempting to overthrow his counterpart in the West, Octavian. When Antony returned to Rome, he found that Octavian had won and his wife was dead. He renewed his relationship with Octavian and married his sister Octivia. With the Empire once more divided between him and Octavian, he chose the Eastern part where he spent several years. At some point during this time he attacked the Parthians, but was not victorious, whereupon he return to Egypt, where he renew his relations with Cleopatra and lived in the lap of Luxury at her court. He made a gift of several of the part of the Eastern Roman Empire. This did not set very well with those in Rome. Octavian lead an army and opposed Cleopatra and Antony at Actium in 31 BC where he was victorious and prusered Antony into Egypt. Antony refused to be take by Octavian and killed himself. As a result, Octavian became Emperor Augustus.

31 BCE- Antony and Cleopatra are defeated by Octavian, ensuring theprosperity of Greek ideals without threat from the eastern principles ofdespotism. His victory begins a new Roman era, called the Principate orEarly Empire. The Senate and army bestow the name of Augustus and emperor("victorious general") upon Octavian, and he is commonly referred to asAugustus. Having gained more land for Rome than any other ruler beforehim, Augustus dies in 14 CE with his rule having lasted 44 years.



In 49, the year in which the Civil War broke out between Pompey andCaesar, Marcus Antonius became tribune of the people and vigorouslysupported Caesar in the Senate. Caesar left him in charge of Italy, apost he again occupied in 48-47. After Caesar's murder, he controlledevents and aroused the people against Caesar's assassins, Marcus Brutusand Cassius.



Octavian, Caesar's great-nephew and adopted son, gradually emerged as arival. In April 43 a coalition of Octavian, the two consuls of the year,and Decimus Brutus defeated Antony at Mutina (Modena) and compelled himto withdraw into the southern part (Narbonensis) of Transalpine Gaul.There, however, he was joined by a number of leading commanders includingMarcus Aemilius Lepidus, who, after Antony, had been in charge of Italy.In early November Octavian met Antony and Lepidus in Bononia (Bologna),and the three entered into an official five-year pact, the secondtriumvirate (November 43). In 42 Marcus Brutus and Cassius killedthemselves after their defeat at the Battle of Philippi, in which Antonygreatly distinguished himself as a commander.



The triumvirs had agreed to divide the empire; so Antony proceeded totake up the administration of the eastern provinces. He spent the winterof 41-40 at Alexandria, as the lover of Cleopatra, the queen of Egypt.



Late in 40 he married Octavian's sister Octavia. In 38, however,differences had arisen between Antony and Octavian, and Antony sentOctavia back to Italy from Greece when he left again for the east andarranged for Cleopatra to join him in Syria. From then on, they livedtogether for the remaining seven years of their lives.



Cleopatra needed Antony in order to revive the Ptolemaic kingdom, andAntony needed Egypt as a source of supplies and funds. Octavian, who hadwon against Sextus Pompeius, sent Octavia to Antony in Syria, along withtroops and provisions. But the soldiers fell far short of the numbersAntony expected and he then made a future breach between the two leadersalmost inevitable by ordering Octavia to return to Rome.



In 32 the triumvirate had officially ended. After Antony had divorcedOctavia, her brother broke off the ties of personal friendship with himand declared war. Antony marshalled his principal fleet in the gulf ofAmbracia (northwestern Greece). But Octavian's admiral Agrippa, and thenOctavian himself, succeeded in sailing from Italy across the Ionian Seaand effecting landings, and Agrippa captured decisive points all alongthe line.



Because of a lack of unity and the inexperience of Antony's crews, thedecisive battle was lost before it ever began. It took place off Actium,outside the Ambracian Gulf, on September 2, 31 BC. Antony suffered theinevitable defeat, but Cleopatra broke through the enemy line with her 60ships and, joined by her lover, made for Egypt. It was nearly a yearbefore Octavian reached them there, but soon after his arrival, in August30 BC, when resistance proved impossible, first Antony and then Cleopatracommitted suicide.

Name Suffix:<NSFX> Triumvir Of Rome ANCI: HIGH

Mark Antony
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.

Marcus Antonius (Latin: M·ANTONIVS·M·F·M·N¹) (ca. 83 BC – August 30 BC), known in English as Mark Antony, was a Roman politician and general. He was an important supporter of Julius Caesar as a military commander and administrator. After Caesar's assassination, Antony allied with Octavian and Marcus Aemilius Lepidus to form the second triumvirate. The triumvirate broke up in 33 BC and the disagreement turned to civil war in 31 BC, in which Antony was defeated by Octavian at the Battle of Actium and then at Alexandria. Antony committed suicide with Cleopatra in 30 BC.


Contents [hide]
1 Early life
2 Supporter of Caesar
3 The second triumvirate
4 Antony and Cleopatra
5 Aftermath and Legacy
6 Antony's marriages and descendants
7 Chronology
8 References
9 See also
10 Notes
11 External links



[edit]
Early life
Antony was born in Rome around 83 BC. His father was his namesake, Marcus Antonius Creticus, the son of the great rhetorician Marcus Antonius Orator executed by Gaius Marius' supporters in 86 BC. Through his mother Julia Caesaris, he was a distant cousin of Julius Caesar. His father died at a young age, leaving him and his brothers, Lucius and Gaius, to the care of his mother. Julia Antonia (known in sources by her married name, to distinguish her from the other Julias) then married Publius Cornelius Lentulus Sura, a politician involved in and executed during the Catiline conspiracy of 63 BC.

Antony's early life was characterized by a lack of parental guidance. According to historians like Plutarch, he spent his teenage years roaming through Rome with his brothers and friends (Publius Clodius Pulcher among them - probably out of hostility to Cicero, who had caused Lentulus Sura to be put to death as a Catilinarian; the connection was severed by a disagreement arising from his relations with Clodius's wife, Fulvia). Together, they embarked on a rather wild sort of life, frequenting gambling houses, drinking too much, and involving themselves in scandalous love affairs. Plutarch mentions the rumour that before Antony reached twenty years of age, he was already indebted the sum of 250 talents (equivalent to several million dollars).

After this period of recklessness, Antony fled to Greece to escape his creditors and to study rhetoric. After a short time spent in attendance on the philosophers at Athens, he was summoned by Aulus Gabinius, proconsul of Syria, to take part in the campaigns against Aristobulus in Judea, and in support of Ptolemy Auletes in Egypt. In the ensuing campaign, he demonstrated his talents as a cavalry commander and distinguished himself with bravery and courage. It was during this campaign that he first visited Egypt and Alexandria.

[edit]
Supporter of Caesar
In 54 BC, Antony became a member of the staff of Caesar's armies in Gaul. He again proved to be a competent military leader in the Gallic wars, but his personality caused instability wherever he went. Caesar himself was said to be frequently irritated by his behaviour.

Nevertheless, raised by Caesar's influence to the offices of quaestor, augur, and tribune of the plebs (50 BC), he supported the cause of his patron with great energy. Caesar's two proconsular commands, during a period of ten years, were expiring, and the general wanted to return to Rome for the consular elections. But resistance from the conservative faction of the Roman Senate, led by Pompey, demanded that Caesar resign his proconsulship and the command of his armies before being allowed to seek re-election to the consulship. This he could not do, as such an act would leave him a private citizen--and therefore open to prosecution for his acts while proconsul--in the interim between his proconsulship and his second consulship; it would also leave him at the mercy of Pompey's armies. Antony proposed that both generals lay down their commands. The idea was rejected, and Antony resorted to violence, ending up expelled from the Senate. He left Rome, joining Caesar, who had led his armies to the banks of the Rubicon, the river that marked the southern limit of his proconsular authority. With all hopes of a peaceful solution for the conflict with Pompey gone, Caesar led his armies across the river into Italy and marched on Rome, starting the last Republican civil war. During the civil war, Antony was Caesar's second in command. In all battles against the Pompeians, Antony led the left wing of the army, a proof of Caesar's confidence in him.

When Caesar became dictator, Antony was made master of the horse, the dictator's right hand man, and in this capacity remained in Italy as the peninsula's administrator in 47 BC, while Caesar was fighting the last Pompeians, who had taken refuge in the African provinces. But Antony's skills as administrator were a poor match to those as general, and he seized the opportunity of indulging in the most extravagant excesses, depicted by Cicero in the Philippics. In 46 BC he seems to have taken offence because Caesar insisted on payment for the property of Pompey which Antony professedly had purchased, but had in fact simply appropriated. Conflict soon arose, and, as on other occasions, Antony resorted to violence. Hundreds of citizens were killed and Rome herself descended into a state of anarchy. Caesar was most displeased with the whole affair and removed Antony from all political responsibilities. The two men did not see each other for two years. The estrangement was not of long continuance; for we find Antony meeting the dictator at Narbo (45 BC), and rejecting the suggestion of Trebonius that he should join in the conspiracy that was already on foot. Reconciliation arrived in 44 BC, when Antony was chosen as partner for Caesar's fifth consulship.

Whatever conflicts existed between the two men, Antony remained faithful to Caesar at all times. In February of 44 BC, during the Lupercalia festival (February 15), Antony publicly offered Caesar a diadem. This was an event fraught with meaning: a diadem was a symbol of a king, and in refusing it, Caesar demonstrated that he did not intend to assume the throne.

On March 15, 44 BC (the Ides of March), Julius Caesar was assassinated by a group of Senators, led by Gaius Cassius Longinus and Marcus Junius Brutus. In the turmoil that surrounded the event, Antony escaped Rome dressed as a slave, fearing that the dictator's assassination would be the start of a bloodbath among his supporters. When this did not occur, he soon returned to Rome, discussing a truce with the assassins' faction. For a while, Antony, as consul of the year, seemed to pursue peace and the end of the political tension. Following a speech by Marcus Tullius Cicero in the Senate, an amnesty was agreed for the assassins. Then came the day of Caesar's funeral. As Caesar's ever-present second in command, partner in consulship and cousin, Antony was the natural choice to make the funeral eulogy. In his speech, he sprang his accusations of murder and ensured a permanent breach with the conspirators. Showing a talent for rhetoric and dramatic interpretation, Antony snatched the toga from Caesar's body to show the crowd the scars from his wounds. That night, the Roman populace attacked the assassins' houses, forcing them to flee for their lives.

Antony surrounded himself with a bodyguard of Caesar's veterans, and forced the senate to transfer to him the province of Cisalpine Gaul, which was then administered by Decimus Junius Brutus, one of the conspirators. Brutus refused to surrender the province, and Antony set out to attack him in October 44 BC.

[edit]
The second triumvirate

Denarius minted by Mark Antony to pay his legions. On the reverse, the standard of his Third legion.The death of Caesar had left an open space in Rome's politics. The Republic was dying, and yet another civil war was starting. It was then that Octavian, Caesar's great-nephew and adopted son, arrived from Illyria, and claimed the inheritance of his "father." Octavian obtained the support of the senate and of Cicero; and the veteran troops of the dictator flocked to his standard. He was also very willing to fight for power with the other two main contestants: Antony himself and Lepidus.

Antony was denounced as a public enemy, and Octavian was entrusted with the command of the war against him. Antony was defeated at Mutina (43 BC) where he was besieging Brutus. The consuls Aulus Hirtius and C. Vibius Pansa, however, fell in the battle, and the senate became suspicious of Octavian, who, irritated at the refusal of a triumph and the appointment of Brutus to the command over his head, entered Rome at the head of his troops, and forced the senate to bestow the consulship upon him (August 19). Meanwhile, Antony escaped to Cisalpine Gaul, effected a junction with Lepidus and marched towards Rome with a large force of infantry and cavalry. Octavian betrayed his party, and came to terms with Antony and Lepidus. The three leaders met at Bononia and adopted the title of Triumviri reipublicae constituendae as joint rulers. Gaul was to belong to Antony, Hispania to Lepidus, and Africa, Sardinia and Sicily to Octavian.

The Triumvirs for the Organization of the People gained official recognition by the Lex Titia, a law passed by the Assembly in 43 BC, which granted them virtually all powers for a period of five years. To solidify the alliance, Octavian married Clodia, Antony's step-daughter. The triumvirs then set to pursue the assassins' faction, who had fled to the East, and to murder the conspirators' supporters who remained in Rome. A reign of terror followed; proscriptions, confiscations, and executions became general; some of the noblest citizens were put to death. Cicero was the most famous victim of these violent days, having been executed during his attempt to flee, according to Anthony Everitt's recent biography. Antony and his wife Fulvia did not spare the body: Cicero's head and hands were posted in the Rostra, with his tongue pierced by Fulvia's golden hairpins. After the twin battles at Philippi and the suicides of Brutus and Cassius, the senatorial and republican parties had been annihilated; no one else would defy the triumvirate's power.

With the political and military situations resolved, the triumvirs divided the Roman world among themselves. Lepidus took control of the Western provinces, and Octavian remained in Italy with the responsibility of securing lands for the veteran soldiers—an important task, since the loyalty of the legions depended heavily on this promise. As for Antony, he went to the Eastern provinces, to pacify yet another rebellion in Judaea and attempt to conquer the Parthian Empire. During this trip, he met Queen Cleopatra VII of Egypt in Tarsus, in 41 BC, and became her lover, spending the winter in her company at Alexandria.

Meanwhile, in Italy, the situation was not pacified. Octavian's administration was not appeasing, and a revolt was about to occur. Moreover, he divorced Clodia, giving a curious explanation: she was annoying. The leader of this revolt was Fulvia, the wife of Antony, a woman known to history for her political ambition and tempestuous character. She feared for her husband's political position and was not keen to see her daughter put aside. Assisted by Lucius Antonius, her brother-in-law, Fulvia raised eight legions with her own money. Her army invaded Rome, and for a while managed to create problems for Octavian. However, in the winter of 41–40 BC, Fulvia was besieged in Perusia and forced to surrender by starvation. Fulvia was exiled to Sicyon, where she died while waiting for Antony's arrival.

Fulvia's death was providential. A reconciliation was effected between the triumvirs, and cemented by the marriage of Antony with Octavia in October 40 BC, Octavian's beloved sister. A new division of the Roman world was made, Lepidus receiving Africa, Octavian the west, and Antony the east. This peace, known as the Treaty of Brundisium, reinforced the triumvirate and allowed Antony to finally prepare his long-awaited campaign against the Parthians.

[edit]
Antony and Cleopatra
With this military purpose on his mind, Antony sailed to Greece with his new wife, where he behaved in a most extravagant manner, assuming the attributes of the god Dionysus (39 BC). But the rebellion in Sicily of Sextus Pompeius, the last of the Pompeians, kept the army promised to Antony in Italy. With his plans again severed, Antony and Octavian quarreled again. This time with the help of Octavia, a new treaty was signed in Tarentum in 38 BC. The triumvirate was renewed for a period of another five years (ending in 33 BC) and Octavian promised again to send legions to the East.

But by now, Antony was skeptical of Octavian's true support of his Parthian cause. Leaving Octavia pregnant of her second Antonia in Rome, he sailed to Alexandria, where he expected funding from Cleopatra, the mother of his twins. The queen of Egypt loaned him the money he needed for the army, but the campaign proved a disaster. After a series of defeats in battle, Antony lost most of his Egyptian army during a retreat through Armenia in the peak of winter.

Meanwhile in Rome, the triumvirate was no more. Lepidus was forced to resign after an ill-judged political move. Now in sole power, Octavian was occupied in wooing the traditional Republican aristocracy to his side. He married Livia and started to attack Antony in order to raise himself to power. He argued that Antony was a man of low morals to have left his faithful wife abandoned in Rome with the children to be with the promiscuous queen of Egypt. Antony was accused of everything, but most of all, of "becoming native", an unforgivable crime to the proud Romans. Several times Antony was summoned to Rome, but remained in Alexandria with Cleopatra.

Again with Egyptian money, Antony invaded Armenia, this time successfully. In the return, a mock Roman triumph was celebrated in the streets of Alexandria. The parade through the city was a pastiche of Rome's most important military celebration. For the finale, the whole city was summoned to hear a very important political statement. Surrounded by Cleopatra and her children, Antony was about to put an end to his alliance with Octavian. He distributed kingdoms between his children: Alexander Helios was named king of Armenia and Parthia (not conquered yet), his twin Cleopatra Selene got Cyrenaica and Libya, and the young Ptolemy Philadelphus was awarded Syria and Cilicia. As for Cleopatra, she was proclaimed Queen of Kings and Queen of Egypt, to rule with Caesarion (Ptolemy Caesar, son of Julius Caesar), King of Kings and King of Egypt. Most important of all, Caesarion was declared legitimate son and heir of Julius Caesar. These proclamations were known as the Donations of Alexandria and caused a fatal breach in Antony's relations with Rome.

Distributing insignificant lands among the children of Cleopatra was not a peace move, but it was not a serious problem either. What did seriously threaten Octavian's political position, however, was the acknowledgement of Caesarion as legitimate and heir to Julius Caesar's name. Octavian's base of power was his link with Caesar through adoption, which granted him much-needed popularity and loyalty of the legions. To see this convenient situation attacked by a child sired by the richest woman in the world was something Octavian could not accept. The triumvirate expired on the last day of 33 BC and was not renewed. Another civil war was beginning.

During 33 and 32 BC, a propaganda war was fought in the political arena of Rome, with accusations flying between sides. Antony (in Egypt) divorced Octavia and accused Octavian of being a social upstart, of usurping power, and of forging the adoption papers by Julius Caesar. Octavian responded with treason charges: of illegally keeping provinces that should be given to other men by lots, as was Rome's tradition, and of starting wars against foreign nations (Armenia and Parthia) without the consent of the Senate. Antony was also held responsible for Sextus Pompeius' execution with no trial. In 32 BC, the senate deprived him of his powers and declared war against Cleopatra. Both consuls (Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus and Gaius Sosius) and a third of the Senate abandoned Rome to meet Antony and Cleopatra in Greece.

In 31 BC, the war started. Octavian's loyal and talented general Agrippa captured the Greek city and naval port of Methone, loyal to Antony. The enormous popularity of Octavian with the legions secured the defection of the provinces of Cyrenaica and Greece to his side. On September 2, the naval Battle of Actium took place. Antony and Cleopatra's navy was destroyed, and they were forced to escape to Egypt with sixty ships.

Octavian, now close to absolute power, did not intend to give them rest. In August 30 BC, assisted by Agrippa, he invaded Egypt. With no other refuge to escape to, Antony committed suicide in the mistaken belief that Cleopatra had already done so (30 BC). A few days later, Cleopatra herself followed his example.

Antony had been married in succession to Fadia, Antonia, Fulvia and Octavia, and left behind him a number of children.

[edit]
Aftermath and Legacy
With the death of Antony, Octavian became uncontested ruler of Rome: no one else attempted to take power from him. In the following years, Octavian, known as Augustus Caesar after 27 BC, managed to accumulate in his person all administrative, political, and military offices. When Augustus died in AD 14, his political powers passed to his adopted son Tiberius; the Roman Principate had begun.

The rise of Caesar and the subsequent civil war between his two most powerful adherents effectively ended the credibility of the Roman oligarchy as a governing power and ensured that all future power struggles would centre upon which of two (or more) individuals would achieve supreme control of the government, rather than upon an individual in conflict with the Senate. Thus Antony, as Caesar's key adherent and one of the two men around whom power coalesced following his assassination, was one of the three men chiefly responsible for the fall of the Roman Republic.

[edit]
Antony's marriages and descendants
Marriage to Fadia
Marriage to Antonia Hybrida (his direct cousin)
According to Plutarch, Antony threw his cousin out of his Roman House, because she slept with his friend the tribune Dolabella. However, it is not known whether they divorced or she died, before Antony married Fulvia.

Marriage to Fulvia
Marcus Antonius Antyllus, executed by Octavian in 31 BC
Iullus Antonius, married Claudia Marcella Major, daughter of Octavia
Marriage to Octavia
Antonia Major, married Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus
Antonia Minor, married Drusus, the son of Livia
Children with Cleopatra
The twins
Alexander Helios, the sun
Cleopatra Selene, the moon, married King Juba II of Numidia (and, later, Mauretania)
Ptolemy Philadelphus.
[edit]
Chronology
83 BC—born in Rome
54–50 BC—joins Caesar's staff in Gaul and fights in the Gallic wars
50 BC—Tribune of the Plebeians
48 BC—Serves as Caesar's Master of the Horse
47 BC—Ruinous administration of Italy: political exile
44 BC—First Consulship with Caesar
43 BC—Forms the Second Triumvirate with Octavian and Lepidus
42 BC—Defeats Cassius and Brutus in the Battle of Philippi; travels through the East
41 BC—Meets Cleopatra
40 BC—Returns to Rome, marries Octavia; treaty of Brundisium
38 BC—Treaty of Tarentum: Triumvirate renewed until 33 BC
36 BC—Disastrous campaign against the Parthians
35 BC—Conquers Armenia
34 BC—The Donations of Alexandria
33 BC—End of the triumvirate
32 BC—Exchange of accusations between Octavian and Antony
31 BC—Defeated by Octavian in the naval Battle of Actium
30 BC—Antony and Cleopatra commit suicide
[edit]
References
Caesar, De Bella Gallico, De Bella Civili
Cicero, Letters and Philippics
Appian, Bell. Civ. i.-v.
Dio Cassius xli.-liii
Antony section in Lives of the Noble Greeks and Romans by Plutarch, of which the English translation is contained in the following Project Gutenberg e-text Plutarch: Lives of the noble Grecians and Romans - Note that parts of Antony's story are in Plutarch's life descriptions of Pompey, Caesar, Cicero, Brutus, all of these contained in that same e-text.
In addition to the standard histories, see:

V. Gardthausen, Augustus und seine Zeit (Leipzig, 1891-1904)
W. Drumann, Geschichte Roms (2nd ed. P. Groebe, 1899), i. pp. 46-384
article by Groebe in Pauly-Wissowa's Realencyclopadie
and a short but vivid sketch by de Quincey in his Essay on the Caesars
This article incorporates text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica, which is in the public domain.
Antony and Cleopatra, William Haines Lytle (1826-1863)
[edit]
See also


wtf 4:565 committed suicide in Alexandria

[4626] "Bloodline ...", p 409 Mark Anthony

http://library.monterey.edu/merrill/family/dorsett6/d0129/I11531.html d 30 BC

Rootsweb Feldman
URL: http://worldconnect.genealogy.rootsweb.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=:3044567&id=I29838
# ID: I29838
# Name: Mark Antony III ROME 1 2 3 4 5 6
# Sex: M
# Birth: in 83 B.C. 2 3 4 5 6
# Death: in Alexandria 1 2 3 4 5 6
# Change Date: 15 JAN 2004 6
# Change Date: 12 MAY 2002 3 4 5 6
# Note:

[Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED]

2 SOUR S332582
3 DATA
4 TEXT Date of Import: 14 Jan 2004


[daveanthes.FTW]

[13143.GED]

Aka; Marcus Antonius.
A Roman politician and soldier. While already married, he had a love affair with and then later, reportedly married Cleopatra, Empress of
Egypt, who also committed suicide in 30 BC.
Sources include, but are not limited to;
"Bloodline of the Holy Grail", by Laurence Gardner (1996)
page(s) 409; ISBN



Father: Marcus Antonius Creticus ROME b: BEF 100
Mother: Julia ROME** b: BEF 100

Marriage 1 Octavia the Elder ROME b: in 64 B.C.

* Note:

[Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED]

[daveanthes.FTW]

_FREL Natural
_MREL Natural[Spare.FTW]

[daveanthes.FTW]

_FREL Natural
_MREL Natural[Spare.FTW]

[daveanthes.FTW]

_FREL Natural
_MREL Natural

Children

1. Has Children Antonia the Elder ROME
2. Has Children Antonia the Younger ROME b: BEF 100 in 36 B.C.


Marriage 2 Fadia ROME


Marriage 3 Antonia ROME


Marriage 4 Fulvia ROME


Marriage 5 Cleopatra Egypt Queen EGYPT


Sources:

1. Title: 13143.GED
Note: ABBR 13143.GED
Note: Source Media Type: Other

ABBR 13143.GED

NS174433
Text: Date of Import: Apr 20, 2001
2. Title: daveanthes.FTW
Note: ABBR daveanthes.FTW
Note: Source Media Type: Other
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Book
Text: Date of Import: 14 Jan 2004
3. Title: daveanthes.FTW
Note: ABBR daveanthes.FTW
Note: Source Media Type: Other
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Book
Text: Date of Import: Jan 13, 2004
4. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Jan 18, 2004
5. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: 21 Jan 2004
6. Title: Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Feb 6, 2004

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]