== Notes for [[Item:Q100939|Q100939]] ==

Reference: '''"Divrei ha-Yamim le-Bnei Yahya,( דברי הימים לבני יחייא )"''', by Eliakim Carmoly, Printed in Frankfort am Main/Rodelheim, Published by: Isak Kaufman, 1850. Genealogy of, and biographical work on, the Yahya family by Eliakim Carmoly. There is an introduction from Carmoly, in which he informs that the Yahya family is one of distinction from the time of Maimonides. Originally achieving greatness in Portugal and Spain, they after settled in Italy and Turkey. The text is preceded by a chart of the family, beginning with the Nasi, Don Yahya, and concluding with Don Gedalia. The text, in seven chapters, is set in a single column, primarily in rabbinic type although there are instances of vocalized square letters, and is accompanied by extensive footnotes. The final page is an announcement of the forthcoming publication of seven minor Yerushalmi tractates by Carmoli. The text of this book was compared to the "bin Yahya Family Tapestry", currently stored in the antiquity archives of Jewish Theological Seminary in New York City, by Abraham Greenstein - grandson of Abraham Gindi HaKohen. The text matches the Tapestry.

Philosopher and Portuguese military advisor. Philosopher, religious scholar, royal military advisor. Shlomo has two sons 1) Gedaliah Ha-Zaken, and 2) Yosef Ha-Meshorer. Shlomo was a philosopher and royal military advisor. He was concerned about the extravagant life style of the community and tried to convince his fellow Jews to curtail their ostentatious display of wealth. He saw the love of luxury as eating away at the soul of the people and was fearful that it could arouse the wrath of the gentile population.
--------------------
=== GEDCOM Note ===
Don Shlomo Ha-Zaken ben Yosef (ibn Yachya) Yewish wise of Talmud and administrator of portugal Kingdom Philosopher and Portuguese military advisor. Philosopher, religious scholar, royal military advisor. Shlomo has two sons 1) Gedaliah Ha-Zaken, and 2) Yosef Ha-Meshorer. Shlomo was a philosopher and royal military advisor. He was concerned about the extravagant life style of the community and tried to convince his fellow Jews to curtail their ostentatious display of wealth. He saw the love of luxury as eating away at the soul of the people and was fearful that it could arouse the wrath of the gentile population.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD8BF8951EFBBFA9822EF79916CBA24
geni:6000000002639072428

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]