== Notes for [[Item:Q88279|Q88279]] ==

440 f.Kr - 400 f.Kr.
--------------------
Death Notes

Birth: 450 B.C.

General Notes

Statira of Armenia was the daughter of Hydranes III of Armenia and N. N. (?) .3 She died 0402 B.C. In circa. "Now there is a small Persian bird, in the inside of which no excrement is found, only a mass of fat, so that they suppose the little creatures lives upon air and dew. It is called rhyntaces. Ctesias affirms, that Parysatis, cutting a bird of this kind into two pieces with a knife one side of which had been smeared with the drug, the other side being clear of it, ate the untouched and wholesome part herself, and gave Statira that which was thus infected; ... Statira; who, dying with dreadful agonies and convulsions, was herself sensible of what had happened to her, and aroused in the king's mind suspicion of his mother, whose savage and implacable temper he knew."3 She married King of Persia and Egypt Artaxerxes II Mnemon Achaemenid , son of King of Persia and Egypt Darius II Nothus Achaemenid and Parysatis (?) , 0420 B.C; His 1st.4,3,2 Sources: 1. Stuart, R.W. 'Royalty for Commoners', line 412. ; 2. Toumanoff, C. 'The Orontids of Armenia' in 'Studies in Christian Caucasian History' (1963) pp.288-289.

Children of Statira of Armenia and King of Persia and Egypt Artaxerxes II Mnemon Achaemenid :

King of Persia and Egypt Artaxerxes III Ochus Achaemenid + b. 0415 B.C., d. 0338 BCE

Ariaspes Achaemenid b. 0416 B.C., d. 0359 B.C.

Darius Achaemenid b. 0417 B.C., d. 0390 B.C.

Rhodogune Achaemenid+ b. 0419 B.C.

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, Royalty for Commoners: The Complete Lineage of John of Gaunt, Son of Edward III, Kings of England, and Queen Philippa (.: ., 3rd Ed., 1998), 426-80. Hereinafter cited as RfC.

[S931] A.H. Clough, editor, Plutarch's Lives (Champaign, IL: Project Gutenberg, October 1996), ARTAXERXES. Hereinafter cited as Plutarch's Lives.

[S931] A.H. Clough, Plutarch's Lives.

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 412-80.

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per01051.htm#0

RESEARCH NOTES:
Queen of Persia

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]