== Notes for [[Item:Q87622|Q87622]] ==

Aurelia Cotta (120 BC-54 BC) was the daughter of a Rutilia and the consul of 144, Lucius Aurelius Cotta. Rutilia is assumed to have been a sister of Publius Rutilius Rufus. After her husband's death, she married his brother, Gaius Aurelius Cotta, and as a result, Aurelia had three half-brothers, who later became consuls: Gaius Aurelius Cotta in 75 BC, Lucius Cotta in 74 BC and Marcus Cotta in 65 BC. Aurelia married Gaius Julius Caesar (the Elder), and her only son was the famous Gaius Julius Caesar. She also had two daughters, one of them the grandmother of Augustus.

http://romanhistorybooks.typepad.com/roman_history_books_and_m/2006/08/post_1.html

-----------------------------------------

The historian Tacitus considers her an ideal Roman matron and thinks highly of her. Plutarch describes her as a "strict and respectable" woman. Highly intelligent, independent and renowned for her beauty and common sense, Aurelia was held in high regard throughout Rome.

Read more: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aurelia_Cotta
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aurelia_Cotta
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aurelia_Cotta
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aurelia_Cotta Aurelia Cotta or Aurelia (120 BC-54 BC) was the mother of Roman dictator Gaius Julius Caesar (100 BC- 44 BC).

--------------------
Died : 54 BC
--------------------
Of the Cotta family
--------------------
Died : 54 BC
----------------------
Of the Cotta family

--------------------
Died : 54 BC
----------------
Of the Cotta family
--------------------
Died : 54 BC - -

Free 1 : : Of the Cotta family

--------------------
Died : 54 BC
-----------------------
Of the Cotta family
--------------------
Died : 54 BC - -

---------------------
Of the Cotta family

--------------------
Aurelia Cotta or Aurelia (May 21, 120 BC – July 31, 54 BC) was the mother of Roman dictator Gaius Julius Caesar (100 BC – 44 BC).

Family[

Aurelia Cotta was a daughter of Rutilia and Lucius Aurelius Cotta.[1] Her father was consul in 119 BC and her paternal grandfather of the same name was consul in 144 BC. The family of the Aurelii Cottae was prominent during the Roman Republican era. Her mother Rutilia, was a member of the gens Rutilius cognominated Rufus. They were of consular rank.

Three of her half-brothers were consuls: Gaius Aurelius Cotta in 75 BC, Marcus Aurelius Cotta in 74 BC and Lucius Aurelius Cotta in 65 BC; they were the sons of her mother, Rutilia's second marriage with her paternal uncle Marcus Aurelius Cotta.

Aurelia married a praetor Gaius Julius Caesar. Her husband died 85 BC – 84 BC. Their children were:
Julia Caesaris Major (102 BC - 68 BC), wife of Pinarius and grandmother of Lucius Pinarius;
Julia Caesaris Minor (101 BC – 51 BC), wife of Marcus Atius and grandmother of emperor Augustus;
Gaius Julius Caesar (100 BC – 44 BC), the dictator.

Character[edit]

The historian Tacitus considers her an ideal Roman matron and thinks highly of her.[2] Plutarch describes her as a "strict and respectable" woman.[3] Highly intelligent, independent and renowned for her beauty and common sense, Aurelia was held in high regard throughout Rome.

Aurelia and her family were very influential in her son’s upbringing and security. Her husband, the elder Gaius Caesar, was often away, so the task of raising their son fell mostly on Aurelia's shoulders. When the younger Caesar was about 18, he was ordered by the then dictator of Rome, Lucius Cornelius Sulla, to divorce his young wife Cornelia Cinna, Cinna's daughter. Young Caesar firmly refused, and by so doing, put himself at great risk from Sulla. Aurelia became involved in the petition to save her son, defending him along with her brother Gaius Cotta.

During the Bona Dea festival, held at Caesar’s house her maid discovered Publius Clodius disguised as a woman, ostensibly in order to start or continue an affair with her second daughter-in-law Pompeia Sulla.[3] Although Caesar himself admitted her possible innocence, he divorced her shortly after[4] stating that his wife must be above suspicion.[3][notes 1]

After her first daughter-in-law Cornelia Cinna minor died young, Aurelia raised her young granddaughter Julia Caesaris in her stead and presided as mistress over her son's households.

Notes[edit]

1.Jump up ^ According to Dryden's translation of Plutarch's biography of Caesar, he said "I wished my wife to be not so much as suspected."

References[edit]

1.Jump up ^ 'Aurelia' in William Smith, ed., Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology (London: Taylor & Walton, 1844-1849. Vol. 1, 2, 3 vol. 1 pp. 435-436
2.Jump up ^ Dialogus de oratoribus section xxviii by Tacitus (published circa 102 AD), referenced in 'Caesar, Gaius Julius' in Encyclopædia Britannica (1911) (copy archived by WikiSource).
3.^ Jump up to: a b c 'Caesar' in Lives of the Noble Greeks and Romans by Plutarch (published circa 100-120 AD) translated by John Dryden (1683)
4.Jump up ^ 'Cicero' in Lives of the Noble Greeks and Romans by Plutarch (published circa 100-120 AD) translated by John Dryden (1683)

--------------------
Aurelia Cota fue la madre de Cayo Julio César. Era hija de Rutilia y Lucio Aurelio Cota. Su padre fue cónsul en 119 a. C. y su abuelo paterno del mismo nombre fue cónsul en 144 a. C., además su tío fue el cónsul P. Rutilio Rufo.
--------------------
Död 54 f.Kr
--------------------
'''
=Aurelia Cotta=
'''

Aurelia Cotta or Aurelia (May 21, 120-July 31, 54 BC) was the mother of Roman dictator Gaius Julius Caesar (100-44 BC).

'''Family'''

Aurelia Cotta was a daughter of Rutilia and Lucius Aurelius Cotta or his brother, Marcus Aurelius Cotta. Her father was consul in 119 BC and her paternal grandfather of the same name was consul in 144 BC. The family of the Aurelii Cottae was prominent during the Roman Republican era. Her mother Rutilia, was a member of the gens Rutilius cognominated Rufus. They were of consular rank.

Three of her half-brothers were consuls: Gaius Aurelius Cotta in 75 BC, Marcus Aurelius Cotta in 74 BC and Lucius Aurelius Cotta in 65 BC; they were the sons of her mother, Rutilia's second marriage with her paternal uncle Marcus Aurelius Cotta.

Aurelia married a praetor Gaius Julius Caesar. Her husband died 85 – 84 BC. Their children were:

* Julia Caesaris Major (102 - 68 BC), wife of Pinarius and grandmother of Lucius Pinarius;
* Julia Caesaris Minor (101 – 51 BC), wife of Marcus Atius and grandmother of emperor Augustus;
* Gaius Julius Caesar (100 – 44 BC), the dictator.

'''Character''' The historian Tacitus considers her an ideal Roman matron and thinks highly of her. Plutarch describes her as a "strict and respectable" woman. Highly intelligent, independent and renowned for her beauty and common sense, Aurelia was held in high regard throughout Rome.

Aurelia and her family were very influential in her son’s upbringing and security. Her husband, the elder Gaius Caesar, was often away, so the task of raising their son fell mostly on Aurelia's shoulders. When the younger Caesar was about 18, he was ordered by the then dictator of Rome, Lucius Cornelius Sulla, to divorce his young wife Cornelia Cinna, Cinna's daughter. Young Caesar firmly refused, and by so doing, put himself at great risk from Sulla. Aurelia became involved in the petition to save her son, defending him along with her brother Gaius Cotta.

After the death of Cornelia in childbirth, Aurelia raised her young granddaughter Julia Caesaris in her stead and presided as mistress over her son's households. Caesar subsequently married Pompeia Sulla. During the Bona Dea festival held at her son Caesar’s house, her maid discovered Publius Clodius disguised as a woman, ostensibly in order to start or continue an affair with her second daughter-in-law Pompeia. Although Caesar himself admitted her possible innocence, he divorced her shortly after stating that his wife must be above suspicion.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aurelia_Cotta

of the Cotta family.

Caesar's mother, known for her beauty, common sense, and hard work.

Senator and debtor, general and seducer, orator and would-be worldconqueror, Julius Caesar, is both a force of nature and something of amomma's boy. He worships his sophisticated mother Aurelia, "a fount ofexperience and a mine of common sense," while dismissing as "notimportant" his "expensive, idle, and monumentally silly" second wife,Pompeia. Aurelia is "an excellent and learned lady." According to Durant,"she was a matron of dignity and wisdom, frugally managing her small homein the unfashionable Subura, a district of shops, taverns, and brothels."Caesar consults his shrewd mother about strategy and depends on her tomanage his household.

Caesar, though tenderly loving and protective toward his daughter, Julia,pledges her as a child to the adolescent Brutus, with whose mother-thecruel, scheming Servilia--the future dictator of Rome has a purely sexualaffair. Years later, Caesar cancels the betrothal in order to use hisblossoming daughter as bait to forge a political alliance with thecommander of the Roman legions. Meanwhile, Cicero, Caesar's main rival,is an incurable vacillator and social climber who displays scantgratitude toward his "sour" and "ugly" wife, Terentia, despite herfoiling a conspiracy against his life.

Mother of Caius Gaius IV Julius Caesar Dictator of Rome
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
AKA:
CORNELIA OF ROME
MARCIA AURELIA COTTA

AKA: AURELIA COTTA

Alias/AKA Cornelia Var fra Cottae-grenen av Aureliafamilien, en rik familie som tilhørte plebeierne.

OR "ELIND""HELINDE"; d. 54 BC

Aurelia Cotta
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.
Jump to: navigation, search
Aurelia Cotta or Aurelia (120BC-54BC) was a daughter to Rutilia and Lucius Aurelius Cotta. Her father was consul in 119BC and her paternal grandfather of the same name was consul in 144BC. The Aurelii Cottae family were prominent during the Roman Republican era. Her mother Rutilia, was a member of the Rutilius family. They were of consular rank.

Her brother a younger Lucius Aurelius Cotta was consul in 74BC. Gaius Aurelius Cotta consul in 75BC and his brother Marcus Aurelius Cotta consul in 65BC, were her first cousins and were sons to her paternal uncle Gaius Aurelius Cotta.

Aurelia married a praetor, Gaius Julius Caesar III. Her husband died 85BC-84BC. Their children were:

Julia Caesaris the Elder (died young)
Julia Caesaris the Younger 101BC-51BC
Gaius Julius Caesar IV ‘The Dictator’ 100BC-44BC
The Historian Tacitus, considers her as an ideal Roman Matron and thinks highly of her. Plutarch describes her as a ‘strict and respectable’ woman.

Aurelia and her family were very influential in her son’s upbringing and security. She was involved in petitions to save her son and her cousin, the consul Gaius Aurelius Cotta, defended young Caesar to the Dictator Lucius Cornelius Sulla.

During the Bona Dea Festival, held at Caesar’s house, during sacred ceremonies she caught her daughter-in-law Pompeia Sulla having an affair with Publius Clodius Pulcher. Due to this Caesar, divorced her.

Sources: Suetonius - The Twelve Caesars - Caesar, Plutarch - Fall of the Roman Republic - Caesar, www.ancientworlds.net/aw/Post/186447 and List of Roman Republican Consuls from Wikipedia.

Rootsweb Feldman
URL: http://worldconnect.genealogy.rootsweb.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=:3044567&id=I30011
# ID: I30011
# Name: Caius Julius Caesar III ROME 1 2 3 4 5 6
# Sex: M
# Death: in Pisa 1 2 3 4 5 6
# Change Date: 15 JAN 2004 6
# Change Date: 8 SEP 2001 3 4 5 6
# Note:

[Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED]

2 SOUR S332582
3 DATA
4 TEXT Date of Import: 14 Jan 2004


[daveanthes.FTW]

Father: Caius Julius Caesar II ROME
Mother: Marcia ROME

Marriage 1 Aurelia of ROME

Children

1. Has Children Julia Caesar ROME
2. Has No Children Caius Julius Caesar IV ROME b: in Subura


Sources:

1. Title: 13143.GED
Note: ABBR 13143.GED
Note: Source Media Type: Other

ABBR 13143.GED

NS174433
Text: Date of Import: Apr 20, 2001
2. Title: daveanthes.FTW
Note: ABBR daveanthes.FTW
Note: Source Media Type: Other
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Book
Text: Date of Import: 14 Jan 2004
3. Title: daveanthes.FTW
Note: ABBR daveanthes.FTW
Note: Source Media Type: Other
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Book
Text: Date of Import: Jan 13, 2004
4. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Jan 18, 2004
5. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: 21 Jan 2004
6. Title: Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Feb 6, 2004


wtf 4:565

Of the Cotta family

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]