== Notes for [[Item:Q100171|Q100171]] ==

Ma‘ādh Abū Tamīm ibn Badis al-Mu‘izz li Dīn Allāh

al-Mu'izz had a Jewish friend and Physician - Abū Isḥāq Ibrāhīm Ibn ʿAṭāʾ (Abraham ben Nathan) was leader of Qayrawanese Jewry in the first third of the eleventh century. He was a member of a wealthy elite that included the Ben Berekhiah, Tahertī, and Ibn al-Majjānī families. His father, Nathan, may have been a communal official, although this is not clear. He was a major supporter of the academy (bet midrash) in Qayrawan and was also a generous contributor to the Babylonian yeshivot, particularly to the Sura yeshiva, the renewal of which he helped to finance. Ibn ʿAṭāʾ served as court physician to the Zirid amirs Bādis (r. 996–1016) and al-Muʿizz (r. 1016–1062) in al-Mahdiyya. Due to his access to the ruler, he bore the honorific title rosh kol ha-qehillot (Heb. head of all the congregations). In late 1015, Ibn ʿAṭāʾ received the title of negid ha-gola (Heb. nagid of the exile) from Hay Gaon of the Pumbedita yeshiva. He was the first Diaspora leader to hold this exalted title. According to a letter in the Cairo Geniza (Bodl MS Heb. D 65, f.9), he was on a military campaign with Bādis when word of the title arrived.

Despite his distinguished position at court, Ibn ʿAṭāʾ was publicly insulted while bearing a message from al-Muʿizz to the great Maliki scholar Abū ʿImrān al-Fāsī. The latter became furious when he mistook the Jew for a Muslim because he was not wearing the ghiyār badge. The zealous jurist stained the nagid’s turban on the spot to mark him as a dhimmī and sent him packing. When Ibn ʿAṭāʾ sought redress from the ruler, he was rebuffed and told that this was a lesson “showing the power of Islam and the veneration inspired by Muslim scholars.”

Ibn ʿAṭāʾ was honored in a number of Hebrew poems by Isaac Ibn Khalfūn and in a panegyric by Hay Gaon himself. Israel ben Samuel ben Hophni dedicated a book on the laws of prayer to Ibn ʿAṭāʾ, and an unknown author dedicated a philosophical treatise on the divine attributes to him. Ibn ʿAṭāʾ died sometime during the 1030s and was succeeded in the office of nagid by Jacob ben Amram.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD71502E1EFBBFA9822EF79916C18F2
geni:6000000019227774558

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]