== Notes for [[Item:Q105342|Q105342]] ==

Misplaced...

7. ALFEREZ REAL JUAN2 MARTINEZ-GUAJARDO (JUAN-FRANCISCO1)
*was born 1607, and
*died Bef. 1664 in Saltillo, Coahulia, Mexico.
*He married (1) ISABEL GARCIA-DEL-VALLE,
**daughter of PEDRO DE-LOS-SANTOS-DE-ROJO-RUELAS and MARIA DEL VALLE-FLORES-DE-VALDEZ. She was born in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
**Notes for ISABEL GARCIA-DEL-VALLE: A.K.A. Isabel Flores.

Children of JUAN MARTINEZ-GUAJARDO and ISABEL GARCIA-DEL-VALLE are:
*1. 33. i. CATARINA3 MARTINEZ-GUAJARDO,
**b. Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
*2. 33. CATARINA3 MARTINEZ-GUAJARDO (JUAN2, JUAN-FRANCISCO1)
**was born in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
**She met SERGEANT MAJOR JOSEPH DE MORALES-Y-RAMON, son of LUIS RAMON-DE-MORALES and JUANA DE TREVINO-QUINTANILLA-Y-SALAZAR.
***He was born Abt. 1610, and died 1670 in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
****Notes for SERGEANT MAJOR JOSEPH DE MORALES-Y-RAMON: Source: Origen de los Fundadores de Texas, Nuevo Mexico, Coahulia, y Nuevo Leon, by Guillermo Garmendia Leal. Page 70 and 103.

Child of CATARINA MARTINEZ-GUAJARDO and JOSEPH DE MORALES-Y-RAMON is:
*1. 124. i. MAJOR DIEGO4 RAMON,
**b. 1641, Queretaro, Queretaro, Mexico;
**d. April 10, 1719, San Juan Bautista del Rio Grande, Presido del Norte, Coahulia, Mexico.

http://www.somosprimos.com/inclan/guajardo.htm

--------------------

33. CATARINA3 MARTINEZ-GUAJARDO (JUAN2, JUAN-FRANCISCO1) was born in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
*She met SERGEANT MAJOR JOSEPH DE MORALES-Y-RAMON,
**son of LUIS RAMON-DE-MORALES and JUANA DE TREVINO-QUINTANILLA-Y-SALAZAR. He was born Abt. 1610, and
**died 1670 in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
***Notes for SERGEANT MAJOR JOSEPH DE MORALES-Y-RAMON: Source: Origen de los Fundadores de Texas, Nuevo Mexico, Coahulia, y Nuevo Leon, by Guillermo Garmendia Leal. Page 70 and 103.

Child of CATARINA MARTINEZ-GUAJARDO and JOSEPH DE MORALES-Y-RAMON is:
*1. 124. i. MAJOR DIEGO4 RAMON,
**b. 1641, Queretaro, Queretaro, Mexico;
**d. April 10, 1719, San Juan Bautista del Rio Grande, Presido del Norte, Coahulia, Mexico.

http://www.somosprimos.com/inclan/guajardo.htm

--------------------

52. CATALINA4 MARTINEZ-GUAJARDO (ISABEL3 FLORES-DE-VALDEZ, MARIA-ISABEL2 DE SALAZAR-Y-TREVINO, PEDRO1 DE SALAZAR)
*was born in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
*She met SERGEANT MAJOR JOSEPH DE MORALES-Y-RAMON,
**son of LUIS RAMON-DE-MORALES and JUANA DE TREVINO-QUINTANILLA-Y-SALAZAR.
**He died 1670 in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
***Notes for SERGEANT MAJOR JOSEPH DE MORALES-Y-RAMON: Source:Origen de los Fundadores de Texas, Nuevo Mexico, Coahilia, y Nuevo Leon, by Guillrtmo Garmendia Leal. Page 70 and 103.
***Child is listed above under (9) Joseph de Morales-y-Ramon.

http://www.somosprimos.com/inclan/salazar.htm

--------------------

Something is amiss with the marriage date to Marcos Alonso, which precedes the death of his 1st wife when there is no mention of divorce from the 1st wife. Were they actually married or did she just bear some of his children?

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000008114111556

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]