== Notes for [[Item:Q104623|Q104623]] ==

9. SERGEANT MAJOR JOSEPH3 DE MORALES-Y-RAMON (JUANA2 DE TREVINO-QUINTANILLA-Y-SALAZAR, PEDRO1 DE SALAZAR) died 1670 in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico. He met (1) CATALINA MARTINEZ-GUAJARDO, daughter of JUAN MARTINEZ-GUAJARDO and ISABEL FLORES-DE-VALDEZ. She was born in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico. He married (2) JUANA GUTIERREZ-DE-MORALES-ARISPE, daughter of JUAN DE MORALES-GOMEZ and ISABEL GUTIERREZ. She was born in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico, and died Aft. Mar 1675/76 in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.

Notes for SERGEANT MAJOR JOSEPH DE MORALES-Y-RAMON: Source:Origen de los Fundadores de Texas, Nuevo Mexico, Coahilia, y Nuevo Leon, by Guillrtmo Garmendia Leal. Page 70 and 103.

Notes for JUANA GUTIERREZ-DE-MORALES-ARISPE: Her last will and testament was signed on March 27, 1676. Source:Origen de los Fundadores de Texas, Nuevo Mexico, Coahulia, y Nuevo Leon, by Guillermo Garmendia Leal. Page 131.

Child of JOSEPH DE MORALES-Y-RAMON and CATALINA MARTINEZ-GUAJARDO is:
* 38. i. MAJOR DIEGO4 RAMON, b. 1641, Queretaro, Queretaro, Mexico; d. 10 Apr 1719, San Juan Bautista del Rio Grande, Presido del Norte, Coahulia,Mexico.

Children of JOSEPH DE MORALES-Y-RAMON and JUANA GUTIERREZ-DE-MORALES-ARISPE are:
* ii. NICOLAS4 RAMON-DE-MORALES, m. ISABEL DE-LA-PENA.
* 39. iii. ALDEFONSA RAMON-GUTIERREZ.
* iv. JOANA RAMON-GUTIERREZ.
* v. MARIA-JACINTA RAMON-DE-MORALES, b. Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico; d. Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico; m. (1) LAZARIO GONZALEZ-DE-OLEA; d. Bef. 1697, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico; m. (2) JUAN DE SALAZAR, 1697, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico; d. Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
* 40. vi. CAPTAIN JOSEPH RAMON-DE-MORALES-Y-GUTIERREZ, b. 1640; d. 08 Jul 1682, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
* 41. vii. MARIA RAMON-DE-MORALES, b. 1652, Saltillo, Coahulia, Mexico.

http://www.somosprimos.com/inclan/salazar.htm
===========================
Joseph RAMON (Joseph de Morales)183,2103,2578 was born (date unknown). Because his offspring would otherwise be Morales de Morales, Joseph de Morales adopted the surname Ramon to distinguish his family from the other Morales families and he became Joseph Ramon. Parents: Capt. Luis de MORALES and Juana de Trevino SALAZAR.

Spouse: Juana de MORALES (aka Juana Gutierrez). Juana de MORALES (aka Juana Gutierrez) and Joseph RAMON (Joseph de Morales) were married about 1648.2103 Children were: Capt. Joseph RAMON, Ildephonsa (Aldonsa) RAMON, Nicolas RAMON, Diego RAMON, Juana RAMON, Maria Jacinta RAMON, Maria RAMON.

http://www.raullongoria.net/Genealogy/FamilyTree/b183.html#P10805

=========================================
father : JOSE Ramon De Morales (1627-1670) mother: juana de morales gutierrez (-) siblings : Ildeponsa Ramon (-) juana Ramon De Morales (-) maria jacinta Ramon (-) nicolas Ramon De Morales (-) maria Ramon (1652-)

Half-Siblings diego Ramon (-1716) jose domingo Ramon (-) leonor Ramon (-) maria Ramon De Morales (-1691)

http://genforum.genealogy.com/ramon/messages/77.htm

Parents & Siblings of jose ramon de morales (jose morales)
* father ; luis Morales (1594-)
* mother: JUANA Treviño Salazar (1588-)

* DIEGO Morales (-)
* JUAN Morales (-)
* LUIS Morales (1615-1701)
* cristobal Morales (1620-)
* LEONOR Morales (1625-1685)
* ANTONIO Morales (1632-1674)
* RODRIGO Morales (1634-1660)
* FRANCISCA Morales (1641-1707)

2. Spouse & Children
* wife 2: juana de morales gutierrez (-)
* Ildeponsa Ramon (-)
* juana Ramon De Morales (-)
* maria jacinta Ramon (-)
* nicolas Ramon De Morales (-)
* joseph RAMON (1640-1682)
* maria Ramon (1652-)

3.Spouse & Children
* wife 3 : Catarina Martinez Guajardo (-)
* diego Ramon (-1716)
* jose domingo Ramon (-)
* leonor Ramon (-)
* maria Ramon De Morales (-1691)

http://genforum.genealogy.com/ramon/messages/76.html

JOSE Morales who change his name to( jose Ramon ) 1627-1670 because he had married juana morales and would have his children with the name morales de morales . he also (jose ramon de morales ) married catarina Martinez Guajardo and father of diego ramon who is the father of domingo ramon ( ramon expedition )

LORENZO SUAREZ DE LONGORIA (1560 - ) 12th great grandfather --> luis Morales (1594 - ) Son of LORENZO --> JOSE Ramon De Morales (1627 - 1670) Son of luis --> joseph RAMON (1640 - 1682) Son of JOSE --> francisco RAMON (1690 - ) Son of joseph --> joseph ILDEFONSO RAMON Son of francisco --> Jose Francisco JAVIER RAMON Son of joseph ILDEFONSO --> jose antonio RAMON Son of Jose Francisco JAVIER --> jose polonio RAMON (1799 - ) Son of jose antonio --> JORGE RAMON SR. (1843 - ) Son of jose polonio --> JORGE RAMON JR (1871 - 1933) Son of JORGE --> Ambrocio Ramon Sr (1903 - 1973) Son of JORGE --> Ambrocio Ramon Jr (1931 - 1990) Son of Ambrocio --> Ana Maria Ramon (1953 - ) Daughter of Ambrocio --> Yoel Yancy Pompa son of Ana Maria

http://genforum.genealogy.com/ramon/messages/74.html

===================================

SERGEANT MAJOR JOSEPH DE MORALES-Y-RAMON, son of LUIS RAMON-DE-MORALES and JUANA DE TREVINO-QUINTANILLA-Y-SALAZAR

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000014312766257

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]