== Notes for [[Item:Q109296|Q109296]] ==

* '''2nd Umayyad Caliph'''
* Reign:

Wikipedia: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yazid_I English] [https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yazid_I. German]
--------------------
Yazīd ibn Mu‘āwiya ibn Abī Sufyān (Arabic: يزيد بن معاوية بن أبي سفيان‎; 20 July 647 – 11 November 683), commonly known as Yazid I, was the second Caliph of the Umayyad Caliphate (and the first one through inheritance). Yazid was the Caliph as appointed by his father Muawiyah I and ruled for three years from 680 CE until his death in 683 CE.

According to some sources Muawiyah warned his son Yazid against mistreating Hussein ibn Ali, grandson of Muhammad. His final warning to Yazid was: "Be careful O my son, that you do not meet God with his blood, lest you be amongst those that will perish".

The appointment of Yazid was unpopular in Madina too.

Yazid was killed by his own horse after it lost control, his remains never being confirmed to have been found. Yazid died at the age of 36 (age 37 in Hijri-Lunar calculation) after he had ruled for three years. He was succeeded by his son Muawiyah II. Yazid was buried in Damascus. Although it is thought that his grave no longer exists, a few believe that it is located in a small street near Umayyad Mosque, without any mark or distinction.

Some scholars regard Yazid as a just, noble, religious and administratively efficient ruler and that his nomination by his father Muawiya as caliph was proper.[22] Notable contemporaries such as Ibn Abbas and Muhammad bin Hanfia regard Muawiya's nomination of Yazid as sincere and proper as Muawiya genuinely believed that Yazid had the qualifications of being the leader of Muslims.[23]

Muslim tradition regards Caliph Yazid I as a tyrant who was responsible for three major actions during the Second Fitna that were considered atrocities: the death of Husayn ibn Ali and his followers at the Battle of Karbala, considered a massacre; the aftermath of the Battle of al-Harrah, in which the troops of Yazid's general Muslim bin Uqbah al-Marri pillaged the town of Medina; and the burning of the Kaaba during Siege of Mecca, which was blamed on Yazid's commander Husayn ibn Numayr.

[... An infidel, who did not believe in any religion, although a crucifix given by his Christian mother used to dangle from his neck, Yazid was a drunkard and frequently asked his slaves to sodomize him. In the three years that he illegally ruled the Islamic realm, before his sudden death at the age of 36, he committed three unpardonable crimes against humanity. The first was the cruel martyrdom of the Prophet’s younger grandson, Imam Husain (AS), and its equally cruel aftermath when the noble ladies and children of the Ahl al-Bayt were brought to his court in Damascus along with the heads of martyrs, at whose sight he exultantly declared that neither revelation had come from heaven nor there is any day of resurrection. His second cardinal sin was the incident of Harrah when his forces slaughtered hundreds of companions of the Prophet and then for three days butchered as many as 10,000 people of the holy city of Medina, where the Prophet's Mosque was desecrated and thousands of women raped. His third blasphemous crime was the storming of the holy Ka’ba in Mecca with fire and brimstone that ended with his sudden death in Damascus as a result of divine wrath while on a hunting trip. Only the charred leg of Yazid was found, and today there is no trace of his grave.]

events: Battle of Karbala

[Some scholars have derived the name Yazidi from Old Iranian yazata (divine being), though the current consensus among Western academics is a derivation from Yazid b. Moʿāwiya,revered by the Yazidis as an incarnation of the divine figure Sultan Ēzi. (Kreyenbroek, 1995, p. 3.]

A dinastia Omíada (árabe umawiyy; persa Omaviyân, turco, Emevi) ou Dinastia Umayyad, foi a primeira dinastia de califas do profeta Maomé que, embora não sendo do seu sangue, pertenciam também a uma tribo de Meca — os Curaixitas. A primeira dinastia reinou de 661 a 750. Ironicamente, o clã curaixita de onde se originaram os Umayyadas teria sido, no passado, inimigo do próprio Maomé.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]