== Notes for [[Item:Q112091|Q112091]] ==

Munia domna Nuñez de Amaya1,2

b. circa 885, d. after 5 August 935

Father Nuño Nuñez "el de Castrogeriz", señor de Amaya1,2 b. circa 855

Mother Asura Díaz de Castilla1,2 b. circa 865?

Also called of Castile.2 Munia domna Nuñez de Amaya was born circa 885. She was the daughter of Nuño Nuñez "el de Castrogeriz", señor de Amaya and Asura Díaz de Castilla.1,2 Munia domna Nuñez de Amaya married Gonzalo Fernández, señor de Lara, son of Fernan Nuñez "el Negro" and Gutina Díaz de Castilla; 1st cousins.3,2 Munia domna Nuñez de Amaya died after 5 August 935.2 Munia domna Nuñez de Amaya was buried in Ste. Marie de Lara.2

Family

Gonzalo Fernández, señor de Lara b. circa 880, d. 932

Children

Fernán, conde de Castilla+ b. c 910, d. Jun 9701,4

Nuña González de Lara+ b. c 910?

Citations

[S187] Royal Genealogy Database, online http://www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/public/genealogy/

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 287-37.

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 285-37.

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 285-36.

--------------------

The origin of Muniadomna is unknown. Pérez de Urbel suggests that she was Muniadomna, daughter of Ramiro de Asturias titular King of León & his wife Urraca ---, based on her supposed mother being present in the castle of Lara, which belonged to Muniadomna, when she witnessed two charters in 927. He also points out the apparent corroboration from the naming of her second son after his supposed maternal grandfather. Muniadomna is referred to as "comitissima", and her descendants referred to in Arab sources as the "Banu Muma" as a tribute to her exceptional character, which may also suggest an illustrious ancestry[102]. "Momadonna cometessa" donated property in Valzalamio to the monastery of Cardeñas with her son "Fredinando Gundisalviz", her son's wife "Sancia" and their sons "Gundesalvuz Fernandez, Sanzio Fernandez" by charter dated 5 Aug [935/38][103]. Gonzalo & his wife had two children:

i) FERNANDO González de Castilla

ii) RAMIRO González de Castilla

SOURCE NOTES:
www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal11067

Há outra muniadona nunes da mesma época na árvore. Verificar se trata da mesma pessoa ou mae e filha (esta muniadona teve uma filha de mesmo nome)

Name Suffix:<NSFX> Of Castile

However it has been recently discovered that Gonzalo's mother Gutina was Nuñez, so it was she who was probably Munio's sibling. Gonzalo's father was probably the Count Fernando Gonzalez living a generation before, who had been discarded as his father in favor of the hypothetical Fernando Nuñez.Gonzalo's wife Muniadomna is often called daughter of Munio Nuñez, but Perez de Urbel demonstrated that she was Muniadomna Ramirez, granddaughter of Alfonso III of Leon.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]