== Notes for [[Item:Q106640|Q106640]] ==

The Shi'a faced persecution under the first two dynasties that rules over the Muslim community: the Ummayad caliphate and the Abbassid caliphate. It was in this climate of persecution during the early Abbasid period tha the Imamis ( the Imamis believed that their imams were appointed by hereditary designation (nass) from among each imam's male descendants, usually his eldest son) were divided flollowing Imam Jafar's al-Sadiq's death in 765. Most hisorical evidence suggests that Imam Jafar al-Sadiq had designated his son Ismail as the next imam. However, there was confusion as to Ismail's whereabout at the time of his father's death. Some believed that he had died before his father, while others claimed that he was alive but hiding from Abbasid persecution. Many Shi'a eventually rallied around Ismail's younger brother, Musa al-Kazim as their imam. These individuals, later known as the Ithna asharis (Twelvers) followed the descendants of Musa al-Kazim until their twelfth imam disappeared in what they believed to be a spiritual occultation (ghayba).
There were 2 groups that would form the earliest Ismailis. The first believed that \Ismail was alive and in hiding, thus acknowledging him as their imam. The second group accepted that Ismail had died , but argued that since he was given the nass from his father , the imamate should remain among his descendants. Ultimately both groups came to accept Ismail's son Muhammad as imam.
ref. A short history of the Ismailis - Farhad Daftary.


* '''Progenitor of ''Ithna'shari Ja'afari'' Imamate'''

* '''7th Itna'shari Shia Imaam'''
* Wilaadat (Birth): 7th Safar 128 AH (10th November 745 AD)
* Wafaat (Death): 25th Rajab 183 AH (4th September 799 AD)

'''Issue (s):'''

* '''He had 36 children'''

* '''18 sons:''' Ali al-Ridha, Ibrahim, Abbas, Salih, Qasim, Ahmad, Mohammad, Hamza, Ismail, Ja'far, Haroon, Husayn, Abdullah, Ishaq, Ubayd-il-lah, Zayd, Hasan, Al-Fadl and Sulayman.

* '''18 daughters:''' Fatima al-Kubra, Fatima al-Sughra, Ruqaya, Ruqaya al-Sughra, Hakeema, Umm Abeeha, Umm Kulthum, Umm Salma, Umm Ja'far, Lubana, Alya, Amina, Hasana, Bareeha, Aisha, Zainab, Khadija and Hajar Khatun.

* Traditionally, the Shia believe that Imam Musa al-Kadhim had 73 children, however this is not verifiable as only 36 have been recorded by Shia scholars.

Source 1: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Musa_al-Kadhim

Source 2: http://www.al-islam.org/masoom/bios/7thimam.html

--------------------
ID: I180902

Name: Musa ibn Abd Allah , Shia Imam al-Husayn 1

Sex: M

Occupation: 7th Shia Imam 1

Father: Abu Abd Allah , Ja'far Shia Imam al-Husayn b: ABT 708

Mother: Hamida al-Barbariyya

Sources:

Title: loren.ged

Repository:

Media: Other

Text: Date of Import: Apr 12, 2006
--------------------
Musa ol Ghasem - septieme Emam de la religion chiite / Conteste par les Ismailiens

A grandi en prison pour le rendre plus faible. Il n'est pas reconnu par les ismaéliens.

À l’âge de 20, en 148 A.H. après l'empoisonnement de son père, il devient imam. Il le reste pendant 35 ans, jusqu'à 183 A.H.

L’un des sujets importants de l’âge de l’imamat de Musa al-kazim est l’apparition de schismes comme l'ismaélisme, les Mubarakia, les Navoussia, etc.

Le pouvoir abbasside voulait savoir qui serait le successeur de Ja`far as-Sadiq. Cet héritier désigné était Ismaïl, ce qui l'obligeait à se protéger, tandis que son frère Mûsâ pouvait vivre de manière plus publique à Médine. La disparition d'Ismaël (qui se serait occulté selon les ismaéliens) avant son père rendit cette succession encore plus confuse. À la mort de Ja`far as-Sadiq, pour la majorité, Mûsâ est devenu l'héritier, mais certains pensaient que la succession revenait aux enfants d'Ismaël, ce qui créa les ismaéliens. Cette branche ne reconnaît pas l'imam al-Kazim.

Le vendredi 7 Safar de l’an 183 A.H., Musa al-Kazim, à l’âge de 55 ans, est empoisonné dans sa prison à Bagdad, sur ordre de Hâroun ar-Rachîd. Il est enterré en Irak dans un quartier de Bagdad, al-Kadhimiya.

------------------

Mūsá ibn Ja‘far al-Kāzim (Arabic: موسى بن جعفر الكاظم‎‎), also called Abūl-Hasan, Abū Abd Allah, Abū Ibrāhīm, and al-Kāzim (the one who controls his anger), was the seventh Shiite Imam after his father Ja'far al-Sadiq. He is regarded by Sunnis as a renowned scholar, and was a contemporary of the Abbasid caliphs Al-Mansur, Al-Hadi, Al-Mahdi and Harun al-Rashid. He was imprisoned several times, finally dying in Baghdad in the Sindi ibn Shahak prison. Ali al-Ridha, the eighth Imām, and Fatemah Masume were among his children

--------------------
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Musa_al-Kadhim

Mūsá ibn Ja‘far al-Kāzim (Arabic: موسى بن جعفر الكاظم‎), also called Abūl-Hasan, Abū Abd Allah, Abū Ibrāhīm, and al-Kāzim (the one who controls his anger), was the seventh Shiite Imam after his father Ja'far al-Sadiq. He is regarded by Sunnis as a renowned scholar, and was a contemporary of the Abbasid caliphs Al-Mansur, Al-Hadi, Al-Mahdi and Harun al-Rashid. He was imprisoned several times; finally dying in Baghdad in the Sindi ibn Shahak prison. Ali al-Ridha, the eighth Imām, and Fatemah Masume were among his children

---------

[The anti-Shiʿite policy was pursued in Iraq itself, where, in 179/795-96, the politically neutral and quietist Seventh Imam, Musā Kāẓem, was arrested and imprisoned. Despite being shielded from the caliph’s wrath to some extent by Yaḥyā Barmaki and his son Fażl, Musā died in captivity in 183/799 or shortly thereafter, either due to natural causes, or, according to Shiʿite sources, by poisoning.] ref http://www.iranicaonline.org/articles/harun-al-rasid

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Musa_al-Kadhim

Harum Al Rashid imprisoned Musa then ordered Sindi Abn Shahiq to poison Musa.
He died in Bagdad

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:4752719506900128751

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]