== Notes for [[Item:Q113118|Q113118]] ==

ES.28079.AHN/1.3.1.2.3.281//CLERO-SECULAR_REGULAR,CAR.793,NUM.12
Tributacion de un palacio con sus heredamientos en Asieso.
Fecha Creacion:
1318-02-04, (Santa Cruz de la Seros) -
Toda Perez de San Vicente, abadesa del monasterio, da a Martín de Ayes, a su mujer Sancha, a Bernardo de Guazer y a su mujer Tomasa un palacio con sus heredamientos situado en Asieso por el pago anual de 5 potos y medio y una libra de aceite.
Lengua/Escritura de la Documentacion:
Castellano
Indices de Descripcion:
Benedictinas
Monasterio de Santa Maria de Santa Cruz de la Seros (Huesca)
Santa Cruz de la Seros (Huesca)
Update: 06/23/2008 via Betty Hubbard via yDNA Project Forum.
Betty Hubbard - Jun 20, 2008 Via E Mail
"Toda Perez is Gutierre Clan-PEREZ DE TRABA, sister of Trastamara Count Fernando Perez de Traba, their father Count of Trastamara Pedro Froilaz. Go to History file name GUTIERRE CLAN pg 1 -H. Gutierrez- browse -Count of Trastamara Pedro Froilaz. I was excited to find the surname AYES in your search of AYES surname connecting to PEREZ DE TRABA! This AYES has to be related to PEREZ DE TRABA because only close kins they favor give lands to each other during these times. I also remembered my grandfather giving lands to his kins before I was born but during his time lands were cheap; lands had gone up in value in the Phil these days. I was surprised to hear last month that the house of my grandfather was sold to someone, when I asked who sold it, it was sold by my distant aunt. "
Research Copyright 2008, John J. Browne Ayes

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]