== Notes for [[Item:Q3187|Q3187]] ==

half sister of Juan de Oñate

--------------------

Cristobal's father-in-law was a son of El Doctor Fernandez de Guadalupe, a famous royal physician, who was a converso. Catalina de la Cadena was a descendant of the wealthy converos house of Maluenda.

Other source--she was the daughter of un funcionario de Hacienda conectado con Nuño de Guzman

--------------------

Her grand-parents were members of the royal court of King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella of Spain.

Her father was the lieutenant governor of all of New Spain and Factor of the Royal Treasuary in Mexico.

Sources: ''With all Arms'' by Carl Laurence Duaine and ''Don Juan de Onate Colonizer of New Mexico'' by George P. Hammond, via the genealogical research of John Inclan©.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The noted historian, Donald Chipman, believes that Catalina's first husband, Ruy Diaz de Mendoza, was not dead when Catalina married Cristobal de Onate. The evidence indicates that Catalina may have deserted her first husband and gone back to her family in Mexico City, where she married Cristobal de Onate and became a bigamist.

Also cited as a bigamist in Marc Simmons' ''The Last Conquistador'' (U. of Oklahoma Press, Norman, Oklahoma, 1991).

--------------------

Magdalena de MENDOZA y Salazar400,918 was born (date unknown). Parents: Ruy Diaz de MENDOZA and Catalina de SALAZAR.

Spouse: General Vicente de ZALDIVAR. Children were: Vicente de ZALDIVAR, Juan de ZALDIVAR, Cristobal de ZALDIVAR, Ana de ZALDIVAR (aka Magdalena de Mendoza).

http://www.raullongoria.net/Genealogy/FamilyTree/b160.html#P996

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051ADAB9B0E1EFBBFA9822EF79916C6D43
geni:6000000005599151568


[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]