== Notes for [[Item:Q111030|Q111030]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cornelia_Africana

=Cornelia Africana=
Cornelia Scipionis Africana (born 191 or 190 BC - died 100 BC) was the second daughter of Publius Cornelius Scipio Africanus, the hero of the Second Punic War, and Aemilia Paulla. She is remembered as the perfect example of a virtuous Roman woman.
==Biography==

Cornelia married '''Tiberius Gracchus Major''', the father of '''Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus''', when he was already in an advanced age. The union proved to be a happy one and together they had 12 children,[1] very unusual for Roman standards. Unfortunately, only three survived childhood:[2] '''Sempronia''', married to her cousin '''Publius Cornelius Scipio Aemilianus'''; and the brothers '''Tiberius''' and '''Gaius Gracchus''', who would defy the political institutions of Rome, with their attempts at popular reforms.

------------------------------------------------------------

ID: I84714

Name: Cornelia Africana Scipio

Given Name: Cornelia Africana

Surname: Scipio

Sex: F

_UID: 442BCB7A034D27418AD246D01DD3E2E595AB

Change Date: 11 Aug 2005

Note:

Cornelia (flourished 2nd century bc), Roman matron, daughter of the general Scipio Africanus the Elder. Cornelia was married to the general and statesman Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus, and after the death of her husband, she refused to remarry, devoting herself instead to the education of her children. According to legend, when a visitor asked to see her jewels, she pointed to the children and replied, “These are my jewels.” Only 3 of her 12 children reached adulthood: two sons, Gaius Sempronius Gracchus and Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus, the great tribunes known as the Gracchi, and one daughter, who married the Roman general Scipio Africanus the Younger. After the murder of Gaius (121 bc), Cornelia retired to Misenum (now Miseno) to study Greek and Latin literature. Following her death a statue was erected bearing the inscription: “Cornelia, Mother of the Gracchi.” The base of the statue, with this inscription, is now at the Capitoline Museum in Rome.

© 1993-2003 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

Birth: 190 BC

Death: 100 BC

Father: PUBLIUS @@ CORNELIUS SCIPIO b: 236 BC

Mother: Aemilia Paula b: ABT 225 BC

Marriage 1 Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus

Married:

Children

TIBERIUS @@ SEMPRONIUS GRACCHUS b: 163 BC

GAIUS SEMPRONIUS GRACCHUS b: 154 BC

Sempronia Graccha

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I84714

--------------------

I

----

'''
=Cornelia Africana Major=
'''

Cornelia Africana Major (b. c. 201 BC, d. unknown) was the first daughter of Aemilia Tertia and Scipio Africanus.

Scipio Nasica Corculum was her husband and second cousin. She had a single child. Judging by the year her son, Scipio Nasica Serapio, became consul in 138 BC she probably married around 184-183 BC.

Cornelia Africana Major had three siblings. They were Publius Cornelius P.f. P.n. Scipio Africanus (fl. 174 BC), Lucius Cornelius P.f. P.n. Scipio (fl. 174 BC), and Cornelia Africana Minor (c. 192-121 BC).

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cornelia_Africana_Major

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]