== Notes for [[Item:Q83943|Q83943]] ==

de la tribu des Banu Hanifa and imamate of Kaysanites Shia - ancetre des Donboli

'''Progenitor of Kaysanite Shi'ism'''

'''4th Shia Kaysanite Imaam'''

* '''3rd Son of [http://www.geni.com/people/Al%C4%AB-ibn-Ab%C4%AB-%E1%B9%AC%C4%81lib/6000000002640501087/ Maulana Ali bin Imaam Abu Talib]'''
* Wilaadat (Birth): 15 AH (636 AD)
* Wafaat (Death): 1st Muharram 84 AH (27th January 703 AD)

Source 1: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Muhammad_ibn_al-Hanafiyyah

Source 2: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Khawlah_bint_Ja%27far

Source 3: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kaysanites_Shia

Source 4: http://www.imamreza.net/eng/imamreza.php?id=5885

Source 5: http://shiastudies.net/article/english/Article.php?id=5178

Source 6: http://ahlulhadist.wordpress.com/2007/10/01/muhammad-bin-al-hanafiyyah-wafat-181-h/

Source 7: http://kisahmuslim.com/tokoh-tabiin-muhammad-al-hanafiyyah-bin-ali-bin-abi-thalib/

Source 8: http://www.maaref-foundation.com/english/history/80_the_hashimites_after_the_event_of_karbala.htm

Source 9: http://www.eslam.de/begriffe/m/muhammad_ibn_hanafiyya.htm

Source 10: http://researchintoothersects.blogspot.com/2011/08/muhammad-ibn-al-hanafiyyah-passing-away.html

--------------------
https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Muhammad_ibn_al-Hanafiyyah
========
[After the death of Husayn, there were three different lines of Alids which compteted for allegiance of the legitimist faction:
Those descended from Hasan and Husayn, the two sons of Ali by his wife Fatima, the daughter of the Prophet who left no son and the House of Muhammad, the son of Ali by another wife known as the Hanifite.... The first Alid faction to become prominent was the partisans of Muhammad, the son of the Hanifite, who were formed into a society by Kaysan, a freedman of Ali, for the purpose of avenging Hasan and Husayn, Ali's sons by Fatima. At Muhammad's death (AH 81), the Kaysanites recognized his son Abu Hashim as the 5th Imam until AH 98 when Abu Hashim died childless after bequeathing his claims to Muhammad b. Ali b. Abdullah (d.126) https://www.geni.com/people/Muhammad-ibn-Ali-ibn-Abd-Allah-of-the-Quraysh-tribe/6000000008427751615 who was not of the House of Ali at all and who became the founder of the Abbasid dynasty which obtained the Khalifate in 132 AH (749)...] ref:p. 9 of A Short History of The Fatimid Khalifate by Lacy O'Leary, lecturer in Aramaic and Syriac, Bristol University.

==================

Imamate of Kaysanites Shi'ia. (The Kaysanites were a Shi'i sect of Islam that formed from the followers of Al-Mukhtar. They are often described in later literature as ghulat – a kind of heretic.)

Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib, also known as Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah (15 AH – 81 AH; c. 636 – 700 A.D) and surnamed Abu'l-Qasim was an early Muslim leader. He was a son of Ali ibn Abi Talib, the first Shi'ite Imam and the fourth Sunni Caliph. He is a member of Ahl al Bayt (the household of Muhammad) and Ahl al Kisa. After Husayn ibn Ali.

Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah (Muhammad Akbar) was born in Medina about 633 CE (though also said to be during Umar's era), the third of Ali's sons. He was called Ibn al-Hanafiyyah after his mother, Khawlah bint Ja'far; she was known as Hanafiyyah, "the Hanafi woman", after her tribe Banu Hanifah. After the death of Muhammad, the people of Yamamah were declared apostates by the Muslims for refusing to pay the zakat (religious tax); the men were killed (see Ridda wars), and the women were taken to Medina as slaves, Khawlah bint Ja'far among them. When her tribesmen found out, they approached Ali ibn Abi Talib and asked him to save her from slavery and to protect her family’s honor and prestige. Consequently, Ali ibn Abi Talib purchased her, set her free, and, after the death of Fatimah, married her.

Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah was the only child of Khawlah bint Ja'far.

During his father's lifetime he distinguished himself for piety, rectitude, and courage and effectiveness in war. During Ali's caliphate at Kufa he was one of the caliph's four chief lieutenants. He particularly distinguished himself at the battles of Jamal and Siffin.

[........]

Ibn al-Hanafiyyah was called "the Mahdi," "the rightly-guided," which then was simply a pledge of confidence in his knowledge, character, and judgment over those of the rival caliphs. In 692 CE he traveled to Damascus and swore allegiance to Abd al-Malik. In 700 he died in Medina, but thereafter a legend grew up that he was not dead, but living in seclusion on Mount Radwa near Medina, protected and fed by wild animals, and that he would, in God's good time, return to establish justice and true religion in the world. Thus arose the legend of the Mahdi as savior.

This is not to be confused with the Twelver Shia Mahdi, who is the son of the 11th Imam Hasan al-Askari.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]