== Notes for [[Item:Q90939|Q90939]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Livia

=Livia Drusilla=

===Birth and first marriage to Tiberius Claudius Nero===

*She was born on 30 January 59 or 58 BC[2] as the daughter of Marcus Livius Drusus Claudianus by his wife Aufidia, a daughter of the magistrate Marcus Aufidius Lurco.

===Spouse ===

# Tiberius Claudius Nero
# Augustus

===Issue===

# Tiberius
# Nero Claudius Drusus

* Father Marcus Livius Drusus Claudianus
* Mother Aufidia
* Born 30 January 58 BC
* Died AD 29 (aged 87) Rome
* Burial Mausoleum of Augustus

===Descendants===

Although her marriage with Augustus produced only one child, which she later miscarried, through her sons by her first husband, Tiberius and Drusus, she is a direct ancestor of all of the Julio Claudian emperors as well as the vast majority of the extended Julio-Claudian imperial family. The line possibly continued for at least another century after the dynasty's downfall through the son and grandson of Livia's great-great-granddaughter Rubellia Bassa (see below); however, it is unknown whether or not this line was continued or if it went extinct.

*1. Tiberius, 42 BC - AD 37, had 2 children
**A. Drusus Julius Caesar, 13 BC - AD 23, had three children
***I. Julia, AD 5 - AD 43, had 4 children
****a. Gaius Rubellius Plautus, 33 - 62, had several children[29]
****b. Rubellia Bassa, born between 33 and 38, had at least 1 child[30]
*****i. Octavius Laenas, had at least 1 child
******i. Sergius Octavius Laenas Pontianus
****c. Gaius Rubellius Blandus
****d. Rubellius Drusus
***II. Tiberius Julius Caesar Nero Gemellus, 19 - 37 or 38, died without issue
***III. Tiberius Claudius Caesar Germanicus II Gemellus, 19 - 23, died young
**b. Tiberillus, died young
*2. Drusus 38 BC - AD 9, had three children
**A. Germanicus, 16 BC or 15 BC - AD 19, had 6 children
***I. Nero Caesar, 6 - 30, died without issue
***II. Drusus Caesar, 7 - 33, died without issue
***III. Caligula, 12 - 41, had 1 child;
****a. Julia Drusilla, 39 - 41, died young
***IV. Agrippina the Younger, 15 - 59, had 1 child;
****a. Nero, 37 - 68, had 1 child;
*****i. Claudia Augusta, Jan. 63 - April 63; died young
****V. Julia Drusilla, 16 - 38, died without issue
****VI. Julia Livilla, 18 - 42, died without issue
**B. Livilla, 13 BC - AD 31, had three children
***I. - III. see children of Drusus Julius Caesar listed above[31]
**C. Claudius, 10 BC - AD 54, had 4 children
***I. Claudius Drusus, died young
***II. Claudia Antonia, c. 30 - 66, had 1 child
****a. a son, died young
***III. Claudia Octavia, 39 or 40 - 62, died without issue
***IV. Tiberius Claudius Caesar Britannicus, 41 - 55, died without issue

------------------------------
Livia Drusa Augusta, Livia Drusilla o Julia Augusta ( 28 de septiembre 57 a. C. — 29 d.C.), segunda esposa de Augusto. Hija de Marco Livio Druso Claudiano y su esposa Alfidia. Su madre, Alfidia, era hermana de Aufidio Lurco. En el 42 a. C. su padre se suicidó en Filipos junto con Casio y Bruto, los asesinos de Julio César, que fueron derrotados por Octaviano y Marco Antonio.

En el 42 a. C., su padre la casó con Tiberio Claudio Nerón, su primo, de condición patricia, que luchaba con él en el lado de los asesinos de Julio César contra Octavio. Su padre se suicidó en la batalla de Filipos, junto con Gayo Casio Longino y Marco Junio Bruto, y su marido a continuación sigue luchando contra Octavio, ahora en nombre de Marco Antonio y de su hermano. En 40 a. C., la familia se vio obligada a huir de Italia con el fin de evitar las Octavian proscripciones, y se unió con Sexto Pompeyo en Sicilia, después de pasar a Grecia.

La familia sobrevivió a la persecución y se encontró con Augusto en el 39 a. C. En aquellos momentos, Livia ya tenía un hijo, el futuro emperador Tiberio, y estaba embarazada del segundo, Druso el Mayor. La leyenda cuenta que Augusto se enamoró fulminantemente de ella, pues pasaba por ser una de las mujeres más bellas de su tiempo, y que se casaron un día después de que sus divorcios fueran anunciados. Aparentemente, Tiberio Claudio Nerón estuvo de acuerdo en ello y fue a la boda. La importancia del papel de los Claudios en la política de Augusto y la supervivencia política de Tiberio Claudio Nerón parecen las explicaciones más racionales para esta tempestuosa unión.

De cualquier modo, el matrimonio entre Livia y Augusto se mantuvo durante los siguientes 52 años, a pesar del hecho de que no tuvieron hijos, y ella siempre disfrutó del privilegio de ser la consejera de confianza de su esposo.

Durante su tiempo, Livia gozó de la popularidad del pueblo romano. Para ser más que la "mujer bonita", como se describe en los textos antiguos, Livia se sirve de la imagen pública de la idealización de las cualidades femeninas romanas, una figura maternal, y, finalmente, una diosa como la representación que alude a su virtud. Livia, que simboliza el poder en la renovación de la República con las mujeres y virtudes que muestra en público, tuvo un efecto espectacular en la representación visual del futuro imperial de la mujer como ideal de honorables madre y esposa romana, aunque después ha sido sospechosa del envenenamiento de muchos de estos personajes, entre ellos del de su hijastra Julia. "Se escuchó el rumor de que cuando Marcelo, sobrino de Augusto, murió en el 23 a. C., no fue por muerte natural, y que detrás de esto se encontraba Livia" (Dión Casio) 55.33.4). Uno por uno, todos los hijos de Julia y Marco Vipsanio Agripa habían muerto prematuramente: en primer lugar y, a continuación, Lucio y Cayo, a quienes Augusto ha adoptado como hijos, con la intención que fueran sus sucesores. Por último Póstumo Agripa, el menor, a quien Octavio había adoptado como hijo, también fue encarcelado por conspiración y finalmente muerto. Tácito y Dión Casio mencionan en sus obras estos rumores, pero Suetonio no hace mención de los mismos, ni hay pruebas suficientes para darlos por válidos.

http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Livia_Drusilla#Su_matrimonio_con_Augusto

--------------------
IID: I6869 Name: Livia Drusilla Given Name: Livia Surname: Drusilla Sex: F _UID: AA0B2AFA5118D811BE490080C8C142CC4942 Change Date: 16 Nov 2003 Birth: ABT 58 BC Death: 29

Marriage 1 GAIUS @@ OCTAVIAN JULIUS CAESAR b: 23 SEP 63 BC Married:

Marriage 2 Tiberius Claudius Nero b: 63 BC Married: Children
Nero Claudius Germanicus Drusus b: 38 BC

Forrás / Source: http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I6869

Livia From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Livia Drusilla Spouse Augustus Issue Drusus Tiberius

Father Marcus Livius Drusus Claudianus Mother Aufidia

Born 58 B.C Died 29 A.D Livia Drusilla, after 14 AD called Julia Augusta (Classical Latin: LIVIA•DRVSILLA, IVLIA•AVGVSTA[1]) (58 BC-29 AD) was the wife of Augustus and one of the most powerful women in the Roman Empire, being Augustus' faithful advisor. She was also mother to Drusus and Tiberius, grandmother to Germanicus and Claudius, great-grandmother to Caligula and Agrippina the Younger and great-great-grandmother to Nero. She was deified by Claudius who acknowledged her title of Augusta.

Life [edit] Birth and first marriage She was born on 30 January 59 or 58 BC[2] as the daughter of Marcus Livius Drusus Claudianus by his wife Aufidia, a daughter of the magistrate Marcus Aufidius Lurco. The diminutive Drusilla often found in her name suggests that she was a second daughter.[3] Marcus Livius Drusus was her brother. In 40 B.C her father married her to Tiberius Claudius Nero, her cousin of patrician status who was fighting with him on the side of Julius Caesar's assassins against Octavian. Her father committed suicide in the Battle of Philippi, along with Gaius Cassius Longinus and Marcus Junius Brutus, but her husband continued fighting against Octavian, now on behalf of Mark Antony and his brother. In 40 BC, the family was forced to flee Italy in order to avoid Octavian's proscriptions, and joined with Sextus Pompeius in Sicily, later moving on to Greece.[4]

[edit] Life with Augustus A general amnesty was announced, and Livia returned to Rome, where she was personally introduced to Octavian in 39 BC. At this time, Livia already had a son, the future emperor Tiberius, and was pregnant with the second (Drusus the Elder). Legend said that Octavian fell immediately in love with her, despite the fact that he was still married to Scribonia.[5] Octavian divorced Scribonia in 39 BC, on the very day that she gave birth to his daughter Julia the Elder (Cassius Dio).[6] Seemingly around that time, when Livia was six months pregnant, Tiberius Claudius Nero was persuaded or forced by Octavian to divorce Livia. On 14 January, the child was born. Octavian and Livia married on 17 January, waiving the traditional waiting period. Tiberius Claudius Nero was present at the wedding, giving her in marriage "just as a father would."[7] The importance of the patrician Claudii to Octavian's cause, and the political survival of the Claudii Nerones are probably more rational explanations for the tempestuous union. Nevertheless, Livia and Octavian remained married for the next 51 years, despite the fact that they had no children apart from a single miscarriage. She always enjoyed the status of privileged counselor to her husband, petitioning him on the behalf of others and influencing his policies, an unusual role for a Roman wife in a culture dominated by the paterfamilias.[5]

After Mark Antony's suicide following the Battle of Actium in 31 BC, Octavian had removed all obstacles to his power and henceforth ruled as Emperor, from 27 BC on, under the honorary title Augustus. He and Livia formed the role model for Roman households. Despite his wealth and power, Augustus and his family continued to live modestly in their house on the Palatine Hill. Livia would set the pattern for the noble Roman matrona. She wore neither excessive jewelry nor pretentious costumes, she took care of the household and her husband (often making his clothes herself), always faithful and dedicated. In 35 BC Octavian gave Livia the unprecedented honour of ruling her own finances and dedicated a public statue to her. She had her own circle of clients and pushed many protégés into political offices, including the grandfathers of the later emperors Galba and Otho.[5]

With Augustus being the father of only one daughter (Julia the Elder by Scribonia), Livia revealed herself to be an ambitious mother and soon started to push her own sons, Tiberius and Drusus, into power.[5] Drusus was a trusted general and married Augustus's favourite niece, Antonia Minor. Tiberius married Augustus' daughter Julia in 11 BC and was ultimately adopted by his stepfather in 4 BC and named as Augustus' heir.

Rumor had it that when Marcellus, nephew of Augustus, died in 23 BC, it was no natural death, and that Livia was behind it.[8] After the two elder sons of Julia by Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa, whom Augustus had adopted as sons and successors, had died, the one remaining son Agrippa Postumus was incarcerated and finally killed. Tacitus charges that Livia was not altogether innocent of these deaths[9] and Cassius Dio also mentions such rumours,[10] but not even the gossipmonger Suetonius, who had access to official documents, repeats them. Most modern historical accounts of Livia's life discount the idea. There are also rumors mentioned by Tacitus and Cassius Dio that Livia brought about Augustus' death by poisoning fresh figs.[11][12] Augustus' granddaughter was Julia the Younger. Sometime between 1 and 14, her husband Paullus was executed as a conspirator in a revolt.[13] Modern historians theorize that Julia's exile was not actually for adultery but for involvement in Paulus' revolt.[14] Livia Drusilla plotted against her stepdaughter's family and ruined them. This led to open compassion for the fallen family. Julia died in 29 AD on the same island where she had been sent in exile twenty years earlier.[15]

[edit] Life after Augustus Augustus died in AD 14, being deified by the senate shortly afterwards. In his will, he left one third of his property to Livia, and the other two thirds to the successor Tiberius. In the will, he also adopted her into the Julian family, thus turning her into a patrician, and granted her the honorific title of Augusta. These dispositions permitted her to maintain her status and power after his death, under the name of Julia Augusta.

For some time, Livia and her son Tiberius, the new Emperor, appeared to get along with each other. Speaking against her became treason in AD 20, and in AD 24 he granted his mother a theatre seat among the Vestal Virgins. Livia exercised unofficial but very real power in Rome. Eventually, Tiberius became resentful of his mother's political status, particularly against the idea that it was she who had given him the throne. At the beginning of the reign he vetoed the unprecedented title Mater Patriae ("Mother of the Fatherland") that the Senate wanted to bestow upon her, in the same manner in which Augustus had been named Pater Patriae ("Father of the Fatherland").[5] (Tiberius also consistently refused the title of Pater Patriae for himself.)

The historians Tacitus and Cassius Dio depict an overweening, even domineering dowager, ready to interfere in Tiberius’ decisions, the most notable instances being the case of Urgulania, a woman who correctly assumed that her friendship with the empress placed her above the law,[16][17] and Plancina, suspected of murdering Germanicus and saved at Livia’s entreaty.[18] A notice from AD 22 records that Julia Augusta dedicated a statue to Augustus in the centre of Rome, placing her own name even before that of Tiberius. Ancient historians give as a reason for Tiberius’ retirement to Capri his inability to endure her any longer.[16][19] Until AD 22 there had, according to Tacitus, been "a genuine harmony between mother and son, or a hatred well concealed;"[20] Dio tells us that at the time of his accession already Tiberius heartily loathed her.[21] In AD 22 she had fallen ill, and Tiberius had hastened back to Rome in order to be with her.[20] But in AD 29 when she finally fell ill and died, he remained on Capri, pleading pressure of work and sending Caligula to deliver the funeral oration.[22][23][24] Suetonius adds the macabre detail that "when she died... after a delay of several days, during which he held out hope of his coming, [she was at last] buried because the condition of the corpse made it necessary...". Divine honours he also vetoed, stating that this was in accord with her own instructions. Later he vetoed all the honours the Senate had granted her after her death and canceled the fulfillment of her will.[24]

It would not be until 13 years later in AD 42, under the reign of her grandson Claudius, that all her honours would be restored and her deification finally completed. Named Diva Augusta (The Divine Augusta), she received an elephant-drawn chariot to convey her image to all public games. A statue of her was set up in the temple of Augustus along with her husband's, races were held in her honour, and women were to invoke her name in their sacred oaths.

Her Villa ad Gallinas Albas north of Rome is currently being excavated; its famous frescoes of imaginary garden views may be seen at National Museum of Rome.[25] One of the most famous statues of Augustus - the Augustus of Prima Porta came from the grounds of the villa.

[edit] Livia's personality While reporting various unsavoury hearsay, the ancient sources generally portray Livia (Julia Augusta) as a woman of proud and queenly attributes, faithful to her imperial husband, for whom she was a worthy consort, forever poised and dignified. With consummate skill she acted out the roles of consort, mother, widow and dowager. Dio records two of her utterances: "Once, when some naked men met her and were to be put to death in consequence, she saved their lives by saying that to a chaste woman such men are in no way different from statues. When someone asked her how she had obtained such a commanding influence over Augustus, she answered that it was by being scrupulously chaste herself, doing gladly whatever pleased him, not meddling with any of his affairs, and, in particular, by pretending neither to hear or nor to notice the favourites of his passion."[26]

With time, however, and widowhood, a haughtiness and an overt craving for power and the outward trappings of status came increasingly to the fore. Livia had always been a principal beneficiary of the climate of adulation that Augustus had done so much to create, and which Tiberius despised ("a strong contempt for honours", Tacitus, Annals 4.37). In 24, typically, whenever she attended the theatre, a seat among the Vestals was reserved for her (Annals 4.16), and this may have been intended more as an honour for the Vestals than for her (cf. Ovid, Tristia, 4.2.13f, Epist.Ex Ponto 4.13.29f).

Livia played a vital role in the formation of her children Tiberius and Drusus. Attention focuses on her part in the divorce of her first husband, father of Tiberius, in 39/38 BC. It would be interesting to know her role in this, as well as in Tiberius’ divorce of Vipsania Agrippina in 12 BC at Augustus' insistence: whether it was merely neutral or passive, or whether she actively colluded in Caesar’s wishes. The first divorce left Tiberius a fosterchild at the house of Octavian; the second left Tiberius with a lasting emotional scar, since he had been forced to abandon the woman he loved for dynastic considerations.

[edit] Livia in literature and popular culture [edit] Livia in ancient literature In Tacitus' Annals, Livia is depicted as having great influence, to the extent where she "had the aged Augustus firmly under control — so much so that he exiled his only surviving grandson to the island of Planasia".

Livia's image appears in ancient visual media such as coins and portraits. She was the first woman to appear on provincial coins in 16 BC and her portrait images can be chronologically identified partially from the progression of her hair designs, which represented more than keeping up with the fashions of the time as her depiction with such contemporary details translated into a political statement of representing the ideal Roman woman. Livia's image evolves with different styles of portraiture that trace her effect on imperial propaganda that helped bridge the gap between her role as wife to the emperor Augustus, to mother of the emperor Tiberius. Becoming more than the "beautiful woman" she is described as in ancient texts, Livia serves as a public image for the idealization of Roman feminine qualities, a motherly figure, and eventually a goddesslike representation that alludes to her virtue. Livia's power in symbolizing the renewal of the Republic with the female virtues Pietas and Concordia in public displays had a dramatic effect on the visual representation of future imperial women as ideal, honorable mothers and wives of Rome. [27]

[edit] Livia in modern literature In the popular fictional work I, Claudius by Robert Graves--based on Tacitus' innuendo—Livia is portrayed as a thoroughly wicked, scheming political mastermind. Devoted to bringing Tiberius to power and then maintaining him there, she is involved in nearly every death or disgrace in the Julio-Claudian family up to the time of her death. However, this portrait of her is balanced by her intense devotion to the well-being of the Empire as a whole. In the 1976 BBC television series based on the book, Livia was played by Siân Phillips. Phillips won a BAFTA for her portrayal of the role.

In the ITV television series The Caesars, Livia was played by Sonia Dresdel.

A heavily fictionalized version of Livia appeared on the show Xena: Warrior Princess, played by Adrienne Wilkinson.

Livia is also dramatized in the HBO/BBC series Rome. Introduced in the 2007 episode "A Necessary Fiction", Livia (Alice Henley) soon catches the eye of young Octavian, who has never been married or fathered any children. Historically, of course, Octavian had already been married to and divorced Clodia Pulchra by this time, and was married to a pregnant Scribonia. Rome does acknowledge the existence of Livia's child, Tiberius Nero, by her first husband, but not that she was pregnant with Nero Claudius Drusus when she met Octavian. Livia is portrayed as deceptively submissive in public, while in private she possesses an iron will, and a gift for political scheming that matches Atia's.

Livia appears in Neil Gaiman's comic "Distant Mirrors - August" collected in The Sandman: Fables and Reflections.

In John Maddox Roberts's short story "The King of Sacrifices," set in his SPQR series, Livia hires Decius Metellus to investigate the murder of one of Julia's lovers.

In Antony and Cleopatra by Colleen McCullough, Livia is portrayed as a cunning and effective advisor to her husband, whom she loves passionately.

Livia plays an important role in two Marcus Corvinus mysteries by David Wishart, Ovid (1995) and Germanicus (1997). She is mentioned posthumously in Sejanus (1998).

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Livia
--------------------
Definition: Livia was the first empress of Rome, the wife of the first emperor, Augustus, and mother of the second emperor, Tiberius (42 B.C. - A.D. 37). Livia (Julia) was long-lived and very influential.

Livia Drusilla (58 B.C. - A.D. 29), the daughter of Marcus Livius Drusus Claudius, married Tiberius Claudius Nero, her cousin, when she was 15 or 16. She was already the mother of the future emperor, Tiberius Claudius Nero, and pregnant with Nero Claudius Drusus (38 B.C. - 9 B.C.) when Octavian, who needed the political connections of Livia's family, arranged for her to be divorced. They then married on January 17, 38. Drusus and Tiberius lived with their father until his death in 33 B.C.

Octavian, who became the Emperor Augustus in 27 B.C., honored his wife with statues and public displays. However, instead of naming Drusus or Tiberius as heirs, he acknowledged his grandchildren Gaius and Lucius, sons of his daughter Julia by his previous marriage to Scribonia.

When, by 4 A.D., his grandsons had both died, Augustus had to look elsewhere. He wanted to name Germanicus, son of Livia's son Drusus, as his successor, but he was too young. Tiberius was Livia's favorite, and Augustus finally turned to him, with provision made for Tiberius to adopt Germanicus as his heir.

Augustus died in 14 A.D. According to his will Livia became a part of his family and was entitled to be called Julia Augusta from then on.

Julia Augusta exerted strong, but unwelcome influence on her son Tiberius. After the emperor Tiberius left Rome, he would not even return for her funeral in 29 A.D.

Julia Augusta was deified by her grandson Claudius in A.D. 41.

Also Known As: Livia Drusilla, Julia Augusta

--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Livia

Born : 57 BC
--------------------
Born : 57 BC
--------------------
Born : 57 BC
--------------------
Born : 57 BC - - Died : 029

--------------------
Buried in Mausoleum of Augustus Campus Martius Rome Italy
--------------------
http://hu.wikipedia.org/wiki/Livia_Drusilla

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Livia
--------------------
Noteringar

Livia skilde sig från Tiberius för att gifta sig med kejsaren Augustus. Augustus adopterade den blivande Kejsaren Tiberius.

Dotter till Livius Drusus Claudianus.

--------------------
Note: Daughter of M. Livius Drusus, consul b. c. 112, and sister of M. Livius Drusus, the celebrated tribune of the plebs, who was killed B. c. 91. [See the genealogical table, Vol. I. p. 1076.] She was married first to'Ml Porcius Cato, by whom she had Cato Uticensis (Cic. Brut. 62; Val. Max. iii. 1. § 2 ; Aur. Vict. de Vir. Ill 80..; Plut. Cat. Min. i. 2), and subsequently to Q. Servilius Caepio, by whom she had a daughter, Servilia, who was the mother of M. Brutus, who killed Caesar. (Plut. Brut. 2, Caes. 62, Cat. Min. 24.) Some writers suppose that Caepio was her first husband, and Cato her second. [Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology II:788] 1 2

Birth: ABT 122 BC in Latium 2

Death: 91 BC
--------------------

Kejsarinna Livia Drusella av Romarriket

Blev högst 86 år.

Född: 57 f.Kr.

Död: 29

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Familj med Quaestor Tiberius Claudius Nero av Romarriket (85 f.Kr. - 33 f.Kr.)

Vigsel: mellan 43 f.Kr. och 42 f.Kr.

Barn:

Tiberius I Claudius Nero av Romarriket (42 f.Kr. - 37)

Nero Claudius Germanicus Drusus av Romarriket (38 f.Kr. - 9 f.Kr.)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Familj med Kejsare Gaius Octavius Augustus av Romarriket (63 f.Kr. - 14)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Noteringar

Livia skilde sig från Tiberius för att gifta sig med kejsaren Augustus. Augustus adopterade den blivande Kejsaren Tiberius.

Dotter till Livius Drusus Claudianus.

--------------------
iNFO FROM http://www.genealogy4u.com/genealogy/getperson.php?personID=I52764&tree=western2007

Livia Drusilla was born in 38 B.C. to Marcus Livius Drusus Claudianus. She married Tiberius Claudius Nero, her cousin, and bore her first child, Tiberius Claudius Nero. While pregnant with her second son, she was forced to marry Octavius due to political reasons. She served Octavius well, being faithful for the entirety of their marriage, which lasted until Octavius' death in 14 A.D. Her life-long goal was to have one of her sons become emperor. One son, Drusus Claudius Nero, died during a war, although Livia may have poisoned him herself. Her first son, Tiberius Clausius Nero, became emperor when Octavius died and willed him the position. Livia had succeeded through much persuasion and a marriage arrangement of Tiberius and Julia, Octavian's daughter. Julia, however, was unfaithful to Tiberius, and he divorced her and sent her into exile. Livia stood by Tiberius and helped him gain public support, although his wife had nearly cost him his powers. Livia was supportive and loving until her death in 29 A.D.

GIVEN_NAMES: Also shown as Livia

BIRTH: Also shown as Born 0060 BC

DEATH: Also shown as Died 0029 BC
--------------------
16870305536220233. Livia Drucilla Julia Augusta ROMAN EMPIRE,1601,1746 daughter of Marcus Livius Drusus Claudius ROMAN EMPIRE and Unknown, was born in 58 B.C. in Rome, Roma, , Lazio, Italy and died in 29 in Rome, Roma, , Lazio, Italy at age 87.

General Notes:

Livia Drusilla was originally married to Tiberius Claudius Nero until the Emperor Augustus forced him to divorce her to become his own wife. Political marriages of this type were common during the Republic and early empire. Livia was a member of the powerful Claudian family and the new emperor needed her wealth and influence to establish his position. Livia had two sons from her previous marriage, Nero Claudius Drusus and Tiberius Claudius Nero, who later became Emperor Tiberius. Drusus was a popular military figure but was killed by a fall from his horse while on maneuvers in the Summer of A.D. 9.

Livia was an intelligent and efficient administrative helper to her new husband who had his hands full consolidating his power while maintaining the appearance of not doing so at all costs. In spite of the political nature of their marriage, Augustus and Livia loved each other deeply. With his dying words, the emperor asked his wife of fifty-two years to remember their life together. The imperial couple had had no children together and Augustus' elder stepson, Tiberius, was the one to inherit the throne after the death of Augustus.

Livia continued to exert her influence over her son Tiberius until her death in A. D. 29 at the age of 85 years. It was probably because of her political acumen and ability to watch out for her son t hat the problems with the praetorian prefect Sejanus did not occur until two years before her death.

Livia married Tiberius Claudius Nero ROMAN EMPIRE 1601 in <B.C. 38, Palace Augustus, Roma, Italy>. Tiberius was born in Lugdunum, Roma, , Lazio, Italy.

Livia next married Augustus Gaius Julius Octavius ROMAN EMPIRE Emperor,1601 son of Senator-Praetor & Governor of Macedonia Caius Octavius IV ROMAN EMPIRE and Atia Balbus ROMAN EMPIRE. Gaius was born on 23 September 63 B.C. in Roma, , Italy and died 19 August 14 in Nola, Abadia A Isola, , , Italy. Other names for Gaius were Gaius Julius Caesar ROMAN EMPIRE, Gaius Octavius ROMAN EMPIRE, and Octavius ROMAN EMPIRE.

The child from this marriage was:

i. Julia "The Older" ROMAN EMPIRE.

http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.com/~mgholler/Caden/a54.htm#i547458828
--------------------
Livia Drusilla, (after 14 AD she was called Julia Augusta born (58 BC-29 AD) was the wife of Augustus and one of the most powerful women in the Roman Empire, being Augustus' faithful advisor. She was also mother to Drusus and Tiberius, grandmother to Germanicus and Claudius, great-grandmother to Caligula and Agrippina the Younger and great-great-grandmother to Nero. She was deified by Claudius who acknowledged her title of Augusta. Life Birth and first marriage: She was born on 30 January 59 or 58 BC as the daughter of Marcus Livius Drusus Claudianus by his wife Aufidia, a daughter of the magistrate Marcus Aufidius Lurco. The diminutive Drusilla often found in her name suggests that she was a second daughter. Marcus Livius Drusus was her brother. In 40 B.C her father married her to Tiberius Claudius Nero, her cousin of patrician status who was fighting with him on the side of Julius Caesar's assassins against Octavian. Her father committed suicide in the Battle of Philippi, along with Gaius Cassius Longinus and Marcus Junius Brutus, but her husband continued fighting against Octavian, now on behalf of Mark Antony and his brother. In 40 BC, the family was forced to flee Italy in order to avoid Octavian's proscriptions, and joined with Sextus Pompeius in Sicily, later moving on to Greece. Life with Augustus: A general amnesty was announced, and Livia returned to Rome, where she was personally introduced to Octavian in 39 BC. At this time, Livia already had a son, the future emperor Tiberius, and was pregnant with the second (Drusus the Elder). Legend said that Octavian fell immediately in love with her, despite the fact that he was still married to Scribonia. Octavian divorced Scribonia in 39 BC, on the very day that she gave birth to his daughter Julia the Elder (Cassius Dio). Seemingly around that time, when Livia was six months pregnant, Tiberius Claudius Nero was persuaded or forced by Octavian to divorce Livia. On 14 January, the child was born. Octavian and Livia married on 17 January, waiving the traditional waiting period. Tiberius Claudius Nero was present at the wedding, giving her in marriage "just as a father would." The importance of the patrician Claudii to Octavian's cause, and the political survival of the Claudii Nerones are probably more rational explanations for the tempestuous union. Nevertheless, Livia and Octavian remained married for the next 51 years, despite the fact that they had no children apart from a single miscarriage. She always enjoyed the status of privileged counselor to her husband, petitioning him on the behalf of others and influencing his policies, an unusual role for a Roman wife in a culture dominated by the paterfamilias. After Mark Antony's suicide following the Battle of Actium in 31 BC, Octavian had removed all obstacles to his power and henceforth ruled as Emperor, from 27 BC on, under the honorary title Augustus. He and Livia formed the role model for Roman households. Despite his wealth and power, Augustus and his family continued to live modestly in their house on the Palatine Hill. Livia would set the pattern for the noble Roman matrona. She wore neither excessive jewelry nor pretentious costumes, she took care of the household and her husband (often making his clothes herself), always faithful and dedicated. In 35 BC Octavian gave Livia the unprecedented honour of ruling her own finances and dedicated a public statue to her. She had her own circle of clients and pushed many protégés into political offices, including the grandfathers of the later emperors Galba and Otho. With Augustus being the father of only one daughter (Julia the Elder by Scribonia), Livia revealed herself to be an ambitious mother and soon started to push her own sons, Tiberius and Drusus, into power. Drusus was a trusted general and married Augustus's favourite niece, Antonia Minor. Tiberius married Augustus' daughter Julia in 11 BC and was ultimately adopted by his stepfather in 4 BC and named as Augustus' heir. Rumor had it that when Marcellus, nephew of Augustus, died in 23 BC, it was no natural death, and that Livia was behind it. After the two elder sons of Julia by Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa, whom Augustus had adopted as sons and successors, had died, the one remaining son Agrippa Postumus was incarcerated and finally killed. Tacitus charges that Livia was not altogether innocent of these deaths and Cassius Dio also mentions such rumours, but not even the gossipmonger Suetonius, who had access to official documents, repeats them. Most modern historical accounts of Livia's life discount the idea. There are also rumors mentioned by Tacitus and Cassius Dio that Livia brought about Augustus' death by poisoning fresh figs. Augustus' granddaughter was Julia the Younger. Sometime between 1 and 14, her husband Paullus was executed as a conspirator in a revolt. Modern historians theorize that Julia's exile was not actually for adultery but for involvement in Paulus' revolt. Livia Drusilla plotted against her stepdaughter's family and ruined them. This led to open compassion for the fallen family. Julia died in 29 AD on the same island where she had been sent in exile twenty years earlier. Life after Augustus: Augustus died in AD 14, being deified by the senate shortly afterwards. In his will, he left one third of his property to Livia, and the other two thirds to the successor Tiberius. In the will, he also adopted her into the Julian family, thus turning her into a patrician, and granted her the honorific title of Augusta. These dispositions permitted her to maintain her status and power after his death, under the name of Julia Augusta. For some time, Livia and her son Tiberius, the new Emperor, appeared to get along with each other. Speaking against her became treason in AD 20, and in AD 24 he granted his mother a theatre seat among the Vestal Virgins. Livia exercised unofficial but very real power in Rome. Eventually, Tiberius became resentful of his mother's political status, particularly against the idea that it was she who had given him the throne. At the beginning of the reign he vetoed the unprecedented title Mater Patriae ("Mother of the Fatherland") that the Senate wanted to bestow upon her, in the same manner in which Augustus had been named Pater Patriae ("Father of the Fatherland").[5] (Tiberius also consistently refused the title of Pater Patriae for himself.) The historians Tacitus and Cassius Dio depict an overweening, even domineering dowager, ready to interfere in Tiberius’ decisions, the most notable instances being the case of Urgulania, a woman who correctly assumed that her friendship with the empress placed her above the law, and Plancina, suspected of murdering Germanicus and saved at Livia’s entreaty. A notice from AD 22 records that Julia Augusta dedicated a statue to Augustus in the centre of Rome, placing her own name even before that of Tiberius. Ancient historians give as a reason for Tiberius’ retirement to Capri his inability to endure her any longer. Until AD 22 there had, according to Tacitus, been "a genuine harmony between mother and son, or a hatred well concealed;" Dio tells us that at the time of his accession already Tiberius heartily loathed her. In AD 22 she had fallen ill, and Tiberius had hastened back to Rome in order to be with her. But in AD 29 when she finally fell ill and died, he remained on Capri, pleading pressure of work and sending Caligula to deliver the funeral oration. Suetonius adds the macabre detail that "when she died after a delay of several days, during which he held out hope of his coming, [she was at last] buried because the condition of the corpse made it necessary. "Divine honours he also vetoed, stating that this was in accord with her own instructions. Later he vetoed all the honours the Senate had granted her after her death and canceled the fulfillment of her will. It would not be until 13 years later in AD 42, under the reign of her grandson Claudius, that all her honours would be restored and her deification finally completed. Named Diva Augusta (The Divine Augusta), she received an elephant-drawn chariot to convey her image to all public games. A statue of her was set up in the temple of Augustus along with her husband's, races were held in her honour, and women were to invoke her name in their sacred oaths. Her Villa ad Gallinas Albas north of Rome is currently being excavated; its famous frescoes of imaginary garden views may be seen at National Museum of Rome. One of the most famous statues of Augustus - the Augustus of Prima Porta came from the grounds of the villa. Livia's personality While reporting various unsavoury hearsay, the ancient sources generally portray Livia (Julia Augusta) as a woman of proud and queenly attributes, faithful to her imperial husband, for whom she was a worthy consort, forever poised and dignified. With consummate skill she acted out the roles of consort, mother, widow and dowager. Dio records two of her utterances: "Once, when some naked men met her and were to be put to death in consequence, she saved their lives by saying that to a chaste woman such men are in no way different from statues. When someone asked her how she had obtained such a commanding influence over Augustus, she answered that it was by being scrupulously chaste herself, doing gladly whatever pleased him, not meddling with any of his affairs, and, in particular, by pretending neither to hear or nor to notice the favourites of his passion." With time, however, and widowhood, a haughtiness and an overt craving for power and the outward trappings of status came increasingly to the fore. Livia had always been a principal beneficiary of the climate of adulation that Augustus had done so much to create, and which Tiberius despised "a strong contempt for honours". In 24, typically, whenever she attended the theatre, a seat among the Vestals was reserved for her, and this may have been intended more as an honour for the Vestals than for her. Livia played a vital role in the formation of her children Tiberius and Drusus. Attention focuses on her part in the divorce of her first husband, father of Tiberius, in 39/38 BC. It would be interesting to know her role in this, as well as in Tiberius’ divorce of Vipsania Agrippina in 12 BC at Augustus' insistence: whether it was merely neutral or passive, or whether she actively colluded in Caesar’s wishes. The first divorce left Tiberius a fosterchild at the house of Octavian; the second left Tiberius with a lasting emotional scar, since he had been forced to abandon the woman he loved for dynastic considerations. Livia in literature and popular culture: Livia in ancient literature In Tacitus' Annals, Livia is depicted as having great influence, to the extent where she "had the aged Augustus firmly under control — so much so that he exiled his only surviving grandson to the island of Planasia". Livia's image appears in ancient visual media such as coins and portraits. She was the first woman to appear on provincial coins in 16 BC and her portrait images can be chronologically identified partially from the progression of her hair designs, which represented more than keeping up with the fashions of the time as her depiction with such contemporary details translated into a political statement of representing the ideal Roman woman. Livia's image evolves with different styles of portraiture that trace her effect on imperial propaganda that helped bridge the gap between her role as wife to the emperor Augustus, to mother of the emperor Tiberius. Becoming more than the "beautiful woman" she is described as in ancient texts, Livia serves as a public image for the idealization of Roman feminine qualities, a motherly figure, and eventually a goddesslike representation that alludes to her virtue. Livia's power in symbolizing the renewal of the Republic with the female virtues Pietas and Concordia in public displays had a dramatic effect on the visual representation of future imperial women as ideal, honorable mothers and wives of Rome.

Livia Drusilla (58 B.C. - A.D. 29), who took the name Julia Augustafollowing the death of her husband Augustus in A.D. 14, served as empresswith her husband and unwanted advisor to her son Tiberius.
-------------------

Source: http://www.mmdtkw.org/VLivia.html

Livia Drusilla, the First First Lady: There has to be a first ofeverything, and this lady was it. She certainly was not the firstpowerful woman in the ancient world: the Bible and other ancient tomeswere full of predecessors, and Cleopatra was barely out of the picturewhen Livia bloomed in Rome. Livia was not even the first wife of Octavian(later called Caesar Augustus): that would have been Claudia, the childstepdaughter of Marc Antony, whom Octavian left untouched and whom hedivorced when he and Antony fell out again. Not even his second:Scribonia, an "older woman" and already (by a previous husband) themother of the later notorious Julia the Elder and grandmother of the evenmore odious Julia the Younger (Julietta), filled that role. LiviaDrusilla, who was willed the title of Julia Augusta when her CaesarAugustus died many years later, was, in fact, Augustus' third wife.

Livia was born in 58 BC, the daughter of a Roman Patrician, Marcus LiviusDrusus Claudius, and the granddaughter of Marcus Livius Drusus, a greatman who had been tribune in 91 BC. At the age of 15 or 16, she wasmarried to Tiberius Claudius Nero, who was an opponent of the youngOctavian. Livia gave birth to there first son, Tiberius in 42 BC and by40 BC, the young family had fled Rome to the protection of Mark Antony.They soon returned to Rome and, by 38 BC, a very pregnant Livia divorcedTiberius Claudius Nero to marry Octavian who had himself just divorcedScribonia, newly the mother of Julia the Elder.

The events leading up to this marriage aren't clear, but it appears tohave been done with the approval of her husband, but he could hardly havesafely objected. It is certain that both Livia and Octavian wanted thisunion, because they were willing to endure a great deal of scandal andRoman gossip. But to make the marriage acceptable to Roman society, astory of divine omens was put about. The tale was that, while travelingto her country estate, an eagle, the sacred bird of Jupiter, had droppedin her lap a laying hen holding a sprig of laurel in its mouth -- threepotent omens occurring simultaneously obviously marked Livia for aspecial job. Three months after her marriage to Octavian, Livia's secondson, Drusus, was born. In accordance with Roman custom, Livia's sons wentto live with their father. Julia, the daughter of Scribonia, stayed withOctavian and Livia. When Tiberius Claudius Nero died in 32 BCE, Livia'ssons joined Octavian's household. This may seem complicated, but suchfamily arrangements were not uncommon among the ancient Roman elites.

The role of wife to rich and a famous urban Roman man was clearly definedby Livia's time: she should stay at home, produce as many children as shecould, maybe do a little spinning and weaving, supervise the servants,and know (for ceremonial purposes only) how to thresh grain and start afire. The "stay at home" part was the most important. A good Roman wifenever upstaged her husband -- in fact, she should not be on the stage atall. Many upper class women understandably found this incredibly boringand sought solace in the arms of men other than their husbands. Livia didnot appear to have had a wandering heart and found other outlets whichclosely match our modern ideas of the role of a "First lady."

Livia was given the right to sit with the Vestal Virgins during publicperformances, she received large numbers of clients, commissioned anddedicated public buildings, sponsored charities and interceded on behalfof provincial emissaries. Her entire public persona and all her imagesand actions were connected with marriage, the family and traditionalRoman family values. She endowed the "Portico of Livia" between the Opianand Cispian Hills in Rome as a public recreational area consisting of alarge courtyard with a shrine to Concordia, dedicated to marital concordand harmony. At the time of its dedication, she gave a large banquet forthe respectable matrons of Rome. Her actions were decidedly untraditionalbecause they were undertaken in public, but they were still directedtoward traditional ends. She was a very intelligent woman who was able tohelp her husband consolidate his power while maintaining the appearanceof not doing so.

Like some later first ladies, Livia had to put up with the rowdiness andrandiness of her husband. The Historian Suetonius noted that Augustus'"various acts of adultery" were "not denied even by his friends". Hisearly enemies (especially Mark Antony and his brother Lucius Antony, whenthey were still alive) were free with accusations, which he apparentlyanswered only with the famous "and so is your mother." Such carryings onwere expected of manly men in those days, and Livia stood by her Augustusthroughout -- and he did always come home. They stayed married for almost53 years until his death in 14 AD.

Livia continued to exert her good influence over Augustus' successor, herson Tiberius, for fifteen years after Augustus' peaceful death. She diedin 29 AD at the age of 85. It was probably because of her politicalacumen and ability to watch out for Tiberius that his problems with thepraetorian prefect Sejanus, a bureaucrat/pretender, did not occur untiltwo years after her death.

Livia's was the exemplar for later Roman and other "First Ladies", butthe later Roman ones, all of whom also carried the honorific title "JuliaAugusta", just did not measure up because all seemed to have forgottenone qualification that Livia always possessed: Livia was never accused orever even suspected of any kind of moral or sexual misconduct. LiviaDrusilla was so revered by later ages that she was claimed as anancestress of all European royal houses (through Charlemagne andFarabert, King of Franks from 166 to 186). British colonials and Americanfounding fathers, steeped as they were in the classics, named theirdaughters Livia Drusilla in the hope that they would be good and faithfulwives as was their namesake, and her combination name survives in asurprising number of American academic and plutocratic families.

For more on the personal lives of Caesar Augustus and Livia, go to:
http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/ancient/suetonius-augustus.html and scrolldown to Chapter 61.

PS: You too can, with mathematical if not biological certainty, traceyour ancestry back to Livia. If you assume four generations per centuryand you know that in each previous generation you had double the numberof ancestors that you had in the next generation, it's easy to work outthe geometric progression. Just multiply by two for each generation:yourself, two parents, four grandparents, eight great grandparents, 16great-greats, etc. Using this method, you can see that you would have hadabout a trillion ancestors (one with 12 zeroes behind it) alive in 1000AD and about a septillion (24 zeroes) in Livia's time. Even the trillionis more folks than ever lived, so you can see that there must have beensome, if distant, incest involved in your ancestry ( -- We won't tell).Since intercontinental travel was already possible in Livia's time andsince race-mixing wasn't much of a taboo in most places and interveningtimes, it's obvious that everyone alive in Livia's time was yourancestor, and inevitably though several different lines.
------------------

A Woman for the Ages
In ancient Rome, in an age when women were valued for little more thantheir family connections, property, or the proper public image they wereable to display, Livia Drusilla emerged as one of the most significantwomen in Roman history. Livia's stature in the Roman world wasunsurpassed. Most scholars believed that Livia conformed to the accepted,traditional role of women and gained influence in an acceptable way;(Huntsman par.1) her reputation as one of the world's most powerful andinfluential women has remained unparalleled.

Livia's Early Years
Livia was...

born in 58 BCE.
the daughter of a Roman noble named Marcus Livius Drusus Claudius
depicted in statues as having "a commanding presence, features of perfectregularity, enormous eyes and thick, wavy hair" (Payne 161).
At the age of 15 or 16, Livia was married to Tiberius Claudius Nero, hercousin and rival to Octavian. Livia had her first child, Tiberius, in 42BCE. While Livia was pregnant with the couple's second child, Octavianbecame attracted to the beautiful Livia. Octavian forced TiberiusClaudius Nero to divorce Livia.

Livia and Octavian
Octavian married Livia Drusilla with "indecent haste" (Earl 39) onJanuary 17, 38 BCE. This marriage was important for the followingreasons...

...it was politically astute.
By marrying a woman whose lineage (Claudian family) was so important,Octavian would attract the support of ambitious aristocrats who judgedthat he might be able to carry them to power (Earl 39).
...it was "perhaps the most important single event in all the long riseof Octavian to supreme power" (Earl 39) but it was also "for love and forlife" (Hooper 345).
A scandal arose over the union of Octavian and the pregnant, divorcedLivia. In order to lessen the effects of the scandal, Octavianmanufactured an omen designed to gain support for his marriage to Livia.

It was said that as Livia rode to her country estate, she recieved adivine gift. An eagle, messenger of Jupiter, dropped a pregnant hen witha laurel sprig in her mouth into Livia's Lap.

This symbol was to indicate that "the new race of triumphatores"(generals who added to the wealth of Rome) would result from his marriageto Livia (Flory).

Livia proved to be a suitable wife, practicing "the virtues of chastity,obedience and silence" (Payne 161). But although she was silent, Livia'sinfluence on Octavian was great. He relied on her "critical intelligence"(Payne 161), and it is said that Livia's "greatest service to the Romanslay in her devotion to Octavian and in the civilizing influence shebrought to bear on him" (Payne 160).

Later, with Livia's counsel, Octavian completed his quest for control ofthe Roman state and won the battle of Actium. Then, in 27 BCE, Octavianrecieved the honorary title "Augustus," which acknowledged his positionof supreme prestige and his protection by the gods.

While exercising restraint in creating lavish tributes for himself,Augustus "carefully crafted the public display, honors and status givento his wife" (McManus)...

Public statues honored Livia.
State protection (sacrosanctity) gave her the right to sit in a specialplace with the vestal virgins during public performances.
She dedicated public buildings and sponsored charities.
All of her "public images and actions were closely connected withmarriage, the family and traditional Roman morality" (McManus).
Livia's public image was carefully cultivated by Augustus.

Livia After Octavian
In 23 BCE, Augustus became gravely ill. Because he feared that he wasdying, "Augustus made no secret of his intention that the descendants ofJulia [his daughter from his previous marriage to Scribonia] were to behis political heirs" (Africa 26). After the health crisis passed,Augustus adopted Gaius and Lucuis (Julia's sons) as his legal heirs,thwarting Livia's desire for Tiberius to succeed Augustus.

But by 4 AD, both Gaius and Lucius died unexpectedly so Augustus soughtto preserve the direct line by looking to Germanicus, son of Tiberius'brother Drusus. However, Germanicus was "too young and inexperienced torule" and Augustus "reluctantly" turned to Tiberuis (Seager 36), who was"compelled to adopt his nephew germanicus, who would thus, when Augustusadopted Tiberius, become the princeps' grandson" (Seager 37). Livia's sonTiberius was adopted as Augustus' heir, and her plans for the successionof her son were complete (Africa 28).

On August 19, 14 AD, Augustus died, and Tiberius assumed power. "In hiswill, Augustus adopted Livia into his own Lineage, giving her the nameJulia Augusta, and the title Augusta was to become a special honorificfor subsequent empresses" (McManus).

As widow of Augustus anf mother of Tiberius, Livia enjoyed unprecedentedstatus and was honored with statues associating her with:

Ceres, goddess of fertility and abundance, and Cybele, the Great Mother(McManus).

Livia and Tiberius
Tiberius' reign was characterized by peace and prosperity, but hesuffered personally. His adopted son Germanicus caused him troublethrough "unruliness and ambitious seeking of popularity" (Payne 195).

Both Livia and Tiberius were jealous of the popularity enjoyed byGermanicus; they feared he would come to power and restore the oldrepublican constitution (Africa 168).

Germanicus soon met a mysterious, untimely death. It was rumored thatLivia and Tiberius plotted to poison Germanicus, but the rumor was neverproven. It was no secret, though, that both Livia and Tiberius were"delighted" by Germanicus' death (Africa 172).

Livia Livia continued to have a strong influence in the reign ofTiberius...

"Tiberius did not like to cross her [Livia] in matters where she hadstrong feelings..."
Livia "...never ceased to remind him what he owed her" (Hooper 367).
In a possible attempt to escape Livia, Tiberius left Rome, never toreturn.
Livia's power and ambitions were so embarrassing to Tiberius that herefused to attend her funeral in 29 AD and failed to carry out the termsof her will (Bonenkamp, et al.).

Livia's Legacy

Despite Tiberius' negative feelings for his mother, Livia's generallypopular reputation survived, and she was deified by her grandson Claudiusin 41 AD.

Livia's reputation has remained largely untainted. In her nearly seventyyears as a public figure she...

quietly shaped the rule of two Roman emperors
and served as a model for Roman decorum.
Livia's prominence in her lifetime was unmatched, and she has remained animportant, admired figure through 2000 years of history.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Works Cited
Africa, Thomas W. Rome of the Caesars. New York: John Wiley & Sons Inc.,1965
Bonenkamp, Jan, Mathija Horathuia and Marloea Mentink. "Livia Drusilla."The Forum Romanum. 6 November 1999.http://library.advanced.org/11042/homebio.html.
Bonenkamp, Jan, Mathija Horathuia and Marloea Mentink. "Tiberius." TheForum Romanum. 6 November 1999.http://library.advanced.org/11042/homebio.html.
Earl, Donald. The Age of Augustus. New York: Exeter Books, 1980.
Flory, Marleen B. "The Deification of Roman Women." The Ancient HistoryBulletin. 1995. Gustavus Adolphus College. 29 October 1999.http://ivory.trentu.ca/www/cl/ahb/AHB9/AHB-9-3e.html.
Hooper, Finley. Roman Realities. Detroit: Wayne State U.P., 1979
Huntsman, Eric D. "The Sources of Livia's Prestige and Influence." Shaw,Brent D. 1997. 6 November 1999.<http://humanities.byu.edu/Faculty/HuntsmanE/Livia/Livia%20intro.html>.
James, Simon. Ancient Rome. New York: Penguin, 1992.
McManus, Barbara F. "Livia: Princeps Femina." June 1999. The College ofNew Rochelle. 29 October 1999.http://vroma.rhodes.edu/~bmcmanus/livia.html.
Payne, Robert. Ancient Rome. New York: American Heritage Press, 1970
Seager, Robin. Tiberius. Berkeley: U of C Press, 1972.
Tacitus. Annals. I 10, pp. 35-36. Translated by Michael Grant, The Annalsof Imperial Rome. Baltimore: Penguin, 1959.

57 BC-AD 29

Livia
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Livia Drusilla, after 14 AD called Julia Augusta (Classical Latin: LIVIA•DRVSILLA, later IVLIA•AVGVSTA[1]) (58 BC-AD 29) was the wife of Caesar Augustus (also known as Octavian) and the most powerful woman in the early Roman Empire, acting several times as regent and being Augustus' faithful advisor. She was also mother to Emperor Tiberius and Drusus, grandmother to Germanicus and Claudius, great-grandmother to Caligula and Agrippina the younger and great-great-grandmother to Nero. She was deified by Claudius who acknowledged her title of Augusta.

Contents [hide]
1 Life
1.1 Birth and first marriage
1.2 Marriage to Octavian
1.3 Livia, Roman empress
1.4 Life after Augustus
2 Livia's personality
3 Livia in literature and popular culture
3.1 Livia in ancient literature
3.2 Livia in modern literature
4 Notes
5 See also
6 External links



[edit] Life

[edit] Birth and first marriage
She was born on 30 January 58 BC as the daughter of Marcus Livius Drusus Claudianus by his wife Aufidia, who was a daughter of Aufidius Lurco, a Roman magistrate from an Italic town. The diminutive Drusilla often found in her name suggests that she was a second daughter[2].

In 42 BC, her father married her to Tiberius Claudius Nero, her cousin of patrician status who was fighting with him on the side of Julius Caesar's assassins against Octavian. Her father committed suicide in the Battle of Philippi, along with Gaius Cassius Longinus and Marcus Junius Brutus, but her husband continued fighting against Octavian, now on behalf of Mark Antony and his brother. In 40 BC, the family was forced to flee Italy in order to avoid Octavian's proscriptions, and joined with Sextus Pompeius in Sicilia, later moving on to Greece.


[edit] Marriage to Octavian
A general amnesty was announced, and Livia returned to Rome, where she was personally introduced to Octavian in 39 BC. At this time, Livia already had a son, the future emperor Tiberius, and was pregnant with the second (Drusus the Elder). Legend said that Octavian fell immediately in love with her, despite the fact that he was still married to Scribonia. Octavian divorced Scribonia in 39 BC, on the very day that she gave birth to his daughter Julia the Elder ( Dio Cassius 48.34.3). Seemingly around that time, when Livia was six months pregnant, Tiberius Claudius Nero was persuaded or forced by Octavian to divorce Livia. On 14 January, the child was born. Octavian and Livia married on 17 January, waiving the traditional waiting period. Tiberius Claudius Nero was present at the wedding, giving her in marriage "just as a father would" (Dio Cassius 48.44.1-3). The importance of the patrician Claudii to Octavian's cause, and the political survival of the Claudii Nerones are probably more rational explanations for the tempestuous union. Nevertheless, Livia and Octavian remained married for the next 51 years, despite the fact that they had no children apart from a single miscarriage. She always enjoyed the status of privileged counselor to her husband, petitioning him on the behalf of others and influencing his policies.


[edit] Livia, Roman empress

Portrait of Livia in Egyptian basalt, ca. 31 BC, LouvreAfter Mark Antony's suicide following the Battle of Actium in 31 BC, Octavian met no opposition to his increasing power, eventually becoming Roman Emperor as Caesar Augustus always with Livia by his side. Together, they formed the role model for Roman households. Despite his wealth and power, Augustus and his family continued to live modestly in their house on the Palatine Hill. Livia would set the pattern for the noble Roman matrona. She wore neither excessive jewelry nor pretentious costumes, she took care of the household and her husband (often making his clothes herself), and she paid no attention to his notorious womanising, always faithful and dedicated.

In 35 BC Octavian gave Livia the unprecedented honour of ruling her own finances and dedicated a public statue to her. She had her own circle of clients and pushed many protégés into political offices, including Roman Emperor Galba and Emperor Otho's grandfather.

With Augustus being the father of only one daughter (Julia the Elder by Scribonia), Livia revealed herself to be an ambitious mother and soon started to push her own sons, Tiberius and Drusus, into power. Drusus was a trusted general and married Augustus's favourite niece, Antonia Minor. Tiberius married Julia the Elder (daughter of Augustus) in 11 BC and was ultimately adopted by his stepfather in AD 4 and nominated heir to the empire.

Rumor had it that when Marcellus, nephew of Augustus, died in 23BC, it was no natural death, and that Livia was behind it (Dio Cassius 55.33.4). One by one, all the sons of Julia the Elder by Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa died: first Lucius and then Gaius, whom Augustus had adopted as his sons, intending them to be his successors. Finally Agrippa Postumus, Julia's one remaining son and also adopted as Augustus' son, was also incarcerated and finally killed. Tacitus charges that Livia was not altogether innocent of these deaths (esp. Annals 1.3; 1.6), and Dio Cassius also mentions such rumours (53.33.4, 55.10A, 55.32; 57.3.6), but not even the gossipmonger Suetonius, who had access to official documents, repeats them. Most modern historical accounts of Livia's life discount the idea. Even less plausible is the rumour mentioned by Tacitus (Annals 1.5) and Dio Cassius (55.22.2; 56.30) that Livia brought about Augustus' death (Dio mentions poisoned figs).


[edit] Life after Augustus
Augustus died in 14 AD, being deified by the senate shortly afterwards. In his will, he left one third of his property to Livia, and the other two thirds to the successor Tiberius. In the will, he also adopted her into the Julian family, thus turning her into a patrician, and granted her the honorific title of Augusta. These dispositions permitted her to maintain her status and power after his death, under the name of Julia Augusta.


Livia as Pietas.For some time, Livia and her son Tiberius, the new Emperor, appeared to get along with each other. Speaking against her became treason in 20 AD, and in 24 AD he granted his mother a theatre seat among the Vestal Virgins. Livia exercised unofficial but very real power in Rome, with a man convicted of treason let go at her request. Eventually, Tiberius became resentful of his mother's political status, particularly against the idea that it was she who had given him the throne. At the beginning of the reign he vetoed the unprecedented title Mater Patriae ("Mother of the Fatherland") that the Senate wanted to bestow upon her, in the same manner in which Augustus and before him Julius Caesar and Cicero had been named Pater Patriae ("Father of the Fatherland"). (Tiberius also consistently refused the title of Pater Patriae for himself.)

The historians Tacitus and Dio Cassius depict an overweening, even domineering dowager, ready to interfere in Tiberius’ decisions, the most notable instances being the case of Urgulania, a woman who correctly assumed that her friendship with the empress placed her above the law (Dio Cassius 57.12, Tacitus, Annals 2.34), and Plancina, suspected of murdering Germanicus and saved at Livia’s entreaty (Annals 3.17). A notice from AD 22 records that Julia Augusta dedicated a statue to Augustus in the centre of Rome, placing her own name even before that of Tiberius.

Ancient historians give as a reason for Tiberius’ retirement to Capri his inability to endure her any longer (Annals 4.57, Dio Cassius 57.12.6). Until AD 22 there had, according to Tacitus, been "a genuine harmony between mother and son, or a hatred well concealed" (Annals 3.64); Dio tells us that at the time of his accession already Tiberius heartily loathed her (57.3.3). In 22 AD she had fallen ill, and Tiberius had hastened back to Rome in order to be with her (Annals 3.64). But in 29 when she finally fell ill and died, he remained on Capri, pleading pressure of work and sending Caligula to deliver the funeral oration (Annals 5.1, Dio 58.2). Suetonius (Vita Tiberii 51) adds the macabre detail that "when she died... after a delay of many days, during which he held out hope of his coming, she was at last buried because the condition of the corpse made it necessary...". Divine honours he also vetoed, as if he took a perverse pleasure in depriving her of her secret aspirations. Later he vetoed all the honours the Senate had granted her after her death and canceled the fulfillment of her will.

It would be another 13 years in the year 42, under the reign of her grandson Claudius, before all her honours would be restored and her deification finally completed. Named Diva Augusta (The Divine Augusta), she received an elephant-drawn chariot to convey her image to all public games, a statue of her was set up in the temple of Augustus along with her husbands, races were held in her honour, and women were to name her in their oaths.

Her Villa ad Gallinas Albas north of Rome is currently being excavated: its famous frescos of feigned garden views may be seen at Museo Nazionale Romano#Palazzo Massimo [1]. One of the most famous statues of Augustus - the Prima Porta Augustus - came from the grounds of the villa.


Livia Drusilla statue, from Paestum.
[edit] Livia's personality
While reporting various unsavoury hearsay, the ancient sources generally portray Livia (Julia Augusta) as a woman of proud and queenly attributes, faithful to her imperial husband, for whom she was a worthy consort, forever poised and dignified. With consummate skill she acted out the roles of consort, mother, widow and dowager. Dio (58.2.5) records two of her utterances: "Once, when some naked men met her and were to be put to death in consequence, she saved their lives by saying that to a chaste woman such men are in no way different from statues. When someone asked her how she had obtained such a commanding influence over Augustus, she answered that it was by being scrupulously chaste herself, doing gladly whatever pleased him, not meddling with any of his affairs, and, in particular, by pretending neither to hear or nor to notice the favourites of his passion."

With time, however, and widowhood, a haughtiness and an overt craving for power and the outward trappings of status came increasingly to the fore. Livia had always been a principal beneficiary of the climate of adulation that Augustus had done so much to create, and which Tiberius despised ("a strong contempt for honours", Tacitus, Annals 4.37). In AD 24, typically, whenever she attended the theatre, a seat among the Vestals was reserved for her (Annals 4.16), and this may have been intended more as an honour for the Vestals than for her (cf. Ovid, Tristia, 4.2.13f, Epist.Ex Ponto 4.13.29f).

Livia played a vital role in the formation of her children Tiberius and Drusus. Attention focuses on her part in the divorce of her first husband, father of Tiberius, in 39/38 BC. It would be interesting to know her role in this, as well as in Tiberius’ divorce of Vipsania in 12 BC at Augustus' insistence: whether it was merely neutral or passive, or whether she actively colluded in Caesar’s wishes. The first divorce left Tiberius a fosterchild at the house of Octavian; the second left Tiberius with a lasting emotional scar, since he had been forced to abandon the woman he loved for dynastic considerations. Ancient testimonies are lacking, but it may well be that Tiberius’ deep-seated antipathy towards Livia is rooted in these two events.


[edit] Livia in literature and popular culture

[edit] Livia in ancient literature
In Tacitus' The Annals of Imperial Rome, Livia is depicted as having great influence, to the extent where she "had the aged Augustus firmly under control — so much so that he exiled his only surviving grandson to the island of Planasia".

Livia's image appears in ancient visual media such as coins and portraits. She was the first woman to appear on provincial coins in 16 BC and her portrait images can be chronologically identified partially from the progression of her hair designs, which represented more than keeping up with the fashions of the time as her depiction with such contemporary details translated into a political statement of representing the ideal Roman woman. Livia's image evolves with different styles of portraiture that trace her effect on imperial propaganda that helped bridge the gap between her role as wife to the emperor Augustus, to mother of the emperor Tiberius. Becoming more than the "beautiful woman" she is described as in ancient texts, Livia serves as a public image for the idealization of Roman feminine qualities, a motherly figure, and eventually a goddess like representation that alludes to her virtue. Livia's power in symbolizing the renewal of the Republic with the female virtues Pietas and Concordia in public displays had a dramatic effect on the visual representation of future imperial women as ideal, honorable mothers and wives of Rome. [3]


[edit] Livia in modern literature
In the popular fictional work I, Claudius by Robert Graves, Livia is portrayed as a thoroughly wicked, scheming political mastermind. Devoted to bringing Tiberius to power and then maintaining him there, she is involved in nearly every death or disgrace in the Julio-Claudian family up to the time of her death. In the 1976 BBC television series based on the book, Livia was played by Siân Phillips.

Livia is also dramatized in the HBO/BBC series Rome. Introduced in the 2007 episode A Necessary Fiction, Livia (Alice Henley) soon catches the eye of young Octavian, who has never been married or fathered any children. Historically, of course, Octavian had already been married to and divorced Clodia Pulchra by this time, and was married to a pregnant Scribonia. Rome does acknowledge the existence of Livia's child, Tiberius Nero, by her first husband, but not that she was pregnant with Nero Claudius Drusus when she met Octavian. Livia is portrayed as deceptively submissive in public, while in private she possesses an iron will, and a gift for political scheming that matches Atia's.

Livia appears in Neil Gaiman's comic "Distant Mirrors - August" collected in The Sandman: Fables and Reflections.

In John Maddox Roberts's short story "The King of Sacrifices," set in his SPQR series, Livia hires Decius Metellus to investigate the murder of one of Julia's lovers.


[edit] Notes
^ E. Groag, A. Stein, L. Petersen - e.a. (edd.), Prosopographia Imperii Romani saeculi I, II et III (PIR), Berlin, 1933 - L 301
^ For Livia's portraiture and representations, see: Rolf Winkes, Livia, Octavia, Iulia- Porträts und Darstellungen-, Archaeologia Transatlantica XIII, Louvain-la-Neuve and Providence, 1995.
^ I Claudia II: Women in Roman art and society. Edited by Diana E. E. Kleiner and Susan B. Matheson Yale University Art Gallery. Austin: University of Texas Press, 2000.

[edit] See also
Julio-Claudian family tree

[edit] External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to:
Livia DrusillaAs goddess and priestess of Demeter
Portraits of Livia
Livia: Love and Politics (in spanish)
Preceded by
None Empress of Rome
37 BC - AD 14 Succeeded by
Livia Orestilla


wtf 4:565

[4982] b Abt 60 BC, d 29 AD, marr 38 BC

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]