== Notes for [[Item:Q116760|Q116760]] ==

-https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mar%C3%ADa_Rodr%C3%ADguez_(hija_del_Cid)_

---------

-https://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/CastilNob.htm#MariaRodriquezM1PedroAragon

(c) MARÍA [Sol] Rodríguez (-[4 Aug 1104/before 1 Nov 1106]). The "Corónicas" Navarras name "dona Cristiana…dona Maria" as the two daughters of "este meo Çid" and his wife, stating that María married "el conte de Barçalona"[410]. Her supposed first marriage is indicated by the Cantar de mio cid which records the annulment of the marriages of “los infantes de Carrión” and “Ruy Díaz...mis hijas...doña Elvira y doña Sol” upon which negotiations took place for their marriages “con los de Navarra y Aragón”[411]. The date of death of her supposed first husband appears incompatible with the date of the first charter in which she appears with her [second] husband. Unless further primary source information comes to light, María´s supposed first marriage should be treated with caution. Ramon Berenguer and his wife Maria granted property to a vassal by charter dated 1103[412]. Ramon Berenguer and his wife Maria donated property to the church of San Adrian "inmediata al rio Besós" by charter dated 4 Aug 1104[413].

'''[m''' firstly (1098) Infante don PEDRO de Aragon y Navarra, son of PEDRO I King of Aragon and Navarre & his first wife Agnès d'Aquitaine (-1 Feb 1104, bur 18 Aug 1104 San Juan de la Peña[414]).''']'''

'''m''' [secondly] ([1104]) as his first wife, RAMÓN BERENGUER III "el Grande" Conde de Barcelona, son of RAMÓN BERENGUER II "Cap d'Estopes" Conde de Barcelona & his wife Mathilde di Apulia (11 Nov 1082-19 Jul 1131).

-------
El Cid

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Together El Cid and Jimena had three children. Their daughters Cristina and María both married high nobility; Cristina to Ramiro, Lord of Monzón, grandson of García Sánchez III of Navarre via an illegitimate son; María, first (it is said) to a prince of Aragon (presumably the son of Peter I) and second to Ramón Berenguer III, count of Barcelona.

Peter, was wed to María Rodríguez, a daughter of El Cid, in 1098, a marriage celebrated in the Cantar de mio Cid and subsequent literature.


Referencia: 1887

Modificación: 29 noviembre 2008 14:30:30

Lineage Sources:
Cokayne's Complete Peerage of England, Vol. 4, pp. 267-278; Vol. 5,
pp. 305-320.
Allstrom's Dict. of Royal Lineage, Vol. 1, pp. 133-140, 169-177; Vol.2,
pp. 618-621.
Betham's Charts of Royal Houses of Europe, DCXIV, CCXXXIII and IV.
Williams' Historians' History of the World, Vol. 10, p. 58.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]