== Notes for [[Item:Q88814|Q88814]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ashurnasirpal_I
--------------------
Ashurnasirpal IFrom Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Ashur-nasir-pal I) Jump to: navigation, search Aššur-nāṣir-apli I, inscribed maš-šur-PAB-A, “the god Aššur is the protector of the heir,” was the king of Assyria, 1049–1031 BC, and the 92nd to appear on the Assyrian Kinglist. He was the son and successor of Šamši-Adad IV, and he ruled for 19 years[i 1] during a troubled period of Assyrian history, marked by famine and war with nomads from the deserts to the west. He is best known for his penitential prayer to Ištar of Nineveh.

[edit] BiographyAccording to a royal hymn composed in his honor, he was born “in the mountains that nobody knows,” suggesting he may have been born in exile, or perhaps a literary device, as it continues: “I was without understanding and I prayed not of your majesty.” It relates that, when Ištar appointed him to the kingship, he had restored her overthrown cult. Known from a single copy from the library of Ashurbanipal, it includes a plea to the goddess to restore him to health from the sickness that afflicted him, citing his temple-restoration, and devotions, to persuade her. It addresses Ištar of Nineveh, and Ištar of Arbil, as though they were separate deities.[1] A second, fragmentary literary prayer thanks her for her favor.[2]

A single short brick-inscription comes from his palace in Assur,[i 2] which was located between the south-west front of the ziggurat and the Anu-Adad temple. The White Obelisk[i 3] is sometimes attributed to him by historians, but more usually to his later namesake, Aššur-nāṣir-apli II, because its internal content (hunting, military campaigns, etc.) better matches what is known about his reign.[3] The Synchronistic Kinglist[i 4] gives his Babylonian counterpart as Kaššu-nādin-aḫi (ca 1006–1004 BC), but probably only for stylistic purposes as there seems to have been no recorded contact between the kingdoms during this period.[4]

He was succeeded by his son, Šalmanu-ašaredu II, who mentions him in one of his own inscriptions[i 5] and later by another son, the long-reigning Aššur-rabi II.

[edit] Inscriptions1.^ Khorsabad Kinglist, tablet IM 60017 (excavation nos.: DS 828, DS 32-54), iv 5. 2.^ RIMA 2 A.0.92.1:1. 3.^ White Obelisk, BM 118807. 4.^ Synchronistic Kinglist, Ass 14616c (KAV 216), iii 4. 5.^ RIMA 2 A.0.93.1:4. [edit] References1.^ W.G. Lambert. "Ištar of Nineveh". Iraq 66: 35–39. 2.^ S. Fischer (1998). "Aššur-naṣir-apli I". In K. Radner. The Prosopography of the Neo-Assyrian Empire, Volume 1, Part I: A. The Neo-Assyrian Text Corpus Project. pp. 204–205. 3.^ D. J. Wiseman (1975). "XXXI: Assyria & Babylonia 1200–1000 BC". In I. E. S. Edwards, C. J. Gadd, N. G. L. Hammond, S. Solberger. The Cambridge Ancient History, Volume II, Part 2, History of the Middle East and the Aegean Region, 1380–1000 BC. Cambridge University Press. pp. 469–470. 4.^ J. A. Brinkman (1968). A Political History of Post Kassite Babylonia, 1158–722 BC. Pontificium Institutum Biblicum. p. 29.

Preceded by Šamši-Adad IV King of Assyria 1050–1031 BCE Succeeded by Šalmanu-ašaredu II [show]v ·t ·eAssyrian kings

Early Bronze Age "Kings who lived in tents" ca. 2500 – 2000 BC Tudiya ·Adamu ·Yangi ·Suhlamu ·Harharu ·Mandaru ·Imsu ·Harsu ·Didanu ·Hana ·Zuabu ·Nuabu ·Abazu ·Belu ·Azarah ·Ushpia ·Apiashal

"Kings who were forefathers" ca. 2000 BC Apiashal ·Hale ·Samani ·Hayani ·Ilu-Mer ·Yakmesi ·Yakmeni ·Yazkur-el ·Ila-kabkaba ·Aminu

"Kings whose eponyms are destroyed" ca. 2000 – 1900 BC Sulili ·Kikkia ·Akiya ·Puzur-Ashur I ·Shallim-ahhe ·Ilushuma

Middle Bronze Age Old Assyrian period ca. 1906 – 1380 BC Erishum I ·Ikunum ·Sargon I ·Puzur-Ashur II ·Naram-Suen ·Erishum II ·Shamshi-Adad I ·Ishme-Dagan I ·Mut-Ashkur ·Rimush ·Asinum ·(Seven usurpers: Ashur-dugul ·Ashur-apla-idi ·Nasir-Sin ·Sin-namir ·Ipqi-Ishtar ·Adad-salulu ·Adasi) ·Bel-bani ·Libaya ·Sharma-Adad I ·Iptar-Sin ·Bazaya ·Lullaya ·Shu-Ninua ·Sharma-Adad II ·Erishum III ·Shamshi-Adad II ·Ishme-Dagan II ·Shamshi-Adad III ·Ashur-nirari I ·Puzur-Ashur III ·Enlil-nasir I ·Nur-ili ·Ashur-shaduni ·Ashur-rabi I ·Ashur-nadin-ahhe I ·Enlil-nasir II ·Ashur-nirari II ·Ashur-bel-nisheshu ·Ashur-rim-nisheshu ·Ashur-nadin-ahhe II

Late Bronze Age Middle Assyrian period ca. 1353 – 1180 BC Eriba-Adad I ·Ashur-uballit I ·Enlil-nirari ·Arik-den-ili ·Adad-nirari I ·Shalmaneser I ·Tukulti-Ninurta I ·Ashur-nadin-apli ·Ashur-nirari III ·Enlil-kudurri-usur ·Ninurta-apal-Ekur

Iron Age Middle Assyrian period ca. 1179 – 912 BC Ashur-Dan I ·Ninurta-tukulti-Ashur ·Mutakkil-nusku ·Ashur-resh-ishi I ·Tiglath-Pileser I ·Asharid-apal-Ekur ·Ashur-bel-kala ·Eriba-Adad II ·Shamshi-Adad IV ·Ashur-nasir-pal I ·Shalmaneser II ·Ashur-nirari IV ·Ashur-rabi II ·Ashur-resh-ishi II ·Tiglath-Pileser II ·Ashur-Dan II

Neo-Assyrian Empire ca. 912 – 609 BC Adad-nirari II ·Tukulti-Ninurta II ·Ashur-nasir-pal II ·Shalmaneser III ·Shamshi-Adad V ·Shammu-ramat (regent) ·Adad-nirari III ·Shalmaneser IV ·Ashur-Dan III ·Ashur-nirari V ·Tiglath-Pileser III ·Shalmaneser V ·Sargon II ·Sennacherib ·Esarhaddon ·Ashurbanipal ·Ashur-etil-ilani ·Sin-shumu-lishir ·Sin-shar-ishkun ·Ashur-uballit II

Persondata Name Ashurnasirpal 01 Alternative names Short description Date of birth Place of birth Date of death Place of death Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ashurnasirpal_I&oldid=539650652" Help improve this pageWhat's this?What's this?× Wikipedia would like to hear what you think of this article. Share your feedback with the editors – and help improve this page. Learn more >>

Did you find what you were looking for? Yes, I found what I was looking for.Yes No, I did not find what I was looking for.No

Please post helpful feedback. By posting, you agree to transparency under these terms.

Post your feedback Categories: Assyrian kings11th-century BC rulersHidden categories: WikiProject Ancient Near East articlesPersondata templates without short description parameter

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ashur-nasir-pal_I

Ashurnasirpal I
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.

Ashurnasirpal I was king of Assyria from 1050 BCE to 1031 BCE. Ashurnasirpal ruled during a troubled period of Assyrian history, marked by famine and war with nomads from the deserts to the west. He succeeded his father Shamshi-Adad IV and was succeeded by his son Shalmaneser II. He was also the father of a later king, Ashur-rabi II.

Preceded by:
Shamshi-Adad IV King of Assyria
1050–1031 BCE Succeeded by:
Shalmaneser II

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
66F2940D2102D1EFBBE49822EF79916C9A85
geni:6000000002517277135

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]