== Notes for [[Item:Q105681|Q105681]] ==

From ''Banu Hanifah'' Tribe.

* Wilaadat (Birth):
* Wafaat (Death):

Source 1: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Khawlah_bint_Ja%27far

Source 2: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Family_tree_of_Ali

Source 3: http://www.balaghah.net/books/imam_ali/body_family_of_i1.html

Source 4: http://www.janathimessage.co.uk/AskTheImam/askimama.asp?qno=465

Source 5: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Muhammad_ibn_al-Hanafiyyah
--------------------
Khawlah bint Ja'far al-Hanafiyyah (Arabic: خولة بنت جعفر الحنفية‎) was one of the wives of imam Ali.

She was known as Hanafiyyah after her tribe Banu Hanifah. When people of Yamamah were declared apostates and were treasoneas for refusing to pay zakat (religious tax) to Abu Bakr and threatening the integrity of the emerging empire. They were killed and their women-folk were brought to Medina as slave girls, this woman also came to Medina with them. When her tribesmen came to know it they approached Ali ibn Abu Talib and requested him to save her from the blemish of slavery and protect her family’s honor and prestige.[citation needed] Consequently, Ali ibn Abu Talib set her free after purchasing and married her where after Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah was born.

Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah (Muhammad Akbar) was born in Medina about 633 CE (though also said to be during Umar's era), the third of Ali's sons. He was called Ibn al-Hanafiyyah after his mother, Khawlah bint Ja'far; she was known as Hanafiyyah, "the Hanafi woman", after her tribe Banu Hanifah.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000008717717838

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]