== Notes for [[Item:Q83640|Q83640]] ==

'''
=Marcus Vitorius Marcellus=
'''

Marcus Vitorius Marcellus or Vitorius Marcellus (c. 60 - aft. 105) was a Roman Senator and a man of consular rank who lived in the 1st century and 2nd century. His father was probably named Gaius Vitorius and little is known on his origins.

Marcellus was a friend of teacher Quintilian and poet Statius. Marcellus is mentioned in the writings of Quintilian and Statius. In Quintilian’s letters to Marcellus, Quintilian speaks of Marcellus as a man who loves letters and someone who cherishes his friendships with others.

Statius dedicated his fourth book of Silvae to Marcellus. In 79-86 Silvae 4.4, Statius is writing the Silvae from Campania, Statius tells Marcellus about the damage that Mount Vesuvius has caused from its eruption. Statius tells Marcellus that the region and land has not completely recovered from the terrible eruption. Statius writes that crops have not recovered, the mountain spews forth its wrath and many cities have disappeared beneath the lava. Mount Vesuvius erupted on August 24, 79; among the cities that were destroyed from the eruption was Pompeii.

Between 94-96, Marcellus was in Rome and was in charged of overseeing the construction of the road in Rome to improve the public access towards in and out of the city. Then Statius, lived in retirement at the bay of Naples. In Silvae 4.4.34, Statius is writing to him in the summer and while Marcellus is overseeing the road construction in Rome, Statius urges Marcellus to stop working over summer in Rome and take a holiday. He states to Marcellus ‘that excellent qualities will be greater achieved after relaxation‘.

Marcellus was Consul in 60 and Consul Suffectus in 105. Marcellus married Hosidia, born c. 65, the daughter of Roman Senator and General Gaius or Gnaeus Hosidius Geta. Hosidia and Marcellus had a son called Gaius Vitorius Hosidius Geta and a daughter called Vitoria, born around 85, who married Lucius Septimius Severus (c. 70-aft. 110), a Roman Eques who might be the wealthy equestrian that is highly commemorated by the Flavian dynasty poet Statius, by whom she had Publius Septimius Geta.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Vitorius_Marcellus

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]