== Notes for [[Item:Q100097|Q100097]] ==

Bādīs abū mannad nāṣir al-dawla, son and successor of al-Manṣūr, a prince of the Zīrid dynasty, succeeded his father on the 3. Rabīʿ I. 386 (26 March 996), as governor of Ifrīḳīya and Central Mag̲h̲rib.

His accession was confirmed by his suzerain al-Ḥākim bi-amriʾllāh the Fāṭimid Caliph of Egypt. He continued the war against the Zanāta and after entrusting the government of Tāhert (Tagdemt) to his uncle Ittūweft he sent against Zīrī b. ʿAṭya, sovereign of Fās, his other uncle Ḥammād who was defeated at Amsār.

Bādīs then advanced in person and his adversary retired before him but while the former was occupied in the West, Falfūl b. Saʿīd, governor of Ṭobna, rebelled against him and with him Māksin and Zāwī the grand-uncles of Bādis, whom Bādīs had offended by his preferment of younger relatives in filling the offices of state.

Māksin and Zāwī were defeated by Ḥammād in 391 (1001), Zāwī fled to Spain where he founded the Zīrid dynasty of Granada. Meanwhile Bādīs had overtaken Falfūl, who, after besieging Bāg̲h̲āi (Bāg̲h̲aya) in vain,had turned his attention to Ḳairawān, and defeated him at Wādī Ag̲h̲lān (10 Ḏh̲u ’l-Ḳaʿda 389 = 22 Oct. 999).

Falfūl fled through the desert and found refuge in Tripoli where he died in 400 ¶ (1009-1010). Bādīs then marched against this town and received the submission of Warrū, brother and successor of Falful. While these events were taking place, Ḥammād founder of the Ḳalʿat of the Banū Ḥammād, had rebelled in anger at being deprived of the governorships of Tid̲j̲is and Constautine.

Bādīs put himself at the head of an expedition against him and defeated him on the borders of the S̲h̲alif, whereupon Ḥammād having lost army and treasure, succeeded in fleeing to the fortress (al-Ḳalʿat) which he had built. He was saved by the death of Bādīs which took place in the night of the 29th or 30th of Ḏh̲u ’l-Ḳaʿda 406 (9th or 10th May 1016).

Badis had a Jewish friend, ''Abū Isḥāq Ibrāhīm Ibn ʿAṭāʾ'' ('''Abraham ben Nathan''') was leader of Qayrawanese Jewry in the first third of the eleventh century. He was a member of a wealthy elite that included the Ben Berekhiah, Tahertī, and Ibn al-Majjānī families. His father, Nathan, may have been a communal official, although this is not clear. He was a major supporter of the academy (bet midrash) in Qayrawan and was also a generous contributor to the Babylonian yeshivot, particularly to the Sura yeshiva, the renewal of which he helped to finance. Ibn ʿAṭāʾ served as court physician to the Zirid amirs Bādis (r. 996–1016) and al-Muʿizz (r. 1016–1062) in al-Mahdiyya. Due to his access to the ruler, Abraham ben Nathan bore the honorific title ''rosh kol ha-qehillot'' (Heb. head of all the congregations). In late 1015, Ibn ʿAṭāʾ received the title of negid ha-gola (Heb. nagid of the exile) from Hay Gaon of the Pumbedita yeshiva. He was the first Diaspora leader to hold this exalted title. According to a letter in the Cairo Geniza (Bodl MS Heb. D 65, f.9), he was on a military campaign with Bādis when word of the title arrived. http://www.geni.com/people/Abu-Is%E1%B8%A5%C4%81q-Ibrahim-Sahl-ibn-al-Nag-hd%C4%ABlah-ibn-Ata-al-yah%C5%ABd%C4%AB/6000000014632605003

(René Basset)

Bibliography

Ibn Ad̲h̲ārī, Hist, de l’Afrique et de l’Espagne, i. 255—261

269—278 (transl, into French by Fagnan, i. 361—371; 382—397)

Ibn al-At̲h̲īr, Chronicon (ed. Tornberg), ix. 89 et seq.

107—no

172—179

Ibn Ḵh̲aldūn, Kitāb al-ʿIbar, vi. 197 et seq.

vii. 40 et seq.

the same, Hist, des Berbers (ed. de Slane), i. 202 et seq., 221 et seq., 232

ii. 46 et seq., 55, 58

(transl, into French by de Slane), ii. 16 et seq., 43 et seq., 59 et seq.

iii. 247 et seq., 260—265

Müller, Islam, ii. 619, 621

Mercier, Hist, de l’Afrique septentr., i. (Paris, 1888), 383 et seq., 388—395.

Citation Basset, René. " Bādīs." Encyclopaedia of Islam, First Edition (1913-1936). Brill Online , 2013. Reference. Jim Harlow. 30 January 2013 <http://referenceworks.brillonline.com/entries/encyclopaedia-of-islam-1/badis-SIM_1103>

Badis ibn Mansur (Arabic: باديس بن منصور‎) (died 1016) was the third ruler of the Zirids in Ifriqiya (995–1016). Badis ibn Mansur succeeded his father Al-Mansur ibn Buluggin (984–995) as viceroy of Ifriqiya. He stayed very close to his overlords, the Fatimids of Egypt,[1] on account of a power struggle amongst the Zirids - his right to rule was challenged by his great-uncle Zawi ibn Ziri, who was ultimately driven into Andalusia where he founded the Zirid dynasty of Granada (1012–1090).

More serious was the challenge posed by his uncle Hammad ibn Buluggin, who as governor of Algeria was building up his power and had established his own residence at Bejaia - ultimately, in 1014, the Hammadids separated from the Zirids. In the ensuing struggle the Zirids received no support from the Fatimids, and were forced to concede the independence of the breakaway dynasty.

Badis was succeeded by Al-Muizz ibn Badis.

Notes

1. Talbi (1970) notes that he sent the poet ar-Raqiq on a diplomatic mission to Cairo. [edit]References

Talbi, Mohammed. (1970). A propos d'Ibn al-Raqīq'. Arabica vol. 19 p. 86-96.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Badis_ibn_Mansur

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD7BA8671EFBBFA9822EF79916CD1FA
geni:6000000019227370994

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]