== Notes for [[Item:Q106863|Q106863]] ==

== Wikipedia ==

'''Nāʾila bint al-Furāfiṣa''' (Arabic: نائلة بنت الفرافصة‎‎) was the wife of Uthman, the third Caliph of the Islamic Empire. She was born into a Christian family in Kufa but was converted to Islam by Aisha. In 28 AH (649 CE), she married Uthman, who had succeeded to the Caliphate in 644.

In 656, after growing discontent with his rule, rebels besieged Uthman in his home in Medina. Ali ibn Abu Talib had earlier rescued Uthman from similar situation on his promise to address complaints made by public. Marwan ibn Al Hakam, however manipulated the situation and thwarted Uthman from correcting the wrongdoings. The Caliph, now about 80 years old, this time pleaded for help from his governors but no help arrived in time. After 49 days, the rebels broke in with the intention of killing Uthman. Naila attempted to save her husband, but in raising her left hand to stop a sword falling on him, merely had her fingers cut off.Uthman was martyred as he read the Qur'an, supposedly while reading the verse (2:137) "And Allah will suffice you for defense against them. He is the Hearer, the Knower."[1]

Later, after Uthman's death, she remained a widow and did not marry again. Muawiya asked her to marry him twice (it was common for Arabs to marry widows). For the first time she refused verbally and on the second, in reply to his letter she sent along two front teeth of hers which she had broken deliberately signaling that she was no longer beautiful and Muawiya should not ask of her again.[2]

References Edit

^ David Cook (15 January 2007). Martyrdom in Islam. Cambridge University Press. pp. 49–. ISBN 978-1-316-58308-1.
^ Guthrie, Shirley (2013). Arab Women in the Middle Ages: Private Lives and Public Roles. Saqi. ISBN 9780863567643. Retrieved 24 September 2017.

https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Na%27ila_bint_al-Furafisa Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Naila_(Calipha)

== Children ==

"Na'ila bore 'Uthman at least four daughters, Maryam (al-Sughra), Umm Khalid, Arwa, Uma Aban (al-Sughra), and perhaps a fifth one, Umm al-Banin. The mother of the latter was Na'ila according to al-Waqidi, but according to Ibn Sa'd, a concubine (''umm walad''). An isolated report of Hisham al-Kalbi that 'Uthman also had a son, 'Anbasa, by Na'ila is probably unreliable. (Wilferd Madelung, [https://books.google.com/books?id=2QKBUwBUWWkC&pg=PA367&lpg=PA367&dq=Na%27ila+uthman&source=bl&ots=eQIOrUZJgE&sig=jBYL-CxEfC0l4_PDQxHrfS6QjIE&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjq4Pu1zbrbAhUR-58KHU_2AT0Q6AEIhwEwCQ#v=onepage&q=Na'ila%20uthman&f=false ''The Succession to Muhammad: A Study of the Early Caliphate''] (1998), p. 367.)

---

Given name also spelled '''Naylah'''

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]