== Notes for [[Item:Q107563|Q107563]] ==

* [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ibrahim_al-Mujab Ibrahim al-Mujab] Wikipedia

'''Sayyid Ibrāhīm ibn Muḥammad ibn Musā al-Kādhi'''m (Arabic: إبْرَاهِيم بْنِ مُحَمَّد بْنِ مُوسَى الكَاظِمْ‎) also known as Ibrahim al-Mujab and al-Dharir al-Kufi, was the son of Muhammad al-Abid, and grandson of Musa al-Kadhim, the seventh Twelver Shia Imam. He was the first Alid to settle in Karbala, where he died, and was buried in the Imam Husayn shrine.

al-Mujab has many descendants that are known today by various names. Al Faiz is the only line of his that remained in Karbala until this day, since he settled in 861. As for his other descendants, most of them emigrated to other cities and countries, some of them are known today as Al Qazwini, Al Hamami, Al Sabziwari, and Al Khirsan. It is also reported, that al-Sharif al-Radhi and al-Murtadha are descendants of al-Mujab.

=Biography=
The date and place of al-Mujab's birth are unknown.

al-Mujab migrated from Kufa to Karbala in 861, after the Abbasid caliph al-Mutawakkil was killed at the hands of his son, al-Muntasir. al-Muntasir was more merciful towards the Shias, and sympathetic with the Alids, allowing them to freely visit the grave of Husayn.

al-Mujab became the first custodian of the Husayn and Abbas shrines.

It is reported that when al-Mujab entered the shrine of Husayn, he called, "Peace be upon you, O' father" to which he received an answer from the grave in a loud voice; "and with you be peace, O' my son"; and thus, became known as al-mujab, meaning "the answered one".

One of his descendants recorded the incident in poetry, stating:

مِـنْ أيْـنَ لِلْنَــاسِ مِثْــلُ جَـدِّي مُــوْسَــى أَوْ اِبْـنُ اِبْنِهِ المُجَابْ إذْ خَاطَبَ السِبْطُ وَهُوَ رِمْسُ جَــــاوَبَـــهُ أَكْـــــــرَمَ الجَــــــوَابْ‎

From where do the people have the like of my grandfather; Musa, or the son of his son, al-Mujab. As he greeted the grandson [of the prophet] whilst in his tomb, and he replied with the most honourable reply.

=Death and resting place=
al-Mujab died in Karbala, in 912. He was buried in the grand courtyard of the Husayn shrine.

In 1804, al-Mujab's grave and rawaq (hallway) were added to the north west side of the Husayn shrine's precinct, under the supervision of the shrines' custodian at the time, Jawad Nasrallah, as part of an expansion of the Husayn shrine.

The cage above his grave was renewed in 2013, by the Iranian association responsible for religious sites in Iraq.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000000901499236

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]