== Notes for [[Item:Q114771|Q114771]] ==

* [NAVA261] Jimeno Garcez of Navarre m. ?
>* [ALAV271] Count Vela Jimenez of Alava m. ?
>>* [ALAV281] Nuno Velaz m. ?
>>>* [ALAV293] Vela Nunez m. Todile Nunez
>>>>* [ALAV303] Jimena Velaz m. [GUND291] Count Piniolo Gundemariz
>>>* [ALAV291] Count Vermudo Nunez of Cea m1. Argilo
>>>>* [ALAV302] Froiloba Vermudez de Cea m. [LOIS301] Munio Flainiz
>>>>* [ALAV301] Count Fernando Vermudez of Cea m. [SALD302] Countess Elvira Diaz
>>>>>* [ALAV312] Justa Fernandez m. [LOIS311] Count Flain Munoz
>>>>>* [ALAV313] Gotina Fernandez m. [RODP311] Count Pelayo Rodrigez
>>>>>* [ALAV314] Jimena Fernandez de Cea m. [NAVA311] King Garcia II Sanchez of Navarre

38. [ALAV271] Vela Jimenez (born c.834, son of [NAVA261] Jimeno Garcez, see NAVARRE (HOUSE OF JIMENO) KINGDOM), Count of Alava.

37. [ALAV281] Nuno Velaz. He died c.926.

36. [ALAV293] Vela Nunez (born c.900, son of Nuno Velaz) married Todile Nunez. He died 945.

35. [ALAV303] Jimena Velaz (daughter of Vela Nunez) possibly married [GUND291] Count Piniolo (see PINIOLO GUNDEMARIZ below).

36. [ALAV291] Vermudo Nunez (son of Nuno Velaz), Count of Cea, married 1. Argilo; then 2. (c.946-49) Velasquite Velsaquez (daughter of Vela Nunez).

35. [ALAV302] Froiloba Vermudez (daughter of Vermudo [& Argilo]) married (before 947) [LOIS301] Munio Flainiz (see LOIS).

35. [ALAV301] Count Fernando Vermudez of Cea (son of Vermudo & Argilo) married [SALD302] Countess Elvira Diaz (see SALDANA COUNTY).

34. [ALAV312] Justa Fernandez (daughter of Fernando) married (before 975) her first-cousin [LOIS311] Flain Munoz (see LOIS).

34. [ALAV313] Gotina Fernandez (daughter of Fernando) married [RODP311] Count Pelayo Rodrigez (see below).

34. [ALAV314] Jemima Fernandez (daughter of Fernando) married [NAVA311] King Garcia II Sanchez (see NAVARRE (HOUSE OF JIMENO) KINGDOM).

in: ALAVA COUNTY <http://mauriceboddy.org.uk/Alava.htm>

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]