== Notes for [[Item:Q3028|Q3028]] ==

Arrived to the New World with Christopher Columbus in the Gallega on his [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voyages_of_Christopher_Columbus#Fourth_voyage 4th voyage in 1502] that attempted to circumnavigate the world for the first time. He submitted his enrollment into the ship's crew in Seville on March 15 of 1502.

Columbus called this voyage his greatest and most challenging one. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?list=PL687D5606DCB2A5D2&v=J7GF2wuFi0o "Columbus:The Lost Voyage"]

After surviving the voyage, Garcia de Polanco was one of the 38 men that decided to stay in La Hispaniola instead of returning to Spain.

It is uncertain whether he died in the Island of Santo Domingo or if he stayed there continuously without returning to Spain at some point.

Leon Guerrero, Montserrat. [https://dialnet.unirioja.es/descarga/articulo/2756103.pdf "Los Pasajeros del Cuarto Viaje de Colon"]. Page 12

Varela, Consuelo. [https://en.calameo.com/read/000345214714aaffd6a3e "Cristobal Colon y la Construccion del Nuevo Mundo"] Pages 417, 427, 437

Gil, Juan [https://estudiosamericanos.revistas.csic.es/index.php/estudiosamericanos/article/view/160/164 "Las cuentas del cuarto viaje de Cristóbal Colón"] Pages 618, 632


Fernandez Navarrete, Martin. [https://books.google.se/books?id=mpJYAAAAMAAJ&pg=PA294&dq=Fernandez+Navarrete+Garc%C3%ADa+Polanco&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwi5iuuq0ZHjAhUKdJoKHRDPAukQ6AEITzAF#v=onepage&q=Fernandez%20Navarrete%20Garc%C3%ADa%20Polanco&f=false "Coleccion de los viajes y descubrimientos...Tomo I"] Page 294

Esteves Volckers, Guillermo (1964). [http://catalogo.academiadominicanahistoria.org.do/opac-tmpl/files/clio/Clio_1964_No_121.pdf "Los primeros pobladores de Santo Domingo" (PDF). CLIO No. 121]. page 7.

Arranz Marquez, Luis. [https://books.google.se/books?id=hEMYAAAAYAAJ&dq=repartimiento+de+alburquerque+de+1514&focus=searchwithinvolume&q=Polanco "El Repartimiento de Alburquerque de 1514: Villa Buenaventura"]. Fundacion Garcia Arvelo. p. 544

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051ADAAA9B51EFBBFA9822EF79916CB908
geni:6000000064525921950


[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]