== Notes for [[Item:Q79509|Q79509]] ==

"The ''Historia Augusta'' reports [http://www.geni.com/people/Claudius-II-Roman-Emperor/4948565574310041717 Claudius] and [http://www.geni.com/people/Quintillus-Roman-Emperor/6000000003645877176 Quintillus] having another brother named Crispus and through him a niece. Said niece Claudia reportedly married Eutropius and was mother to [http://www.geni.com/people/Constantius-I-Chlorus-Roman-Emperor/6000000002120145230 Constantius Chlorus]. Historians however suspect this account to be a genealogical fabrication with the purpose to link Constantine I family to the one of another emperor." In other versions, she was the daughter of the Emperor Commodus and his wife Brutia Crispina.

https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/C%C3%B3modo

https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brutia_Crispina

https://www.geni.com/people/Commodus-Roman-Emperor/6000000000700903993?through=6000000002005998997
* http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Claudius_II

https://www.geni.com/people/Marcus-Aurelius-Rohttps://www.geni.com/people/Commodus-Roman-Emperor/6000000000700903993?through=6000000002005998997 /6000000002006109656?through=6000000003645864052 https://www.geni.com/people/Annia-Galeria-Faustina-Minor-Roman-Empress/6000000002005998997?through=6000000002006109656 https://fabpedigree.com/s040/f005237.htm https://fabpedigree.com/s082/f010474.htm https://www.geni.com/people/Antoninus-Pius-Roman-Emperor/6000000000700895484?through=6000000012773904209 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antoninus_Pius https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/C%C3%B3modo https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brutia_Crispina https://www.geni.com/people/Bruttia-Crispina-Crispina/6000000001637778769?through=6000000000700903993
Notas



http://www.shocking.com/~gregbard/genealogy/fam01752.php

Alternate Data, omitted during merge of 12/2/09:

Birth Date(s): 203, 218

--------------------

•ID: I66368

•Name: Claudia Crispina Illyria

•Given Name: Claudia Crispina

•Surname: Illyria

•Name: Claudia CRISPINA

•Given Name: Claudia

•Surname: CRISPINA

•Sex: F

•_UID: EFE0CEC6FDB26E49B47A2858EB895AA1E6FB

•Change Date: 3 Oct 2005

•Birth: ABT 192

•Birth: ABT 230

•Death: deceased

Father: MARCUS @@ AURELIUS COMMODUS ANTONIUS OF ROME b: 161

Mother: Brutia Crispina b: ABT 186

Marriage 1 Flavius Eutropius of the Gordiani b: 218

•Married:

Children

1. Gaius Flavius Valerius Constantius b: 31 MAR 250

2. Eutropia Crispina of Rome b: ABT 235

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I66368

--------------------

ALIA: CLAUDIA (NOTES) (L) /CRISPINA/

•Birth: BET 192 AND 230 1 2

•Note:

SOME SOURCES SAY CLAUDIA'S PARENTS WERE MARCUS (NOTE)AURELIUS COMMODUS ANTONIUS (L) ROME AND BRUTIA OR BRUTTIA (NOTES) (L) CRISPINA.

OTHER POSSIBLE PARENTS ARE SHOWN BELOW BUT THIS INDIVIDUAL IS NOT SHOWN AS A CHILD ON THE FOLLOWING POSSIBLE PARENTS' FAMILY PAGES, TO DO SO WOULD BE CONSIDERED ERRORS BY THIS PROGRAM. EVEN THOUGH THESE LAST POSSIBLE PARENTS MAY BE THE CORRECT ONES, SHOWING MORE THAN ONE SET OF PARENTS COULD CAUSE MY "FAMILY TREE" PROGRAM TO MALFUNCTION.

OTHER SOURCES SAY HER PARENTS WERE FLAVIUS (NOTES) (L) CRISPUS AND AURELIA (NOTES) POMEIANA (L) POMPEIANUS.

ALSO, VARIOUS SOURCES SHOW CLAUDIA MARRIED TO ONE OR ANOTHER OF TWO MEN NAMED EUTROPIUS. AS THEY HAVE DIFFERENT ANCESTRY, I SHOW THEM BOTH AS HER HUSBANDS HERE. I MAY BE WRONG. PERHAPS SHE ONLY MARRIED ONE EUTROPIUS.

Father: MARCUS (NOTE)AURELIUS COMMODUS ANTONIUS (L) ROME b: BET 31 AUG 161 AND 214

Mother: BRUTIA OR BRUTTIA (NOTES) (L) CRISPINA b: BET 160 AND 210

Marriage 1 EUTROPIUS (NOTES) OR FLAVIUS (L) DE ROME b: BET 200 AND 240

Children

1. CONSTANTIUS I (NOTES) EMPEROR (L) ROMAN EMPIRE b: BET 230 AND 31 MAR 250

2. Eutropia (NOTES) Crispina of (L) ROME b: BET 235 AND 252

Marriage 2 EUTROPIUS (NOTES) OF (L) DARDANIA b: ABT 215

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=pusch&id=I146382

--------------------

Reference: http://familytrees.genopro.com/318186/jarleslekt/default.htm?page=toc_families.htm

--------------------

Claudia Crispina OF ROMA was born 221. She married Eutropius DE ROMA, son of Gordiana II DE ROMA. He was born 218/220 in Rome,Latium,Italy.

Child of Claudia Crispina OF ROMA and Eutropius DE ROMA is:

Constantius I Chlorus DE ROMA was born 31 Mar 242 in Rome,Latium,Italy.

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=REG&db=:2439373&id=I519491059

http://larryvoyer.com/genealogy/getperson.php?personID=I50510&tree=v7_28
--------------------

1 NAME Constantius Angelus of /Rome/ 2 SOUR S033320 3 DATA 4 TEXT Date of Import: Jan 17, 2001 1 BIRT 2 PLAC ,Britain 2 SOUR S033320 3 DATA 4 TEXT Date of Import: Jan 17, 2001 1 DEAT 2 PLAC ,York 2 SOUR S033320 3 DATA 4 TEXT Date of Import: Jan 17, 2001

[De La Pole.FTW]

Sources: Ancestral Roots 45; Kraentzler 1669, 1680, 1795. K-1795: Constantius I, Emperor of Britain, Gaul, Spain and Rome ("Chlorus"). His British name appears to have been Cystennan. K-1669: Flavius Constantius "Chlore," Emperor of Britain, Rome and Gaul. Roots: Theodora Comnena, married Constantinus Angelus.

=========================

Constantinos was the governor of Dalmatia, and appointed Caesar to rule Gaul and Britain March 1, 293. Born in Illyria 214, he was trained in the hard school of warfare on the Danube frontier. Constantius I became Emperor of Rome in May 305, and in right of his wife, King of England. He was born in 242 and died at Eboracum (present day York, England) on July 25, 306. The son of Helen and Constantius I was Constantine the Great.

=================

file:///E:/E-S009/genealogy/Grab_A_Site_downloads/stirnet/romans2.htm#link4

1. Constantius Chlorus, Emperor of Rome (b 242, d 07.306) m1. (div) Helena 'of the Cross' (d 328, possibly dau of Coilus, King of Cochester) ... m2. Theodora (dau of Maximianus Herculius, Emperor of Rome) @@4@@ above ...

_____________________________________

Constantius I (Flavius Valerius Constantius Chlorus) "the Pale", Emperor of Rome

Governor of Dalmatia, appointed Caesar to rule Gaul and Britain March 1, 293. He was the son of *Eutropious, a Dardanian nobleman descended from the *Gordiani, and his wife, *Claudia, daughter of *Claudius II (Marcus Aurelius Flavius Claudius Gothicus), a virtuous and worthy Roman Emperor (268-270), who was a soldier, statesman, and a distinguished officer. Born in Illyria 214, he was trained in the hard school of warfare on the Danube frontier, and died of the Plague in 270, aged 55, whereupon his brother Marcus Aurelius Claudius Quintillus became Emperor. Constantius I became Emperor of Rome in May 305, and in right of his wife, King of England. He was born in 242 and died at Eboracum (present day York, England) on July 25, 306. On becoming "Caesar," he was required by Diocletian to put aside *Helena and to take Maximian's stepdaughter, Theodora, as his wife. From the first union, *Helena and *Constantius I had an illegitimate son, *Constantine the Great. He married (2) Theodora, daughter of Maximinus, Roman Emperor. Gibbon says *Claudia was the niece of *Claudius II (Marcus Aurelius Flavius Claudius Gothicus). Encyclopedia Brittanica maintains Constantius I's descent from Claudius Gothicus was a fiction.

SOURCES: "Neuman-Smith-Goodale Family and Ancestors" Michael R. Neuman michaelneuman@@earthlink.net (who has generously shared the above narrative at AWTP.)

Sources

[S395] royal_lineage.ged, June 2006.

[S2119] rootsweb, Mark Willis-Ballard, Willis-Ballard, Markrootsweb, (http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=SHOW&db=mwballard&surname=Ballard%2C+Living : 2014 feb 01).

1 NAME Claudia /Maxima/
2 GIVN Claudia
2 SURN Maxima


1 NAME /Claudia/ 2 SOUR S033320 3 DATA 4 TEXT Date of Import: Jan 17, 2001

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]