== Notes for [[Item:Q111482|Q111482]] ==

==Alfonso I el Católico, rey de Asturias==

ALFONSO ([705/10]-[757], bur Santa María). The Chronicle of Alfonso III names "Alfonso the son of Peter, who was the leader of the Cantabrians and was of the royal line" when recording his arrival in Asturias[65] . The Historia Silense records that "Petrus ex Recaredi… Gotorum principis progenie" had "duos filios… Adefonsum… et Froylam"[66]. His birth date range is estimated based on his having fought alongside his father-in-law, therefore before 737, according to the Chronicle of Alfonso III[67]. [Duque de Cantabria.] The Chronicle of Alfonso III states that, after the death of Fáfila (his brother-in-law, in 739), he was elected to succeed as ALFONSO I "el Católico" King of Asturias[68] . He took advantage of instability in the Muslim Government of al-Andalus following the Berber rebellion of 741, and of a severe famine in 750, to expand the area of Christian settlements to the north of the Duero river, a list of the towns he conquered being set out in the <b 20>Chronicle of Alfonso III[69]. Ibn Idhari ́s al-Bayan Al-Moghrib records 748-753 as years of drought and famine, that in 750 "the people of Galicia raised themselves" and that many campaigns were directed against them, and that as a result of the famine "the major part of the [Muslim] population emigrated to Tangier, zawila and the African coastline "departing from" the river sidona, known as Barbat"[70] . King Alfonso established fortifications along the central Cordillera at Coimbra, Coria, Talavera, Madrid, Guadalajara and Medinaceli, fixing the northern frontier of the Muslim occupation for the next three centuries. On the other hand, King Alfonso was less successful along his eastern frontier, where the Muslims established settlements as far as the Pyrenees, including Pamplona, Tudela, Huesca, Girona and even Narbonne until it was captured by Pépin King of the Franks in [759] [71]. The Chronicle of Alfonso III states that King Alfonso "lived as king for eighteen years and died a natural death"[72]. The Chronicon Compostellani records that “Alfonsus” reigned 19 years, one month and one day[73]. Ibn-Khaldun states that "Alphonse fils de Pedro" died "en 142" ([4 May 759/22 Apr 760]) after reigning 18 years[74]. The Sebastiani Chronicon records that "Adefonsus… cum uxore sua Regina Ermesinda" was buried "in territorio Cangas in Monasterio S. Mariæ"[75]. '''m (before 737) ERMESINDA de Asturias''', daughter of PELAYO King of Asturias & his wife Gaudiosa ---. The Chronicon Albeldense records that “Bermisindam, Pelagii filiam” married “Adefonsus… Petri, Cantabriæ ducis filius” who succeeded King Fáfila[76]. The Chronicle of Alfonso III names "the daughter of Pelayo Ermesinda" when recording her marriage to "Alfonso the son of Peter"[77] . Her birth date range is estimated from the birth of her first known child in [740]. Her marriage date is deduced from the Chronicle of Alfonso III recording that Alfonso "enjoyed many victories alongside his father-in-law"[78] . The Sebastiani Chronicon records that "Adefonsus… cum uxore sua Regina Ermesinda" was buried "in territorio Cangas in Monasterio S. Mariæ"[79]. Mistress (1): ---. The name of King Alfonso's mistress is unknown. She is named Sisalda by Fernández de Béthencourt[80]. The primary source on which this is based has not been identified: according to Barrau-Dihigo, she is not named in any near contemporary source[81].

==King Alfonso I & his wife ERMESINDA had three children:==

* a)''' FRUELA''' ([740]-murdered Cangas de Onís 768). The Chronicle of Alfonso III records that "his son Fruela" succeeded his father as king "in the era 795 (757)" [82] . He succeeded his father in 757 as FRUELA I King of Asturias. The Chronicle of Alfonso III states that he "won many victories", including against the Cordobans at Pontubio in Galicia, that he conquered the Basque country, and "overcame the peoples of Galicia who were rebelling against him and violently laid waste the entire province"[83]. He imposed the celibacy of priests in Galicia. Ibn al-Athir records that Fruela I King of Asturias took control of “Lugo, Portucale, Salamanca, Zamora, Ávila, Segovia y Castilla”[84]. The Chronicle of Alfonso III records that King Fruela was killed by his own men after ruling "eleven years, three months, era 806 (768)"[85]. The Chronicon Albeldense records that “Froila filius eius [Adefonsi]” was killed “in Canicas… æra 806”[86]. The Chronicon Compostellani records that “Froila” reigned 11 years, five months and 20 days[87]. The Sebastiani Chronicon records that "Froila… cum uxore sua Munia Oveti" was buried in 768[88]. m MUNIA Ovéquiz, daughter of OVECO --- & his wife --- [de Asturias] ([745/50]-[768]). The Chronicle of Alfonso III states that Fruela "overcame the rebellious Basques and took for himself a wife from their territory named Munia"[89] . The Sebastiani Chronicon records that "Froila… cum uxore sua Munia Oveti" were buried in 768[90]. Her geographical origin is confirmed more precisely by the Chronicle of Alfonso III which records that [her son] Alfonso, after he was displaced by Maugerato, fled to Álava where he was received by his mother's relatives [91] . King Fruela I & his wife had [three] children: i) ALFONSO ([765]-Oviedo 20 Mar 842, bur Oviedo). The Historia Silense records that "Froyla… [et] uxorem… Monniam" had "filium… Adefonsum"[92]. The Chronicle of Alfonso III records that "Alfonso the son of Fruela and grandson of the older Alfonso governed the palace" during the reign of Silo[93] . The same source states that his aunt Adosinda engineered his election to succeed on the death of her husband King Silo, but that Alfonso was displaced by Maugerato and fled to Álava where he was received by his mother's relatives [94] . He finally succeeded in 791, on the abdication of King Vermudo I[95], as ALFONSO II "el Casto" King of Asturias, anointed 14 Sep 791. The Sebastiani Chronicon records that "subrinum suum Adefonsum", who had been exiled by Maugerato, succeeded when King Vermudo I was deposed[96] . King Alfonso II transferred the royal residence to Oviedo, maybe as early as 791[97]. Intense attacks by the Muslims continued, the region of Álava was sacked in 791 and Oviedo threatened, although King Alfonso's forces succeeding in routing the attackers at Llamas de Mouro[98] . The Annales Laurissenses Continuatio records that "Hadefonsi regis Gallæciæ et Asturiæ" sent "Frola" [not yet traced, maybe a relative] as legate to Charles I King of the Franks in 798 [99]. King Alfonso was deposed in Sep 801 and placed in the monastery of Ablaña, but restored as king in Sep 802[100]. King Alfonso II defeated the Muslims in the valley of Pisuerga in 805 and at Lodos, near Oviedo in 816, reinforcing the impenetrability felt by the new nation. A truce was negotiated with the Muslims in 823, which lasted 15 years[101]. King Alfonso started constructing a series of fortified villages and castles in the mountains above the upper Ebro to guard against Muslim attacks, which ultimately gave the name to the area of Castile[102] . The discovery between 818 and 842 of a tomb attributed to St James the Apostle, at the place later known as Santiago de Compostela, created a focus for the new nation. The Chronicle of Alfonso III records that King Alfonso died "after ruling for fifty-two years" and was buried at Oviedo[103]. The Sebastiani Chronicon records that "Adefonsum" was buried in "ecclesia S. Mariæ" which he had founded[104]. The Chronicon Compostellani records that “Adefonsus” reigned 52 years, five months and 13 days[105]. ii) [daughter . The primary source which confirms her parentage and marriage has not yet been identified, although the Chronicon Albeldense names “Nepotianus cognatus regis Adefonsi” as successor of King Alfonso [106] . Her existence is therefore presumably speculative, on the assumption that “cognatus” in that source indicates brother-in-law (certainly one of the possible translations, although this meaning appears only to have become generally established in Latin language sources in later centuries). m NEPOCIANO, son of ---. The Chronicle of Alfonso III records that "Nepotianus, count of the palace, rebelled and seized power" after the death of King Alfonso I, but was defeated at the River Narcea by King Ramiro I who had been elected to succeed. The same source records that he fled the battlefield, was captured in the province of Primorias "by the two counts Scipio and Sonna", blinded, and confined to a monastery for the rest of his life[107] .] iii) [ROMÁN . Barrau-Dihigo asserts that Román, alleged son of King Fruela and supposed ancestor of the Traba family, was an entirely fictitious invention[108]. He is, for example, named in the Nobiliario of Pedro Conde de Barcelos "Conde D. Roman hermano del Rey D. Alonso el Casto" as father of "D. Iuana Romanes" who married "Conde D. Mendo" [109].]
* b) '''VIMERANO'''(-murdered [767]). The Chronicle of Alfonso III states that King Fruela "killed his brother… Vimerano with his own hands", the event being dated from the passage stating that the king was killed "not long after"[110].
* c)''' ADOSINDA (-bur Pravia San Juan)''' - The Chronicle of Alfonso III records the marriage of "Adosinda, daughter of Alfonso" and Silo "after Aurelio's death", commenting that they "had no son" [111] . After her husband died, Adosinda engineered the election of her nephew Alfonso as king, but he was deposed by her half-brother Maugerato who forced Adosinda to become a nun at San Juan Bautista de Pravia[112] . The Sebastiani Chronicon records that "Silo… cum uxore sua Regina Adosinda" was buried "in ecclesia S. Joannis Apostoli et Evang. in Pravia"[113]. m (773) SILO, son of --- (-783, bur Pravia San Juan). He succeeded on his marriage in 773 as SILO King of Asturias. The Chronicon Albeldense records that “Silo” maintained peace “cum Spania ob causam matris”[114], which suggests that his mother may have been Muslim. “Domnus Silo” donated “locum... Lucis” to found a monastery by charter dated 23 Aug 775, confirmed by “Ranimirus, Adefonsus, Hordoneus”, witnessed by “Nepotianus”[115] . He transferred the royal residence from Cangas de Onís to Pravia, on the Nalón mountain [116] . The Chronicle of Alfonso III records that he suppressed a rebellion in Galicia[117]. The Chronicle of Alfonso III states that Silo died "after the ninth year of his rule… as a result of a natural death, in the era 821 (783)"[118]. The Chronicon Compostellani records that “Silo” reigned 9 years, one month and one day[119]. The Sebastiani Chronicon records that "Silo… cum uxore sua Regina Adosinda" was buried "in ecclesia S. Joannis Apostoli et Evang. in Pravia"[120]. Silo & his wife had one child: i) ADELGASTER (-after 17 Jan 780). “Addelgaster filius Silonis Regis… cum coniuge mea Brunildi” founded the monastery of Santa María de Obona by charter dated 17 Jan 780, the dating clause stating “regnante principe nostro Silone cum uxore sua Odisinda”[121] . If the dating relating to Adosinda´s family is accurate as shown above, Adelgaster must have been a young adult at the date of this charter, unless he was born from an earlier otherwise unrecorded marriage of his father. m BRUNILDE, daughter of --- (-after 17 Jan 780). “Addelgaster filius Silonis Regis… cum coniuge mea Brunildi” founded the monastery of Santa María de Obona by charter dated 17 Jan 780[122]. - http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/ASTURIAS,%20LEON.htm#AlfonsoIdied757

——-

http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfonso_I_de_Asturias

ENGLISH see:

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfonso_I_of_Asturias

Alfonso I de Asturias, rey de Asturias desde el año 739 al 757, apodado "el Católico". Sucedió a Favila y fue sucedido por su hijo Fruela.

Biografía [editar]

Nació en el año 693. Era yerno del caudillo Don Pelayo, ya que estaba casado con su hija Ermesinda, e hijo de Pedro, Duque de Cantabria; y según crónicas posteriores de dudosa credibilidad, descendiente del rey hispano visigodo Recaredo.

Con Alfonso I se intensifica la labor de Reconquista, aprovechando las luchas internas de los árabes. Aprovechando que los bereberes habían abandonado la zona noroeste de la península, se anexionó Galicia y el norte de Portugal en el 740. También conquistó León en el 754, e incluso llegó hasta La Rioja, pero no se pudo repoblar. Contó con la importante colaboración de su hermano Fruela, que capitaneó muchas de las campañas militares de su reinado.

En estas campañas de reconquista las ciudades y pueblos quedaban vacíos, tras matar a todos los musulmanes que hallaban en ellos y llevar a sus habitantes cristianos hacia las tierras más seguras del norte.

Este modo de actuar trajo consigo dos consecuencias de gran repercusión para el futuro, tanto desde el punto de vista demográfico como cultural, en todo el territorio:

* La creación del llamado «Desierto del Duero»: El área comprendida entre el río Duero y la Cordillera Cantábrica quedó prácticamente despoblada. Según Herculano, para dificultar así los futuros avances de tropas musulmanas hacia el norte, aunque otros historiadores consideran que esta despoblación no fue realizada conscientemente. La repoblación de parte de estas tierras comenzará a producirse 100 años más tarde, con gentes del propio reino y mozárabes venidos de reinos musulmanes.

* El incremento de población que experimentaron las tierras de la vertiente norte de la Cordillera, Cantabria y Asturias, con la gente traída de la Meseta Central, provocó la necesaria roturación de nuevas tierras y la fundación de nuevos pueblos y aldeas, configurando el tipo de poblamiento que ha llegado hasta nuestros días.

La incorporación por Alfonso I de gentes procedentes de los Campos Góticos, que conservaban cierta tradición guerrera, bastante perdida por la población hispano-romana, si se exceptúa a los pobladores de norte, menos inculturados en el mundo romano, dio impulso a la reconquista y permitió reforzar la zona sur del reino más expuesto a las incursiones enemigas.

Matrimonio y descendencia

Casó con Ermesinda, hija de Don Pelayo. Fueron sus hijos:

* Fruela I, rey de Asturias.

* Vimarano.

* Adosinda. Casó con Silo, sexto rey de Asturias.

--------------------

Alfonso I de Asturias

De Wikipedia, la enciclopedia libre

Alfonso I de Asturias. La imagen que se ve aquí de este rey forma parte de una serie de estatuas dedicadas a todos los monarcas de España, mandadas hacer para la decoración del Palacio Real de Madrid en el reinado de Fernando VI. En un principio la idea era que adornasen la cornisa del palacio. Los autores son Domenico Olivieri y Felipe de Castro. Parece ser que nunca llegaron a su destino y se colocaron en distintos lugares de la ciudad (Plaza de Oriente, El Retiro, Puerta de Toledo) y algunas se llevaron a otras provincias.Alfonso I de Asturias, rey de Asturias desde el año 739 al 757, apodado "el Católico". Sucedió a Favila y fue sucedido por su hijo Fruela.

Biografía

Era yerno del caudillo Don Pelayo, ya que estaba casado con su hija Ermesinda, e hijo de Pedro, Duque de Cantabria; y según crónicas posteriores de dudosa credibilidad, descendiente del rey hispano visigodo Recaredo.

Con Alfonso I se intensifica la labor de Reconquista, aprovechando las luchas internas de los árabes. Aprovechando que los bereberes habían abandonado la zona noroeste de la península, se anexionó Galicia y el norte de Portugal en el 740. También conquistó León en el 754, e incluso llegó hasta La Rioja, pero no se pudo repoblar. Contó con la importante colaboración de su hermano Fruela, que capitaneó muchas de las campañas militares de su reinado.

En estas campañas de reconquista las ciudades y pueblos quedaban vacíos, tras matar a todos los musulmanes que hallaban en ellos y llevar a sus habitantes cristianos hacia las tierras más seguras del norte.

Este modo de actuar trajo consigo dos consecuencias de gran repercusión para el futuro, tanto desde el punto de vista demográfico como cultural, en todo el territorio:

La creación del llamado «Desierto del Duero»: El área comprendida entre el río Duero y la Cordillera Cantábrica quedó prácticamente despoblada. Según Herculano, para dificultar así los futuros avances de tropas musulmanas hacia el norte, aunque otros historiadores consideran que esta despoblación no fue realizada conscientemente. La repoblación de parte de estas tierras comenzará a producirse 100 años más tarde, con gentes del propio reino y mozárabes venidos de reinos musulmanes.

El incremento de población que experimentaron las tierras de la vertiente norte de la Cordillera, Cantabria y Asturias, con la gente traída de la Meseta Central, provocó la necesaria roturación de nuevas tierras y la fundación de nuevos pueblos y aldeas, configurando el tipo de poblamiento que ha llegado hasta nuestros días.

La incorporación por Alfonso I de gentes procedentes de los Campos Góticos, que conservaban cierta tradición guerrera, bastante perdida por la población hispano-romana, si se exceptúa a los pobladores de norte, menos inculturados en el mundo romano, dio impulso a la reconquista y permitió reforzar la zona sur del reino más expuesto a las incursiones enemigas.

Matrimonio y descendencia

Casó con Ermesinda, hija de Don Pelayo. Fueron sus hijos:

Fruela I, rey de Asturias.

Vimarano.

Adosinda. Casó con Silo, sexto rey de Asturias.

--------------------

3er. rey de Asturias y Galicia, 739-757

FUENTES:

-http://www.abcgenealogia.com/Asturias00.html

ENGLISH

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfonso_I_of_Asturias

Alfonso I of Asturias

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Statue in Madrid (J. Porcel, 1750-53).

Alfonso I (more rarely Alonso), called the Catholic (el Católico), was the King of Asturias from 739 to his death in 757.

He was son of Duke Peter of Cantabria, and held many lands in that region. He may have been the hereditary chief of the Basques, but this is uncertain. He is said to have married Ermesinda, daughter of Pelayo, who founded the kingdom after the Battle of Covadonga in which he reversed the Moorish conquest of the region. He succeeded Pelayo's son, his brother-in-law, Favila on the throne after the latter's premature death.

Whether Pelayo or Favila were ever considered kings in their own lifetime is debatable, but Alfonso certainly was. He began a lifelong war against the Moors. In 740, he conquered Galicia and in 754, León. He went as far as La Rioja. However, the few urban populations of these frontier regions fled to his northern dominions, leaving a depopulated buffer between the Christian and Muslim states.

This created the so-called Desert of the Duero, an empty region between the River Duero and the Asturian Mountains. Alfonso intended it this way; he wished to leave such a zone where any invading army would find it too difficult to survive. Besides the martial, the demographic and cultural effect of this policy on later Asturian and Spanish and Portuguese history is large. It was over a hundred years before the region was repopulated (an event known as the Repoblación).

The Arab writers speak of the kings of the northwest of Iberia as the Beni-Alfons (descendants of Alfonso), and appear to recognize them as a Galician royal stock derived from Alfonso I. Alfonso is credited with establishing the shrine of Our Lady of Covadonga in commemoration of his father in law's victory at the Battle of Covadonga.
--------------------
Alfonso I of Asturias

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Alfonso I (more rarely Alonso), called the Catholic (el Católico), was the King of Asturias from 739 to his death in 757. He was son of Duke Peter of Cantabria, and held many lands in that region. He may have been the hereditary chief of the Basques, but this is uncertain. He is said to have married Ermesinda, daughter of Pelayo, who founded the kingdom after the Battle of Covadonga in which he reversed the Moorish conquest of the region. He succeeded Pelayo's son, his brother-in-law, Favila on the throne after the latter's premature death.

Whether Pelayo or Favila were ever considered kings in their own lifetime is debatable, but Alfonso certainly was. He began a lifelong war against the Moors. In 740, he conquered Galicia and in 754, León. He went as far as La Rioja. However, the populations of these frontier regions fled to his northern dominions, leaving a depopulated buffer between the Christian and Muslim states.

This created the so-called Desert of the Duero, an empty region between the River Duero and the Asturian Mountains. Alfonso intended it this way; he wished to leave such a zone where any invading army would find it too difficult to survive. Besides the martial, the demographic and cultural effect of this policy on later Asturian and Spanish and Portuguese history is large. It was over a hundred years before the region was repopulated (an event known as the Repoblación).

The Arab writers speak of the kings of the northwest of Iberia as the Beni-Alfons (descendants of Alfonso), and appear to recognize them as a Galician royal stock derived from Alfonso I.

--------------------
Alfonso I (more rarely Alonso), called the Catholic (el Católico), was the King of Asturias from 739 to his death in 757.

He and his descendants formed the Beni Alfons dynasty.

He was son of Duke Peter of Cantabria, and held many lands in that region. He may have been the hereditary chief of the Basques, but this is uncertain. He is said to have married Ermesinda, daughter of Pelayo, who founded the kingdom after the Battle of Covadonga in which he reversed the Moorish conquest of the region. He succeeded Pelayo's son, his brother-in-law, Favila on the throne after the latter's premature death.

Whether Pelayo or Favila were ever considered kings in their own lifetime is debatable, but Alfonso certainly was. He began a lifelong war against the Moors. In 740, he conquered Galicia and in 754, León. He went as far as La Rioja. However, the populations of these frontier regions fled to his northern dominions, leaving a depopulated buffer between the Christian and Muslim states.

This created the so-called Desert of the Duero, an empty region between the River Duero and the Asturian Mountains. Alfonso intended it this way; he wished to leave such a zone where any invading army would find it too difficult to survive. Besides the martial, the demographic and cultural effect of this policy on later Asturian and Spanish and Portuguese history is large. It was over a hundred years before the region was repopulated (an event known as the Repoblación).

The Arab writers speak of the kings of the northwest of Iberia as the Beni-Alfons (descendants of Alfonso), and appear to recognize them as a Galician royal stock derived from Alfonso I.
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfonso_I_of_Asturias
--------------------
=Alfonso I, rey de Asturias=

* c. 0690 + 0757

==Padres==

>Padre: Pedro, duque da Cantabria * c. 0660

>Madre: N

==Matrimonios==

Matrimonio I: c. 0723
>Ermesinda de Asturias * 0700

==Hijos==

Hijos del Matrimonio I:

* Froila I, rey de León * c. 0725 cc. Munia Froilaz
* Vimerano de Asturias
* Adosinda de Cantabria cc. Silo I. Rey de Asturias

Hijos de N

* Mauregato I, Rey de Asturias cc. Creusa N

==Titulos y Señorios==

* Reis das Astúrias

''in: GeneAll.es <http://www.geneall.net/H/per_page.php?id=8165>''

______________________________________________________________________________

'''Afonso I das Astúrias''' (? — 757) foi Rei das Astúrias e Duque da Cantábria desde 739, descendente do rei visigodo Recaredo. Alguns autores indicam que terá casado com Ermesinda, filha de Pelágio, tornando-se, portanto, seu genro e herdeiro do trono. Era herdeiro das terras na Cantábria por parte do seu pai, o Duque Pedro de Cantábria.

Afonso I autoproclama-se Rei das Astúrias, ao contrário de Pelágio e seu filho Fávila, e, com ele, retoma-se a Reconquista, aproveitando as guerras internas dos mouros. Anexa-se a Galiza em 740, Leão em 754. Governou durante 19 anos.

==Descendência==

De Ermesinda,

* Fruela I das Astúrias
* Vimarano, pai de Bermudo I das Astúrias

E de uma árabe, cujo casamento daria um filho bastardo:

* Mauregato das Astúrias

''in: Wikipédia, a enciclopédia livre <http://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Afonso_I_das_Ast%C3%BArias>''

--------------------
3º REI DAS ASTÚRIAS, Espanha, falecido em 757

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

http://www.arteguias.com/biografia/alfonsoicatolico.htm
--------------------
Alfonso I, esposo de Ermesinda sucedió a Favila y reinó durante 18 años. “Era hijo de Pedro, duque de Cantabria , que vino a Asturias y tomó por mujer a Bermisinda (Ermesinda), hija de Pelayo, el cual, había dispuesto este matrimonio. Cuando se posesionó del reino dio muchas batallas, con la divina protección. Ocupó victoriosamente las ciudades de León y Astorga que estaban en poder del enemigo y yermó los llamados Campos góticos hasta el río Duero, extendiendo el imperio de los cristianos. Amado de Dios y de los hombres falleció de muerte natural”.
--------------------

En mi nuevo libro LA SORPRENDENTE GENEALOGÍA DE MIS TATARABUELOS, encontrarán a este y muchos otros de sus ancestros con un resumen biográfico de cada uno. El libro está disponible en: amazon.com barnesandnoble.com palibrio.com. Les será de mucha utilidad y diversión. Ramón Rionda

In my new book LA SORPRENDENTE GENEALOGÍA DE MIS TATARABUELOS, you will find this and many other of your ancestors, with a biography summary of each of them. The book is now available at: amazon.com barnesandnoble.com palibrio.com. Check it up, it’s worth it. Ramón Rionda

--------------------
At the time of his rein, questions emerged about the Asturian monarchy having had Jewish ancestry. In a desperate attempt, King Alfonso tried to obliterate these "rumors" by executing those who he suspected had knowledge of this hazardous secret. Nevertheless, some of his descendants during the Spanish Inquisition were indeed labels as Jews and, as an attempt to avoid persecution, relocated to the Canary Islands and later on to the Americas (including Puerto Rico).

----
===References
* https://thesignsofthetimes.com.au/31/69906.htm

1 NAME the Catholic //
2 GIVN the Catholic
2 SURN
2 NICK the Catholic

Rey de Asturias
1: Collins, Roger. Visigothic Spain, 409-711.
Blackwell publishing 2004.
2: King, P.D., King Chindasuinth and the first territorial law code of the Visigothic kingdon.
Edward James-Oxford-Clarendon Press 1980, PP. 131-157.

Afonso I das Astúrias (? — 757) foi Rei das Astúrias e Duque da Cantábria desde 739, descendente do rei visigodo Recaredo. Alguns autores indicam que terá casado com Ermesinda, filha de Pelágio, tornando-se, portanto, seu genro e herdeiro do trono. Era herdeiro das terras na Cantábria por parte do seu pai, o Duque Pedro de Cantábria.
Afonso I autoproclama-se Rei das Astúrias, ao contrário de Pelágio e seu filho Fávila, e, com ele, retoma-se a Reconquista, aproveitando as guerras internas dos mouros. Anexa-se a Galiza em 740, Leão em 754. Governou durante 19 anos.

He ruled from 739 to 757.

1 NAME the Catholic //
2 GIVN the Catholic
2 SURN
2 NICK the Catholic

1 NAME the Catholic //
2 GIVN the Catholic
2 SURN
2 NICK the Catholic

Rey de Asturias y Galicia (739-757), asume el 14 de septiembre de 739, sucediendo al Rey Favila I al morir éste devorado por un oso, en 739.
Es el primer rey de Asturias y pasaría a dar origen a la monarquía asturiana, bajo el nombre de Alfonso I, el Católico
Durante su reinado, los musulmanes bereberes de la península iniciaron una serie de guerras civiles que les debilitaron, lo cual fue aprovechado por Alfonso I para iniciar campañas militares con ellos en la zona noroeste de la península. Con ellas, cosiguió anexionar Galicia a sus dominios (Lugo, Oporto, Braga) y llegar hasta la cordillera Central y hasta La Rioja por el valle del Ebro (Salamanca, Zamora, Ávila, Segovia, Astorga, León, Saladaña, Simancas, Osma, Clunia). Se hizo, además, de las antiguas ciudades cántabras de Mave y Amaya. Una vez conquistadas las ciudades, se llevaba a los cristianos a zonas más protegidas del norte y se mataba a los habitantes musulmanes, lo que creó grandes núcleos de despoblación en el valle del Duero. La creación de estas importantes zonas deshabitadas al sur de sus dominios no respondía a ningún objetivo militar, sino que fue causada, además de por la imposibilidad de controlar de una manera efectiva las extensas zonas de territorio que conquistaba, por el hambre y una epidemia de viruela. La repoblación de estas zonas de la península se extendió durante siglos y determinaría de una manera fundamental las características socioeconómicas de Castilla y de León.

El reino de Alfonso I comprendía Asturias, Asturia e Santillana (zona occidental de Cantabria), Liéban y Trasmiera. La Cantabria septetntrional estaba en un principio bajo control musulmán. En 18 años dejó un reino formado por gran parte de la cornisa cantábrica, protegido de los ataques musulmanes por una amplia extensión de terreno conocido como el "Desierto del Duero".

Rey de Asturias y Galicia (739-757), asume el 14 de septiembre de 739, sucediendo al Rey Favila I al morir éste devorado por un oso, en 739.
Es el primer rey de Asturias y pasaría a dar origen a la monarquía asturiana, bajo el nombre de Alfonso I, el Católico
Durante su reinado, los musulmanes bereberes de la península iniciaron una serie de guerras civiles que les debilitaron, lo cual fue aprovechado por Alfonso I para iniciar campañas militares con ellos en la zona noroeste de la península. Con ellas, cosiguió anexionar Galicia a sus dominios (Lugo, Oporto, Braga) y llegar hasta la cordillera Central y hasta La Rioja por el valle del Ebro (Salamanca, Zamora, Ávila, Segovia, Astorga, León, Saladaña, Simancas, Osma, Clunia). Se hizo, además, de las antiguas ciudades cántabras de Mave y Amaya. Una vez conquistadas las ciudades, se llevaba a los cristianos a zonas más protegidas del norte y se mataba a los habitantes musulmanes, lo que creó grandes núcleos de despoblación en el valle del Duero. La creación de estas importantes zonas deshabitadas al sur de sus dominios no respondía a ningún objetivo militar, sino que fue causada, además de por la imposibilidad de controlar de una manera efectiva las extensas zonas de territorio que conquistaba, por el hambre y una epidemia de viruela. La repoblación de estas zonas de la península se extendió durante siglos y determinaría de una manera fundamental las características socioeconómicas de Castilla y de León.

El reino de Alfonso I comprendía Asturias, Asturia e Santillana (zona occidental de Cantabria), Liéban y Trasmiera. La Cantabria septetntrional estaba en un principio bajo control musulmán. En 18 años dejó un reino formado por gran parte de la cornisa cantábrica, protegido de los ataques musulmanes por una amplia extensión de terreno conocido como el "Desierto del Duero".

Rootsweb Feldman
URL: http://worldconnect.genealogy.rootsweb.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=:3044567&id=I01078
# ID: I01078
# Name: Alphonse Ier Le Catholique DE CANTABRE 1 2 3 4 5
# Sex: M
# Birth: ABT 695 1 2 3 4 5
# Death: 757 1 2 3 4 5
# Change Date: 15 JAN 2004 5
# Change Date: 16 SEP 2001 2 3 4 5
# Note:

[Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED]

2 SOUR S332582
3 DATA
4 TEXT Date of Import: 14 Jan 2004


[daveanthes.FTW]

#Générale# Roi de Léon de 739 à 757.[Spare.FTW]

Father: Duke Of Cantabria PEDRO b: 650
Mother: Princess Of Asturias HERMESINDA b: 680

Marriage 1 Ermessinde DES ASTURIES b: ABT 710

Children

1. Has No Children Bermude Ier Le Diacre DES ASTURIES b: 730
2. Has Children Fruela DE CANTABRE*** b: ABT 735


Sources:

1. Title: daveanthes.FTW
Note: ABBR daveanthes.FTW
Note: Source Media Type: Other
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Book
Text: Date of Import: 14 Jan 2004
2. Title: daveanthes.FTW
Note: ABBR daveanthes.FTW
Note: Source Media Type: Other
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Book
Text: Date of Import: Jan 13, 2004
3. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Jan 18, 2004
4. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: 21 Jan 2004
5. Title: Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Feb 6, 2004

Alfonso I (more rarely Alonso), called the Catholic (el Católico), was the King of Asturias from 739 to his death in 757. He was son of Duke Peter of Cantabria, and held many lands in that region. He may have been the hereditary chief of the Basques, but this is uncertain. He is said to have married Ermesinda, daughter of Pelayo, who founded the kingdom after the Battle of Covadonga in which he reversed the Moorish conquest of the region. He succeeded Pelayo's son, his brother-in-law, Favila on the throne after the latter's premature death.
Whether Pelayo or Favila were ever considered kings in their own lifetime is debatable, but Alfonso certainly was. He began a lifelong war against the Moors. In 740, he conquered Galicia and in 754, León. He went as far as La Rioja. However, the populations of these frontier regions fled to his northern dominions, leaving a depopulated buffer between the Christian and Muslim states.
This created the so-called Desert of the Duero, an empty region between the River Duero and the Asturian Mountains. Alfonso intended it this way; he wished to leave such a zone where any invading army would find it too difficult to survive. Besides the martial, the demographic and cultural effect of this policy on later Asturian and Spanish and Portuguese history is large. It was over a hundred years before the region was repopulated (an event known as the Repoblación).

-- MERGED NOTE ------------

Wikidata: https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q333609 | Geni: https://www.geni.com/people/6000000004045821353

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]