== Notes for [[Item:Q89607|Q89607]] ==

Gaius Furius Sabinius Aquila Timesitheus (c. 190 - 243) was a Roman knight who lived in the 3rd century and was the most important advisor to Roman Emperor Gordian III. Very little is known on his origins. Timesitheus was a Roman of equestrian rank.

Life

He started his career under the Severan dynasty emperor Elagabalus. Timesitheus held a number of important provincial postings. He was adept at finances and served in Spain as a Promagistrate. Between 218-222, the emperor promoted him and appointed him as Procurator of Arabia and from 220 he became a Prefect of the Cohorts and held procuratorships in Syria, Palestine, Bithynia, Pontus, Paphlagonia, Asia, Germania Inferior, Gallia Belgica, Gallia Aquitania and Gallia Lugdunensis. Timesitheus proved to be an able and efficient official.

In 241 the Roman Emperor Gordian III was looking for a responsible person to serve as Praetorian Prefect and head of the Praetorian Guard. Gordian had picked Timesitheus and appointed him to the position. Timesitheus was an important, responsible and prominent figure in the emperor’s reign and through his years of political experience was able to assist Gordian and Gordian’s mother Antonia Gordiana in administering the Roman Empire. An example of Timesitheus’ suitability in his position is that of May 241, Timesitheus had arranged with Gordian to marry his daughter Tranquillina. The wife of Timesitheus is unknown. His daughter became a Roman Empress and her marriage to Gordian proved to be a very happy (albeit short-lived) union.

Timesitheus had proven to be a figure that would work with the emperor, not against the emperor. He ordered the improvements of the empire’s borders in Africa. The Prefect began to organise war on Persia, whose King Shapur I had recently invaded Roman Mesopotamia and captured Nisibis and Carrhae. In 243 Timesitheus defeated the Persians at the Battle of Resaena and expelled them from Roman territory, regaining Carrhae and Nisibis. As he was planning more campaigns, Timesitheus suddenly became ill and died. Gordian, his mother and Tranquillina were sadden by his death. Gordian replaced him with Philip the Arab.[1]

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaius_Furius_Sabinius_Aquila_Timesitheus

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]