== Notes for [[Item:Q88774|Q88774]] ==

'''Tukulti-Ninurta II''' was King of Assyria from 891 BC to 884 BC. He was the second king of the Neo Assyrian Empire.

His father was Adad-nirari II, the second king of the Neo-Assyrian period. His son succeeded him and was named Ashurnasirpal II. He consolidated the gains made by his father over the neo Hittites, Babylonians and Arameans, and successfully campaigned in the Zagros Mountains of Iran, subjugating the newly arrived Iranic peoples of the area, the Persians and Medes, during his brief reign.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tukulti-Ninurta_II

Preceded by Adad-nirari II King of Assyria 891–884 BC Succeeded by Ashurnasirpal II Persondata Name Tukulti-Ninurta Ii Alternative names Short description Assyrian king Date of birth Place of birth Date of death Place of death

This Middle Eastern history-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v ·t ·e
This biography of a member of a Middle Eastern royal house is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v ·t ·e
This Assyrian-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v ·t ·e Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tukulti-Ninurta_II&oldid=516454096" View page ratingsRate this page Rate this page Page ratings What's this?Current average ratings. Trustworthy

Objective

Complete

Missing most informationWell-written

I am highly knowledgeable about this topic (optional) I have a relevant college/university degreeIt is part of my professionIt is a deep personal passionThe source of my knowledge is not listed here I would like to help improve Wikipedia, send me an e-mail (optional) We will send you a confirmation e-mail. We will not share your e-mail address with outside parties as per our feedback privacy statement.Submit ratings

Saved successfullyYour ratings have not been submitted yetYour ratings have expiredPlease reevaluate this page and submit new ratings. An error has occurred. Please try again later. Thanks! Your ratings have been saved.Do you want to create an account?An account will help you track your edits, get involved in discussions, and be a part of the community.Create an accountorLog inMaybe later Thanks! Your ratings have been saved.Did you know that you can edit this page?Edit this pageMaybe later Categories: 883 BC deathsAssyrian kingsMiddle Eastern history stubsMiddle Eastern royalty stubsAssyrian stubsHidden categories: Articles lacking sources from December 2009All articles lacking sourcesNavigation menuPersonal tools Create accountLog inNamespaces ArticleTalkVariantsViews ReadEditView historyActions Search
Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia InteractionHelp About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact Wikipedia ToolboxWhat links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageRate this page Print/exportCreate a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version LanguagesCatalà Česky Deutsch Español Euskara Français Italiano Magyar Nederlands Norsk (bokmål)‎ 日本語 Polski Português Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska 中文 This page was last modified on 2 February 2013 at 04:26.

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. See Terms of Use for details. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

Contact us http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tukulti-Ninurta_II

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per02163.htm#0

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Assyria 889-884 BC

Tukulti-Ninurta II
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.

Tukulti-Ninurta II was King of Assyria from 891 to 884 BC. He was the son of Adad-nirari II and the second king of the Neo-Assyrian period. He was succeeded by his son, Ashurnasirpal II.

Preceded by:
Adad-nirari II King of Assyria
891–884 BC Succeeded by:
Ashurnasirpal II

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]