== Notes for [[Item:Q106026|Q106026]] ==

'''Progenitor of Zaydi Shi'ism (Zaydi Imamate)'''

'''1st Shia Zaydi Imaam'''

* Wilaadat (Birth): 75 AH (695 AD)
* Wafaat (Death): 1st Safar 122 AH (9th January 740 AD)

====
Zayd's Children: Yahya: after his father, he made an uprising in Sabzevar and was martyred in Jowzjan, Afghanistan. Husayn: he was known as Husayn Dhu l-Dam'a because he cried for the martyrdom of his father. After the martyrdom of Zayd, Imam al-Sadiq (a) took care of him.[33] Muhammad: he was among the companions of Imam al-Sadiq (a).[34] 'Isa: he lived a life in secret and passed away at the age of 60 in Kufa.[35] According to some reports, he too was a companion of Imam al-Sadiq (a).[36] The progeny of Zayd continued through 'Isa, Muhammad and Husayn.[37] https://en.wikishia.net/view/Zayd_b._al-Imam_al-Sajjad_(a)
===
Unlike his brother, Muhammad al-Baqir, the fifth Imam of the Twelver Shi'as, Zayd ibn Ali believed the time was ripe for renewing the rebellion against the Umayyad Caliphs in support of the claims of his own Hashemite clan. On his trip to Iraq, he was persuaded by pro-Alids of Kufa that he had support of 10,000 warriors and could easily drive out a few hundred Umayyad soldiers stationed there.[1] Kufa had previously been the capital of his great-grandfather Ali, and the place where his grandfather Husayn also sought support for his own rebellion in 680.[citation needed] He started his propaganda in Kufa, Basra and Mosul and 15,000 people were enlisted on his army register.[1] The Umayyad governor of Kufa, however, learned of the plot, and commanded the people to gather at the great mosque, locked them inside and began a search for Zayd. Zayd with some troops fought his way to the mosque and called on people to come out.[2]

However, in events that echoed Husayn's own abandonment by the Kufans decades earlier, the bulk of Zayd's supporters deserted him and joined the Umayyads, leaving Zayd with only a few dozen outnumbered followers. Accounts differ slightly on the circumstances of the desertion. Sunni sources attribute the desertion to Zayd's refusal to speak ill of the first two Caliphs, Abu Bakr and Umar, who most Shi'a don't follow and instead force their own point of view opposing their own Imams. Zaydi sources on the other hand attribute it to Zayd's refusal to acknowledge the authority of his nephew, Ja'far al-Sadiq (the sixth Imam according to the Twelver Shi'ites). In both accounts, Zayd bitterly scolds the "rejectors" (Rāfiḍah) who desert him, an appellation used by some Sunnis to describe non-Zaydi Shi'ites to this day.[citation needed]

Twelver Shia sources such as al-Kashi's al-Rijal state the opposite, that Zayd called the rejectors Batriyyah as they apparently refused to speak ill of the two caliphs. It was said they cut (Batri) the origin of the cause of Zayd's uprising. Zaydi hadith sources however do not discuss the issue of speaking ill of the two caliphs. Instead they simply state that Zayd named them Rejectors due to them not being willing to launch an uprising against the Umayyad government. It is likely that the Sunni and Shia narrations which concern speaking ill of the caliphs are a result of sectarian tensions like much of the hadith literature.

Nevertheless, Zayd fought on. His small band of followers was soundly defeated by the much larger Umayyad force, and Zayd fell in battle to an arrow that pierced his forehead. The arrow's removal led to his death. He was buried in secret outside Kufa, but the Umayyads were able to find the burial place, and, in retribution for the rebellion, exhumed Zayd's body and crucified it.[2] The remained on the cross for three years. After the death of Hisham, the new caliph ordered his corpse to be burned. The ashes were scattered in the Euphrates. When the Abbasids, who, like Zayd, were Hashemites, overthrew the Umayyads in 750, they in turn exhumed Hisham's body, crucified it, and burned it, out of revenge for Zayd.[3]

Consequences of the Zaydi rebellion and the insurrection of Hasan ibn Zayd
Zayd's desperate rebellion became the inspiration for the Zaydi sect, a school of Shi'a Islam that holds that any learned descendant of Ali can become an Imam by asserting and fighting for his claim as Zayd did (the rest of the Shi'as believe, in contrast, that the Imam must be divinely appointed). However, all schools of Islam, including the majority Sunnis, regard Zayd as a righteous martyr (shahid) against what is regarded as the corrupt leadership of the Umayyads. It is even reported that Abu Hanifa, founder of the largest school of Sunni jurisprudence, gave financial support to Zayd's revolt and called on others to join Zayd's rebellion.[citation needed]

Zayd's rebellion inspired other revolts by members of his clan, especially in the Hejaz, the most famous among these being the revolt of Muhammad al-Nafs az-Zakiyya against the Abbasids in 762. Zaydi agitation continued until 785 and re-erupted in Tabaristan under the leadership of the Zayd's son, Hasan ibn Zayd ibn Ali His revolt attracted many supporters, among them the ruler of Rustamids, the son of Farīdūn (a descendant of Rostam Farrokhzād), Abd ar-Rahman ibn Rustam. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Revolt_of_Zayd_ibn_Ali
=============
Although he fought bravely, Zayd was killed in battle on the 2nd of Safar in 120 or 122 AH (740 AD) at the age of forty-two by Yusuf ibn 'Amr ath-Thaqafi (the Umayyad governor). His son, Yahya, took his body from the field and buried him away from the city near the river bank, causing the water to flow over it. However, the grave was discovered and, under Yusuf's orders, the body was exhumed, Zayd's head was cut off and sent to Hisham in Syria. In the month of Safar, 121 AH, Hisham had the sacred body of this descendant of the Prophet placed on the gallows entirely naked. For four years the sacred body remained on the gallows. Thereafter, when Walid Ibn Yazid ibn Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan became caliph in 126 AH, he ordered that the skeleton be taken down from the gallows, burnt, and the ashes scattered to the wind.

There are two shrines for Zayd, One is in Kufa, Iraq, the other is in Karak, Jordan. The shrine in Jordan is believed to be the final resting place of the head of Zayd ibn ‘Ali ibn Al-Husayn

All schools of Islam Sunnis and Shias, regard Zayd Ibn Ali as a righteous martyr (Shaheed) against what was regarded as the corrupt leadership of an unjust Caliph. It is even reported that Mujtahid Imam Abu Hanifa, founder of the largest school of Sunni jurisprudence, gave financial support to Zayd's revolt and called on others to join Zayd's rebellion. Zayd's rebellion inspired other revolts by members of his clan, especially in the Hejaz, the most famous among these being the revolt of Imam Muhammad al-Nafs al-Zakiyya al-Mahdi against the Abbasids in 762.

Zaydis believe that he was a rightful Caliph and their sect is named after him.

It is believed that from him originated the derogatory word for Imami Shi'ites, Rafida.

Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zayd_ibn_Ali
--------------------
37eme generation

Madar Djoun [Zeinat ol Sadat - Bibi Khanum] descend de sa branche)

--------------------
He is the son of Alī ibn Husayn "Zayn al-Abidīn". And Emam Jaffar Sadeq's uncle.

Ibn Qutaybah in his book “al-Ma‘ārif” republished in 1934 from Egypt writes (at page-73) that one of wives of 4th Shia Imam belonged to Sindh and she was mother of Zayd ibn Ali.

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir narrated: "The Holy Prophet put his sacred hand on Husayn bin Ali's back and said: 'O Husayn, it will not be long until a man will be born among your descendants. He will be called Zaid; he will be killed as a martyr. On the day of resurrection, he and his companions will enter heaven, setting their feet on the necks of the people.

Ibn Katheer wrote in his book the Al-Bidayah wan-Nihayah that "in the year 56 AH Muawiyah called on the people including those within the outlying territories to pledge allegiance to his son, Yazeed, to be his heir to the Caliphate after him. Almost all the subjects offered their allegiance, with the exception of Abdur Rahman ibn Abu Bakr (the son of Abu Bakr), Abdullah ibn Umar (the son of Umar), Husain ibn Ali (the son of Ali), Abdullah ibn Az-Zubair (the maternal grandson of Abu Bakr) and Abdullah ibn Abbas (Ali's cousin). Because of this Muawiyah passed through al-Madinah on his way back from Makkah upon completion of his Umrah Pilgrimage where he summoned each one of the five aforementioned individuals and threatened them. The speaker who addressed Muawiyah sharply with the greatest firmness amongst them was Abdurrahman ibn Abu Bakr as-Siddeeq, while Abdullah ibn Umar ibn al-Khattab was the most soft spoken amongst them.

-------------
All schools of Islam, Sunnis and Shias, regard Zayd Ibn Ali as a righteous martyr (Shaheed) against what was regarded as the corrupt leadership of an unjust Caliph. It is even reported that Mujtahid Imam Abu Hanifa, founder of the largest school of Sunni jurisprudence, gave financial support to Zayd's revolt and called on others to join Zayd's rebellion. Zayd's rebellion inspired other revolts by members of his clan, especially in the Hejaz, the most famous among these being the revolt of Imam Muhammad al-Nafs al-Zakiyya al-Mahdi against the Abbasids in 762.

Zaydis believe that he was a rightful Caliph and their sect is named after him.

It is believed that from him originated the derogatory word for Imami Shi'ites, Rafida.

[ Rafida, also transliterated as Rafidah, is an Arabic word (collective plural Arabic: الرافضة‎, translit. ar-Rāfiḍa‎; multiple plural Arabic: روافض‎, translit. Rawāfiḍ‎; singular Arabic: رافضي‎, translit. Rāfiḍī‎) meaning "rejectors", "rejectionists", "those who reject" or "those who refuse". The word is derived from the Arabic consonantal root ر ف ض, which as a verb means "to reject". The non-collective singular form is رافضي rāfiḍī "one who rejects". This is an Islamic term which refers to those who, in the opinion of the person using the term, reject legitimate Islamic authority and leadership. Those being called rafida generally consider it to be a pejorative appellation, a negative affect, and an abusive nickname.

The term is used contemporarily in a derogatory manner by Sunni Muslims, especially Salafis, who refer to Shia Muslims as such because Shia Muslims do not recognize Abu Bakr, Umar, and Uthman as the legitimate successors of Muhammad, and hold Ali to be the rightful first successor. ]

========

https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Zayd_ibn_Ali

Descendants:
Hasan ibn Zayd https://www.geni.com/people/627-Hasan-bin-Zayd-bin-Ali-Hassan-ol-Faths/6000000018889356231

Yahya ibn Zayd 2nd son

Husayn ibn Zayd 3rd son

Muhammad ibn Zayd

Isa ibn Zayd-Mawtamul Ishball 4th son

Yahya ibn Umar- lead an abortive uprising from Kufa in 250 A.H. (864-65 C.E.)

--------------------
Ali zayn al Abidin's son Ali was a Madani. He was born to a concubine and was the youngest of his progeny to leave issue. His son al-Hasan al Aftas https://www.geni.com/people/627-Hasan-bin-Zayd-bin-Ali-Hassan-ol-Faths/6000000018889356231 who was also born to a concubine has been mentioned int eh discussion of the uprising of 169 AH and his two sons in turn, Ali and Muhammad whose mothers are not identified were killed on al-Ma'mun's orders. .. in the uprising of 199 AH, they may well have participated in it. ref page 171 of The Religious Elite of the Early Islamic Ḥijāz: Five Prosopographical Case ... By Asad Q. Ahmed.

https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=v1dwdBDDjcUC&pg=PA148&lpg=PA148&dq=The+religious+elite+of+the+early+Islamic+Hijaz...+The+descendant+of+Al+b.+Abi+Talib.+by+Hasan+Q.+Ahmed&source=bl&ots=z3DYB03n81&sig=ACfU3U0T-H0Q2VuJMJ3y6zzveM3Kfso1XQ&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjc5MHi_MPkAhXgThUIHSn1DMAQ6AEwCXoECAoQAQ#v=onepage&q=%20insurrection%20of%20199%20&f=false
--------------------
* Wilaadat (Birth): 100 A.H.
* Wafaat (Death): 157 A.H. (57 years old).

[Sons of Hossein al-Asghar: Obeidollah al-Aarej - Abdullah al-Aqeqi - Soleiman - Ali - Hassan.] ?

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000001472795870

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]