== Notes for [[Item:Q101216|Q101216]] ==

Constanza Rodriguez de Maluenda appears as a daughter of Gonzalo Rodriguez de Maluenda in 1435 in https://www.fundacioncajacirculo.es/AHCB_D.php?cod=5842RR&nombre=Rodr%C3%ADguez,%20Constanza

Contanza's second last name could also be Villena since in http://bibliotecadigital.rah.es/dgbrah/i18n/consulta/registro.cmd?id=45697 page 7 Luis de Salazar y Castro says that Gonzalo Rodriguez de Maluenda, son of Juan Garces de Maluenda and Maria Nunez de Cartagena, "it is supposed" or "it was known" (the meaning of the words used can be interpreted differently) that he was married to a Maria de Villena.

In the Maluenda "probanza de hidalguia" in page 248 of http://riubu.ubu.es/bitstream/10259.4/591/1/1133-9284_n097_p241-254.pdf it is said that Teresa Rodriguez de Maluenda was married to a Polanco. Teresa married Pedro Torquemada and had many children with him according to Cantera Burgos so it is unlikely that it was her who married a Polanco and instead it was her sister.

It is unclear if in this document of the Cathedral of Burgos, Gonzalo Lopez de Polanco appears as Gonzalo Perez de Polanco y Villena or if Villena is another person. https://www.fundacioncajacirculo.es/AHCB_D.php?cod=13968RR&nombre=L%C3%B3pez%20de%20Polanco,%20Gonzalo

Author Laura Lara Martinez in her book ''Ignacio y la Compañía: Del castillo a la misión'' (2015) claims that Constanza de Maluenda was the paternal greatgrandmother of the Jesuit Juan Alfonso de Polanco. For that to happen, Constanza needs to be the wife of Don Gonzalo Lopez Polanco (c.1420-?), his paternal greatgrandfather. https://books.google.se/books?id=2VwPCwAAQBAJ&pg=PT40&dq=juan+alfonso+polanco+maluenda&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjgs_HoxsDZAhXCKCwKHYvXBrY4ChDoAQgrMAA#v=onepage&q=juan%20alfonso%20polanco%20maluenda&f=false

https://books.google.se/books?id=db89AQAAIAAJ&q=polanco+astruch&dq=polanco+astruch&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjilPiv18DZAhVBlSwKHRgBCbQQ6AEIKTAA

Various authors claim the same thing as above, that Jesuit Juan Alfonso Polanco descends from the Maluenda family, again for that to happen, his paternal greatgrandmother needs to be a Rodriguez Maluenda born circa 1420-1430 https://books.google.se/books?id=xCPtCwAAQBAJ&pg=PA191&dq=polanco+maluenda+converso&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiQ9oq1m9nZAhVSyaQKHR76DiQQ6AEIKTAA#v=onepage&q=polanco%20maluenda%20converso&f=false

Author Jose Garcia de Castro in his book "Polanco, el humanismo de los jesuitas" on page 13 also says that Juan Alfonso Polanco descends from the Maluendas (although he says its from his mother's side. His mother was Maria de Salinas and there is no evidence that his maternal grandfather Juan Alonso de Salinas descends from the Maluendas and the genealogy of his maternal grandmother Catalina Iniguez de la Mota is an old Christian lineage. https://gcloyola.com/es/index.php?controller=attachment&id_attachment=101

Maluenda lineage links- https://sites.google.com/site/barbagen/maluenda http://bibliotecadigital.rah.es/dgbrah/i18n/consulta/registro.cmd?id=45697 page 7 (Descendants of Maria Nunez Ha-Levi)

Cantera Burgos book on Alvar Garcia de Santa Maria descendants https://bibliotecadigital.jcyl.es/es/catalogo_imagenes/grupo.cmd?path=10067821

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD94BF741EFBBFA9822EF79916CA5DB
geni:6000000076374486908

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]