== Notes for [[Item:Q100395|Q100395]] ==

Meʾir ibn Migash (12th century) was the son of the well-known talmudist Joseph ibn Migash. Following the Sephardi tradition, he was named for his grandfather, who had lived in Seville in the eleventh century. Meʾir was a disciple of his father, studying with him alongside his cousin, also named Meʾir. Although he never attained the same level of knowledge as his father, he was the last rav of the talmudic academy of Lucena. The arrival of the Almohads meant the end of the city’s prosperous Jewish community (as lamented in the famous elegy by Abraham ibn Ezra), and most of its Jews left Muslim al-Andalus for Christian territories in the north. As told by Abraham ibn Daʾud in his Sefer ha-Qabbala (ed. Cohen, Heb. p. 65, Eng. pp. 87 f.), Meʾir and his family settled in Toledo and continued teaching there: “After the demise of R. Joseph ha-Levi, of blessed memory,—whose generation was third of the Rabbinate—the world became desolate of academies of learning. Although his son, R. Meir, and his nephew, R. Meir, were his disciples and received their authority from him, and, indeed, are great scholars—‘before the impending calamity, the righteous had been taken away.’ After the demise of R. Joseph there were years of war, evil decrees and persecutions that overtook the Jews, who were compelled to wander from their homes. . . . Owing to this situation, R. Joseph’s sons were unable to maintain academies and were [among] the first to flee to the city of Toledo. They have been making whatever effort they can to raise disciples, and the Holy One, blessed be He, has shown His approval of their deeds. They are the last of the talmudic scholars of the present age.”

Angel Saénz-Badillos

Bibliography

Ibn Daʾud, Abraham. Sefer ha-Qabbalah: The Book of Tradition, ed. and trans. Gerson D. Cohen. (Oxford: Littman Library of Jewish Civilization, 2005).

Citation Angel Saénz-Badillos. " Ibn Migash, Me'ir ben Joseph." Encyclopedia of Jews in the Islamic World. Executive Editor Norman A. Stillman. Brill Online , 2012. Reference. Jim Harlow. 19 July 2012 <http://referenceworks.brillonline.com/entries/encyclopedia-of-jews-in-the-islamic-world/ibn-migash-meir-ben-joseph-SIM_0010890>

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD8AF9831EFBBFA9822EF79916C99C9
geni:6000000017215153101

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]