== Notes for [[Item:Q111620|Q111620]] ==

FUENTES:

https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Silo_de_Asturias

-http://www.abcgenealogia.com/Asturias00.html
--------------------
Silo of Asturias

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Silo was the king of Asturias from 774 to 783. Silo was not a relative of either the Peláyez or Pérez families which had produced all previous kings. He was, however, the husband of Adosinda, daughter of Alfonso I. For this, some historians have posited a matrilineal succession or at least rule jure uxoris.

He transferred the capital from Cangas de Onís to the village of Pravia, which was closer to the centre of the kingdom. He was a local magnate of the region around Pravia. The strategic benefits were that Pravia was located in the Valle del Nalón and at the terminus of the Roman Asturica Augusta.

Silo extended the frontiers of the realm to Galicia. He had to endure a Galician rebellion at Monte Cubeiro in the province of Lugo. On Silo's death, the throne was seized by Mauregatus, an illegitimate son of Alfonso I. Silo did leave one bastard son: Adelgaster.

Rey de Asturias (773-783)
La elección de Silo fue fácil para los "altos Omes", ya que estaba casado con Adosina, la hija de Alfonso I "el Católico", y además era descendiente de Pelayo. Hizo frente a un levantamiento gallego en Montecubeiro. Se cree que mantuvo la paz con los árabes por la influencia de su madre. Al no tener descendencia de Adosina, trajo a su lado al hijo de Fruela, pero Mauregato se interpuso. Silo murió en Pravia en el año 783. Su mujer se fue a un monasterio y su sobrino Alfonso con sus familiares de Álava

Rey de Asturias (773-783)
La elección de Silo fue fácil para los "altos Omes", ya que estaba casado con Adosina, la hija de Alfonso I "el Católico", y además era descendiente de Pelayo. Hizo frente a un levantamiento gallego en Montecubeiro. Se cree que mantuvo la paz con los árabes por la influencia de su madre. Al no tener descendencia de Adosina, trajo a su lado al hijo de Fruela, pero Mauregato se interpuso. Silo murió en Pravia en el año 783. Su mujer se fue a un monasterio y su sobrino Alfonso con sus familiares de Álava

Succeded Alfonso I as King of Asturias.
1: Collins, Roger. Visigothic Spain, 409-711.
Blackwell publishing 2004.
2: King, P.D., King Chindasuinth and the first territorial law code of the Visigothic kingdon.
Edward James-Oxford-Clarendon Press 1980, PP. 131-157.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]