== Notes for [[Item:Q3045|Q3045]] ==

Juan GÓMEZ GALLARDO LATAPÍ's Family Tree

Ana ESTRADA DE-LA-CABALLERÍA Sosa/Ahnentafel # 81,133 Family Tree Profile Matches Print Illustrated family tree Family Ancestry Charts & lists Family tree Check Descendants Lists Family tree Relationship Calculate relationship Relationship with x x (Sosa/Ahnentafel #1) Relationship with Juan Alonso CABRERA (spouse) More Illustrated statistics Map Set as family tree root F Ana ESTRADA DE-LA-CABALLERÍAPrint Family TreeSosa : 81,133 Born in 1492 Deceased - Nueva Galicia, México

Parents Alonso ESTRADA DE-LA-CABALLERÍA Mariana GUTIÉRREZ FLORES-DE-LA-CABALLERIA

Spouses and children Married to Juan Alonso CABRERA †1564 (Parents : Lope SOSA †1520 & Inés CABRERA) with F María SOSA CABRERA M Lope SOSA † married to Inés CASTILLA-OSORIO SOSA M Juan Alonso ESTRADA 1542- married to Mariana GUEVARA BARRIOS
Ana de Estrada Cavalleria and Juan Alonso de Sosa had the following children 8 ii. Inez de Sosa was born in Mexico circa 1533. 9 iii. Lope de Sosa was born in Mexico, D.F. circa 1542. 10 iv. Alonso de Sosa was born in Mexico, D.F. circa 1543. 11 v. Maria de Sosa was born in Mexico, D.F. circa 1545.

20. FRANCISCO7 DE SOSA-GUEVARA-Y-ALBORNOZ (ESTEBAN6 DE SOSA-GUEVARA, JUAN-ALONSO5 DE ESTRADA, ANA4 ESTRADA-DE-LA-CABALLERIA, ALONSO3 DE ESTRADA, was born 1530 in Santa Olalla, Spain. He married INES DE TAPIA-Y-SOSA 1548 in Xochitla, Mexico City, D.F., Mexico, daughter of ANDRES DE TAPIA and ISABEL DE SOSA. She was born in Spain, and died in Mexico City, F.D., Mexico.

Notes for FRANCISCO DE SOSA-GUEVARA-Y-ALBORNOZ:

ALSO OF INTEREST SEE: MARIA-BEATRIZ4 NAVARRO-RODRIGUEZ-CASTANO-SOSA (JUAN3 NAVARRO II, JUAN2, PEDRO1) was born Abt. 1575, and died Dec 1674 in Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico. She married (1) CAPTAIN ALONSO DE SOSA-ALBORNOZ 1593 in Mexico City, D.F., Mexico, son of FRANCISCO DE SOSA-GUEVARA-Y-ALBORNOZ and INES DE TAPIA-Y-SOSA. He was born Abt. 1549 in Xochitle, Mexico F.D., Mexico, and Abt. 1601 was Murdered at San Gabriel, New Mexico. She married (2) CAPTAIN BERNABE DE-LAS-CASAS Abt. 1602 in New Mexico, son of MIGUEL DE-LAS-CASAS and MARTHA LOPEZ. He was born Abt. 1573 in Tenerife, Canary Island, Spain, and died Abt. 1637 in Salinas Victoria, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.
Notes for MARIA-BEATRIZ NAVARRO-RODRIGUEZ-CASTANO-SOSA:
A.K.A. Beatriz de Navarro.
She was widowed with five children.
Source:From the book, New Mexico's First Colonists, compiled and arranged by David H. Snow.
Notes for CAPTAIN ALONSO DE SOSA-ALBORNOZ:
Member of the 1598 New Mexico Expedition
A native of New Spain, Captain Alonso Sosa Albornoz, one of the founders of the mines at San Martin,
was born in 1550 at Xochitla, New Spain (Mexico). He was the son of Don Francisco de Sosa Albornoz and Dona Inés de Tapia and a descendent of the Royal Treasurer of New Spain, Don Alonso de Estrada.
He was married twice. His first marriage occurred in 1565 to Dona Juana Ramirez, a native of New Spain, and born about 1550. After the death of his first wife, Captain Alonso married the Dona Beatris Navarro Rodriguez. This marriage took place on or about 1589 in Mexico City. Dona Beatris was much younger than her husband, having been born in 1564. She was the daughter of Don Juan Navarro and Dona Maria Rodriguez
Captain Alonso is listed on the January 8, 1598 muster of the officials and soldiers who enlisted in the Valley of La Puana for Governor Don Juan de Onate's expedition into New Mexico. On the muster, his belongings included a servant, harquebus (a early type of portable gun supported on a hooked staff), and complete armor plate for himself and his horse. Also in this expedition was his wife Dona Beatriz and their five children. It is possable that his children from his previous marriage may have also accompanied him. By the time of this expedition these children would have been older than eighteen years and could have gone their separate ways.
As one of New Mexico's first settlers, he would be executed for requesting to be transfer back to New Spain. This settlement was located in the far frontier of Spain's vast Empire. Finding itself removed from all civilization, this harsh land was rendering the settlers to extreme hardships. Not wanting to endure any further hardship, Captain Alonso asked for permission to return his family to New Spain. At first his request had granted, but apparently to prevent a mutiny, the governor had second thoughts. It is recorded that Governor Juan de Oñate ordered Don Alonso's killing and in 1601, under the command of Don Vicente de Zaldivar, Captain Alonso was ambushed and killed.
After Don Alonso's death, and finding herself completely vulnerable in a hostile and remote environment, Dona Beatris would married a native of Tenerife, Canary Island, Spain, Captain Bernabe de las Casas. This marriage took place in New Mexico. This marriage provided her the security and protection for her and her five children. Her marriage to Bernabe would add five additional children.
Captain Alonso Sosa Albornoz and Dona Beatris Navarro Rodriguez had the following child: Ana Sosa Albornoz was born in Mexico around 1590. She married Alonso Farias Treviño in Nuevo León. He was the son of Don Juan Farias and Dona Maria de Treviño Quintanilla. There are many descendants of Captain Alonso who are the progeny of his daughter, Ana Sosa Albornoz.
A.K.A. Alonso Albornoz de Sosa and Alonso de Sosa Panalosa
Source: Agapito Rey and George Hammond, Don Juan de Oñate Colonizer of New México 1595 - 1628 (Coronado Historical Series: The University of New México Press, 1953); New México Historical Review The Founding of New México.
A History of New Mexico by Gaspar Perez de Villagra, Alcala - 1610, translated by Gilberto Espinosa.
In the book, Mil Familias III, by Rodolfo Gonzalez de la Garza, he is listed as a descendent of the Don Alonso of Estrada, Duke of Aragon. Page 85.
New Mexico's First Colonists, compiled and arranged by David H. Snow.
Land of the Conquistador by Cleve Hallenbeck.

In the book, Mil Familias III, by Rodolfo Gonzalez de la Garza, he is listed as a descendent of the Don Alonso of Estrada, Duke of Aragon. Page 85.

Conquistador of Nueva Galicia, Mexico.

Marriage Notes for FRANCISCO DE SOSA-GUEVARA-Y-ALBORNOZ and INES DE TAPIA-Y-SOSA:

Marriage source from the book, Mil Familias III by Rodolfo Gonzalez de la Garza. Page 85.

Children of FRANCISCO DE SOSA-GUEVARA-Y-ALBORNOZ and INES DE TAPIA-Y-SOSA are:

28. i. CAPTAIN ALONSO8 DE SOSA-ALBORNOZ, b. Abt. 1549, Xochitle, Mexico F.D., Mexico; d. Abt. 1601, Murdered at San Gabriel, New Mexico.

ii. ANA DE SOSA-ALBORNOZ, d. Bef. 02 Sep 1591, Mexico City, F.D. Mexico?.

--------------------
esteban de SOSA Guevara

Esteban de SOSA24,2980 was born (date unknown). He was a resident of Santa Olalla, near Toledo, Spain. Parents: Alonso de SOSA and ______ ______ (spouse of Alonso de Sosa).

Spouse: Ana de ALBORNOZ. Ana de ALBORNOZ and Esteban de SOSA were married. Children were:
* Francisco de SOSA ALBORNOZ.

http://www.raullongoria.net/Genealogy/FamilyTree/b213.html#P6969

======================================

(JUAN-ALONSO5 DE ESTRADA, ANA4 ESTRADA-DE-LA-CABALLERIA, ALONSO3 DE ESTRADA, FERDINAND II (THE2 CATHOLIC), JOHN II OF1 ARAGON) was born in Santa Olalla, Toledo, Spain. He married ANA DE ALBORNOZ Abt. 1529, daughter of BERNARDO DE ALBORNOZ and ISABEL VASQUEZ-DE-TAPIA. She was born in Santa Olalla, Toledo, Spain.

Children of ESTEBAN DE SOSA-GUEVARA and ANA DE ALBORNOZ are:
* i. ESTEBAN7 DE SOSA-ALBORNOZ.
* 20. ii. FRANCISCO DE SOSA-GUEVARA-Y-ALBORNOZ, b. 1530, Santa Olalla, Spain.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051ADA525A71EFBBFA9822EF79916C405D
geni:6000000029288980201


[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]