== Notes for [[Item:Q81610|Q81610]] ==

Source 1: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hubba_bint_Hulail

Source 2: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hulail_ibn_Hubshiyyah
--------------------
Hubba bint Hulail (Arabic: حبة بنت هليل‎‎) was the grandmother of Hashim ibn 'Abd Manaf, thus the great-great-great-grandmother of Islamic prophet Muhammad.

Hubba was the daughter of Hulail ibn Hubshiyyah ibn Salul ibn Ka’b ibn Amr al-Khuza’i of Banu Khuza'a[2] who was the trustee and guardian of the Ka‘bah. She married Qusai ibn Kilab and after her father died, the keys of the Ka‘bah were committed to her. Qusai, according to Hulail's will, had the trusteeship of the Ka‘bah after him.

Hubba never gave up ambitious hopes for the line of her favourite son ‘Abd Manaf. Her two favourite grandsons were the twin sons ‘Amr and ‘Abd Shams of ‘Ātikah bint Murrah. Hubba hoped that the opportunities missed by 'Abd Manaf would surely be made up for in these grandsons, especially ‘Amr, who seemed so much more suitable for the role than any of the sons of ‘Abd al-Dar. He became the darling of grandmother Hubba's eye.[3]

Family Qusai ibn Kilab had four sons by Hubba: Abd-al-Dar ibn Qusai dedicated to his house, Abdu’l Qusayy dedicated to himself, Abd-al-Uzza ibn Qusai to his goddess (Al-‘Uzzá) and Abd Manaf ibn Qusai to the idol revered by Hubba. They also had two daughters, Takhmur and Barrah. Abdu’l Manaf's real name was Mughirah, and he also had the nickname al-Qamar (the Moon) because he was so handsome.

Hubba bint Hulail was one of the ancestral women of the Muhammad and was related to him in various ways. Firstly, she was the great-great-grandmother of Abdullah,[2] who was the father of the Prophet. As well as this, Hubba was the great-grandmother of Umm Habib and Abdul Uzza (maternal grandmother and grandfather of Aminah).

----

Source:

https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hubba_bint_Hulail

Name Suffix:<NSFX> Of The Khozaites

Name Suffix:<NSFX> Of The Khozaites

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]