== Notes for [[Item:Q57000|Q57000]] ==

Matías López del Castillo named his parents in his will as Juan del Castillo and María Días (Díaz) de Cuéllar. From Beyond Origins, Vol. 7Researcher: Robert Martínez Narrative Summary: José Antonio Esquibel Source: Archivo Histórico del Parral, Reel 1632, Frame 180.

Catholic
Matías López del Castillo was thirty-five years old in 1626.
He was married to the daughter of Ana de Bustillos and living in Santa Fé. His wife was therefore an Archuleta, daughter of Asencio. Matías was also in the soldier-escort of 1628. One daughter of his seems to be have been Ana López del Castillo, the wife of Juan de Herrera. After the Reconquest there were more family matches between this Herrera family and that of Pedro López del Castillo.
____________________
A fragment of the will of Matías López del Castillo (ONMF: 55) was recently uncovered by Rob Martínez in the collection of the Achivo Histórico del Parral. The fragment contains information about the place of birth López del Castillo and the names of his parents. Chávez identified López del Castillo as having been born circa 1591. In his will, dated 1632, Matías declared he was a native of Cabra, in the province of Córdoba and located about 35 miles southeast of the City of Córdoba. Cabra lays between the Sierra de la Cabra and the Sierra de Montilla in the region of Andalucía.

Matías López del Castillo named his parents as Juan del Castillo and María Días (Díaz) de Cuéllar. Information about the wife and children of Matías were not located in the fragment, but the available information makes clear reference to the fact that he was in New Mexico prior to making his will. If he died soon after making the will, he was about 41 years of age when at the time of his death. Cháves indicated that one of his daughters was apparently Ana López del Castillo, the wife of Juan de Herrera.

Researcher: Robert Martínez

Narrative Summary: José Antonio Esquibel

Source: Archivo Histórico del Parral, Reel 1632, Frame 180.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]