== Notes for [[Item:Q1944|Q1944]] ==

{geni:about_me} In the epic Mahabharata, Shantanu was a Kuru king of Hastinapura. He was a descendant of the Bharata race, of the lunar dynasty and great-grandfather of the Pandavas and Kauravas. He was the youngest son of King Pratipa of Hastinapura and had been born in the latter's old age. The eldest son Devapi had leprosy and gave up his inheritance to become a hermit. The middle son Bahlika (or Vahlika) abandoned his paternal kingdom and started living with his maternal uncle in Balkh and inherited the kingdom from him. Shantanu became the king of Hastinapura by default.
<p>He is best known for being the father of Bhishma, one of the mightiest warriors of all time. </p>
<p>Brahma's Curse & Birth Of Shantanu </p>
<p>In his previous birth, Shantanu was a powerful king of the Ikshvaku dynasty named Mahabhisha. Mahabhisha possessed many virtuous qualities, and after performing a thousand Ashwamedha Yagnas (Horse Sacrifices) and a hundred Rajasuya Yagnas (to qualify as emperor), he had attained heaven after his death. Once he got an opportunity to visit the court of Brahma where all the Devas and Ganga were also present. While the celestials were worshipping Brahma, a wind blew and displaced Ganga's clothes revealing her body. Everybody present there bashfully bent their heads except Mahabhisha who kept on gazing at her body. Upon seeing this act, Brahma lost his temper and cursed him to be born as mortals and that Ganga will cause much emotional pain to him. Mahabhisha then requested Brahma to be born as the son of Kuru king Pratipa and his wish was granted by Brahma.
<p>The Kuru king Pratipa was once meditating, in atonement for the crimes he had committed in seizing the throne of Hastinapur. At that time Ganga took the form of a beautiful woman, approached the king and sat on his right thigh. When he asked her what she wanted, Ganga requested him to become her husband. Pratipa however refused since he had taken a vow not to lust for anybody, and also that she had sat on his right thigh and according to traditions a man's right thigh was for his daughter or daughter-in-law while the left thigh was for his wife. He then proposed that she marry his son, to which she agreed.
<p>A child was born to Pratipa and his wife in their old age. He was named Shantanu because when he was born his father had controlled his passions by ascetic penances. Pratipa then installed Shantanu as king of Hastinapura and retired into the woods to perform penances. Bahlika who was elder than Shantanu also gave permission to him for becoming the king of Hastinapura.
<p>Shantanu & Ganga</p>
<p>Shantanu saw a beautiful woman on the banks of the river Ganges (Ganga) and asked her to marry him. She agreed but with one condition: that Shantanu would not ask any questions about her actions. They married and she later gave birth to a son. But she drowned the child. Shantanu could not ask her the reason, because of his promise, lest she would leave him. One by one, seven sons were born to them and were drowned by Ganga. When Ganga was about to drown the eighth son, Shantanu, devastated, could not restrain himself and confronted her. Finally, Ganga explained to King Shantanu about Brahma's curse given to Mahabhisha and her. Then she told him that their eight children were Eight Vasus who were cursed by Vasishtha to be born on earth as mortal humans however when they pacified him, he limited his curse and told them that they would be freed from this curse within a year of their birth as humans. So she released the seven of them from this life by drowning them all. However the Vasu Dyaus was cursed to live a long life and to never have a wife or have children. But the sage also gave a boon to him that he would be virtuous, conversant with all the holy scriptures and will be an obedient son to his father. that she will take him to the heavens to train him properly for the King's throne and status. With these words she disappeared along with the child while Shantanu was struck with grief thinking about spending the rest of his life without her.
<p>Shantanu Reunites With His Son</p>
<p>Shantanu, filled with grief from loss of his wife and son, began to practise Brahmacharya and ruled his kingdom extremely well. By merely adopting virtuous behaviour, Shantanu was easily able to conquer the entire world without lifting weapons. All the kings declared Shantanu as Emperor and his reign was a peaceful one. Shantanu gave up hunting and gained popularity from his subjects.
<p>One day, while walking along the banks of the Ganga, Shantanu saw that the river had become shallow. While searching for the cause of this phenomena, he came across a handsome young boy who had checked the river's flow with his celestial weapon. The young boy was his son however he didn't recognize this because of only having seen him for a few moments after his birth. The boy recognized that he was his father however didn't reveal it to him instead disappearing in his very sight using his powers of illusion. Shantanu upon seeing this wondered whether the boy was actually his son and called upon Ganga to show the boy to him. Ganga thus appeared. She then revealed to him that the boy was actually his son Devavrata and that he was taught the knowledge of the holy scriptures by the sage Vasishtha and the art of warfare by Parshurama. After revealing the truth about Devavrata she told Shantanu to take him back with to Hastinapura. Upon reaching the capital Shantanu crowned Devavrata as the heir-apparent to the throne.[citation needed]
<p>Shantanu & Satyavati</p>
<p>Four years later, Shantanu while travelling near the banks of Yamuna smelled a sweet scent coming from an unknown direction. While searching for the cause of the scent, he came across Satyavati from whom the smell of scent was coming. Satyavati was an adopted daughter of the chief of the fishermen of her village. Upon seeing her, Shantanu fell in love with her and desired to her. Upon asking for his consent, her father agreed to the marriage on condition that Satyavati's son would inherit the throne of Hastinapura.
<p>King Shantanu was unable to give his word on accession as his eldest son Devavrata was the heir to the throne. However, Devavrata came to know about this and for the sake of his father, gave his word to the chief that he would renounce all his claims to the throne, in favour of Satyavati's children. To reassure the skeptical chief, further he also vowed lifelong celibacy to ensure that future generations borne of Satyavati would also not be challenged by his offsprings. Upon hearing this vow he immediately agreed to the marriage of Satyavati and Shantanu. Devavrata was named as Bhishma (one who has taken a terrible vow) by the celestials because of the terrible oath he took. Upon returning with Satyavati to Hastinapura he told about his vow to his father. Upon hearing about this Shantanu became highly impressed and gave him a boon that he will only die if he chooses so. Shantanu and Satyavati went on to have two sons, Chitrāngada and Vichitravirya. After Shantanu's death, Chitrangada became the king of Hastinapura.[citation needed]
<p>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shantanu </p>
<p>----</p>
<p>Media images on https://www.geni.com/people/King-Shantanu-Pratipa/6000000003485699460?through=6000000008814114101</p>
<p>--------------------</p>
<p>King Shantanu was King Mahabhishek in his previous birth. After leading a good life as king, he was invited to Indra's kingdom where accidentally he stared at Ganga when there was a wardrobe malfunction. So, Indra cursed King Mahabhishek to be born again on earth and lead a normal human life. Since Ganga too enjoyed the attention, she too was cursed to be born as human.
<p>When King Shantanu was born, he had forgotten about his past life whereas Ganga remembered and pursued behind him.</p>
<p></p>
<p>----</p>
<p>There is No Greater Virtue Than Patience </p>
<p>Parashara, son of Adrushyanti, grew up in Vasishta's hermitage. VasisThta taught him everything. When he grew up into a man, his mother told him all about his father. Parashara became angry. He had mastered the four Vedas and was a saint like Vasishta. He had earned great power by his tapas like Vasishta. He declared, I shall kill Kalmashapada, who killed my father" and was starting when Vasishta came and advised, "0 child Parashara, be calm. There is no virtue higher than patience. For a person who. Performs tapas, patience is of great value. After all Kalmashapada is the king of this country. he is ruling righteously now.
<p>What is the benefit in killing him? Will your father come back to life? The kingdom will become leaderless. The citizens will be put to a lot of hardship. Taking revenge is not fit for us. Do not use the power gained by hard tapas for a task like this. Your father also did not do the right thing. He could have given the right of way to the king and could have avoided conflict. He made a mountain of a mole-hill. See how bad the consequences were. in his anger he cursed the king and wasted the, power he had gained by his tapas. He became the cause of his own death. Therefore, Parashara, do not wish Kalmashapada ill."
<p>--------------------</p>
<p>REASON FOR NAME;-</p>
<p>OLD MEN TOUCHED BY THIS MONARCH, NOT ONLY FELT ANINDESCRIBABLESENSATION OF PLEASURE BUT ALSO RESTORED TO YOUTH. THEREFORE THIS MONARCH WAS CALLED SANTANU.</p>
<p>Shantanu was a Kuru king of Hastinapura, who is mentioned in the Mahābhārata epic. He was a descendant of the Bharata race, of the lunar dynasty and the ancestor of the Pandavas and the Kauravas. The Rigveda (X.98.11) mentions Shantanu.[1] He was the youngest son of King Pratipa of Hastinapura and had been born in the latter's old age. The eldest son Devapi suffered from leprosy and abdicated his inheritance to become a hermit. The middle son Balhika devoted his life to conquer Balkh.[citation needed] Shantanu become the king of Hastinapura by default. Contents [hide]
<p>*1 Shantanu and Ganga</p>
<p>*2 Shantanu and Satyavati</p>
<p>*3 References</p>
<p>*Shantanu and Ganga</p>
<p>The scene from the Mahabharata of the presentation by Ganga,(A MAIDEN LIVING IN THE VICINITY OF GANGES) of her son Devavrata (the future Bhisma) to his father, Santanu.</p>
<p>Shantanu saw a beautiful woman on the banks of the river Ganges (Ganga) and asked her to marry him. She agreed but with one condition: that Shantanu would not ask any questions about her actions. They married and she later gave birth to a son. But she drowned the child. Shantanu could not ask her the reason, because of his promise, lest she would leave him. One by one, seven sons were born to them , and were drowned by Ganga. When Ganga was about to drown the eighth son, Shantanu, devastated, could not restrain himself and confronted her. She explained that she was in fact the Goddess Ganga, and that the infants she had drowned were demi-gods who had been cursed to be born as humans. She had been freeing them from their curse. Since Ganga revealed the truth to Shantanu, she could not free the last demi-god. So she left the baby boy in Shantanu's care and went back to the river. The baby boy was named Devavrata, and eventually came to be known as the mighty warrior Bhishma. [edit]Shantanu and Satyavati
<p>When Shantanu's son Bhishma had grown into a young prince, Shantanu came across Satyavati, an adopted daughter of a ferryman on the Yamuna river, (WHO WAS ALSO CALLED GANDHAKALI IN HER MAIDENHOOD) and fell in love with her. The ferryman agreed to the marriage on condition that, the son Satyavati bore the king would inherit the throne.
<p>King Shantanu was unable to give his word on accession as his eldest son Bhishma was the heir to the throne. However, Bhishma came to know of this and for the sake of his father, gave his word to the ferryman that he would renounce all his claims to the throne, in favour of Satyavati's children. To reassure the skeptical ferryman, further he also vowed lifelong celibacy to ensure that future generations borne of Satyavati would also not be challenged by his offspring.
<p>Shantanu and Satyavati went on to have two sons, Chitrāngada and Vichitravirya. After Shantanu's death, Satyavati continued to rule the kingdom with her two sons, with help of Bhishma.</p>
<p>--------------------</p>
<p>Birth Shantanu stops Ganga from drowning their eighth child, which later was known as Bhishma. The legend behind Bhishma's birth is as follows — once the eight Vasus ("Ashtavasus") visited Vashishta's ashram accompanied by their wives. One of the wives took a fancy to Nandini, Vashishta's wish-bearing cow and asked her husband Prabhasa to steal it from Vashishta. Prabhasa then stole the cow with the help of the others who were all consequently cursed by Vashishta to be born in the world of men. Upon the Vasus appealing to Vashishta's mercy, the seven Vasus who had assisted in stealing Nandini had their curse mitigated such that they would be liberated from their human birth as soon as they were born; however, Prabhasa being protagonist of the theft, was cursed to endure a longer life on the earth. The curse, however is softened to the extent that he would be one of the most illustrious men of his time. It was this Prabhasa who took birth as Devavrata (Bhishma). Shantanu spent long hours with Devrath, hungry to find out everything and anything about his son. He asked questions about the celestial realm and what Devrath's gurus had taught. He asked what Devrath thought on various topics and found out what the boy liked in food and clothes and sports.
<p>Shantanu was proud to discover that his son was highly educated and intelligent, giving well informed and developed thoughts on all issues, whether politics, taxation, agriculture or philosophy.</p>
<p>Shantanu discovered that Devrath had no equal when it came to weaponry. Devrath could outshoot, outhit, outride and outrace every other warrior in the kingdom. He was lightning fast, taking on all attackers and dispatching them without even breaking a sweat. Shantanu had many seasoned warriors attack Devrath at the same time and the boy took care of them with an efficiency and skill that boggled anyone who saw him.
<p>In court, Shantanu proudly showed off his son, encouraging Devrath to exhibit his learning in matters of state decisions and court judgements.</p>
<p>Devrath became wildly popular with the people and was happy in Hastinapur. His mother had told him that his duty was always to his father and to his motherland and thus he put all his energy into serving the both of them. Whenever he missed his mother he would go to the banks of the river and she would appear before him. Many times he asked her to come to the palace and stay with his father but she would not.
<p>One day Shantanu gifted his son with a rare Arabian horse, so white and swift it was unparalleled in the world. Seeing his son expertly mounted on the animal, his white robes melding with the colour of the horse, Shantanu almost burst with pride.
<p>Devrath, with the enthusiasm of youth, tore off on the horse. He was eager to test it's speed and strength. Galloping along Kurukshetra, the vast fields of the Kurus, Devrath saw an encroaching army in their territory. By the flag he knew it was the army of Shalva, a kingdom that had always coveted the power of Hastinapur.
<p>How did they get so close to Hastinapur without the king being informed? Devrath wondered. Perhaps the king did know and was preparing the army to defend the city at another location.</p>
<p>Devrath considered the size of the enemy army and the danger to Hastinapur's people if the fighting were to be held any closer than Kurukshetra. Devrath knew that by the time he rode home to inform his father it would be too late to mount an effective resistance.
<p>He decided to take care of the matter himself. Shalva's army were clearly not expecting resistance here so he would take them by surprise.</p>
<p>He rode towards the enemy and stopped a distance away. "Who are you and what are you doing in the King of Hastinapur's territory?" He called to them. The niceties had to be observed.</p>
<p>The young man at the head of the army halted his chariot and laughed. "Child, I am the crown prince of Shalva and I have come to conquer Hastinapur."</p>
<p>Devrath arched an eyebrow. "If that is so then you will have to go through me."</p>
<p>"Move aside, boy. I don't fight children." The prince of Shalva laughed again and gave the order to continue forward.</p>
<p>Devrath was secretly rejoicing. It had been a long time since he'd had a chance to test his skills. He pulled an arrow from his quiver and drew it on his bow. Chanting a sacred mantra his guru Parashuram had taught him, he infused the arrow with power and shot it at the ground.
<p>Instantly a line of fire erupted from the dry earth in front of the advancing enemy soldiers. It blocked them from moving forward and the line of fire curved around their flanks so it even blocked them from moving to the side. The soldiers panicked, breaking rank and fleeing back the way they came.
<p>Devrath's lips curved in amusement as the prince of Shalva futilely shouted at his troops to stand fast. The prince was abandoned by most of his army and the rest was helpless to advance without being burned.</p>
<p>"You will pay for that, boy!" The man screamed at him.</p>
<p>"I don't think I will," Devrath said and shot an arrow that broke the prince's bow. Before the man even had a chance to lift another bow Devrath shot off his crown, then pinned him to the flagstaff with an arrow through his thick shoulder armour. Devrath then shot down the enemy flag that dared fly on Hastinapur's sacred earth.
<p>Devrath chanted a mantra that turned one arrow into a length of rope. He looped it and threw it around the crown prince of Shalva, snapping it tight. Devrat pulled the prince of Shalva from his chariot and dragged him forwards, through the line of fire and back to where Devrath sat on his white mount.
<p>"Now I shall take you to the King of Hastinapur for judgement," Devrath informed the prince, as the man struggled to his feet.</p>
<p>"Just kill me!" The prince of Shalva snarled. "I'd rather die that be humiliated."</p>
<p>"Judgement is not passed according to the wishes of the offender," Devrath said. And turning his horse back he cantered to Hastinapur, the prince of Shalva forced to run alongside him. He rode into the court itself where Shantanu sat with his ministers.
<p>Shantanu was amazed to hear Devrath's story. He'd only just been informed of the impending attack by his scouts and in the midst of readying his army he'd worried about Devrath who was out riding alone. But Devrath had saved them all.
<p>"What do you think we should do with him, my son?" Shantanu asked Devrath, gesturing to the prince of Shalva.</p>
<p>Devrath gave the bound man a solemn stare. "In my opinion, we should set him free because it is against dharma to kill prisoners of war. Also, with the tale of his defeat spread through Bharat he will be unable to attack us again without being laughed at."
<p>"And what if his father, the king of Shalva, decides to take revenge upon us for humiliating his son?"</p>
<p>"Then we will meet his challenge and defeat him, just as I defeated his son." Devrath said. "Truth is on our side so we will certainly be victorious."</p>
<p>The ministers in the court all agreed that Devrath's judgement was correct.</p>
<p>Shantanu then asked the prince of Shalva to speak if he had anything to say. The prince said nothing and was sullen as Devrath removed his bindings. His clothes torn and scorched, his crown lost, the prince of Shalva limped out of the kingdom and back towards Shalva.
<p>Immediately afterwards the ministers entreated Shantanu to install Devrath as the crown prince of Hastinapur.</p>
<p>Shantanu was overjoyed. He had not yet expressed his wish to make Devrath crown prince because the heir had to prove himself worthy of the throne as per the tradition of King Bharat's lineage. Shantanu had wanted to wait until the people themselves selected Devrath as their next king. Now they had.
<p>All was perfect except for one thing; that Ganga was not there to see it.</p>
<p>Shantanu still yearned for her. He couldn't help it.</p>
<p>The ceremony was performed with great pomp. Shantanu invited all the people and thousands of Brahmins to bless Devrath.</p>
<p>Devrat accepted the position of crown prince with humility. He was happy to serve his beloved father and motherland in whatever way he could. So to see his father's face lit with happiness made Devrath joyous and he vowed to always do what made his father happy. Surely that was his destiny and his duty.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]