== Notes for [[Item:Q105042|Q105042]] ==

Pedro De La Garza Falcon
*(son of Marcos Alonso De La Garza y Arcon and Juana De Trivino y Quintanilla) was born 1589, and
*died 08 Feb 1639 in Valle de la Salinas, Nuevo Leon,Mexico.
*He married Ines Rodriguez on 1610,
**daughter of Diego Rodriguez and Sebastiana De Trevino.

http://familytreemaker.genealogy.com/users/a/b/o/Dorothy-M-Aboyte/WEBSITE-0001/UHP-0191.html
--------------------
This is on the descendants of The Descendents of Captain Pedro de la Garza Falcon y Trevino

1. CAPTAIN PEDRO2 DE-LA-GARZA-FALCON-TREVINO (MARCOS-ALONSO1 DE-LA-GARZA-Y-ARCON) was born 1589 in Guadiana, Durango, Mexico, and on 08 Feb 1639 he was in murdered in Salinas Victoria, Nuevo Leon, Mexico. He met (1) SLAVE GIRL ?. He married (2) Dona MARIA-INES RODRIGUEZ-MARTINEZ-GUAJARDO Abt. 1610 in Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico, daughter of Don JUAN-FRANCISCO MARTINEZ-GUAJARDO and Dona URSULA-INES-CATARINA NAVARRO-RODRIGUEZ. She was born 1585 in Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.

Notes for CAPTAIN PEDRO DE-LA-GARZA-FALCON-TREVINO:

Founder of Apodaca, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.

Notes for SLAVE GIRL ?:

Her name is unknown

Notes for MARIA-INES RODRIGUEZ-MARTINEZ-GUAJARDO:

In the book, Origin of the surnames Garza and Trevino in Nuevo Leon, by Tomas Mendirichaga Cueva,

her Parents are listed as Lord Chief Justice Diego Rodriguez and Dona Sebastiana de Trevino. Page 13.

Child of PEDRO DE-LA-GARZA-FALCON-TREVINO and SLAVE GIRL ? is:

2. i. ELENA3 DE-LA-GARZA. (Note: She is listed as a Mulatta}

Children of PEDRO DE-LA-GARZA-FALCON-TREVINO and MARIA-INES RODRIGUEZ-MARTINEZ-GUAJARDO are:

3. ii. ELENA3 DE-LA-GARZA-RODRIGUEZ, b. 1607; d. Bet. 1636 - 1705, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.

iii. MARIANA DE-LA-GARZA-RODRIGUEZ, b. 1610; d. Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico; m. CAPTAIN FELIX DE MENDOZA, 1630; b. Cuencame, Durango, Mexico.

4. iv. CAPTAIN PEDRO DE-LA-GARZA-RODRIGUEZ, b. Abt. 1613, Nuevo Leon, Mexico; d. 20 Nov 1695, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.

5. v. CAPTAIN JOSEPH DE-LA-GARZA-RODRIGUEZ, b. 1616; d. 1671, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.

http://www.somosprimos.com/inclan/garza.htm

--------------------
Pedro de la Garza was born in 1589 or 1590. In 1610 he married Ines Rodriguez, the daughter of Chief Justice Diego Rodriguez and Sebastiana de Trevino. This union resulted in the following children: Mariana, Elena, Pedro, and Jose--and more than twenty grandchildren. His civic appointments included that of procurer of the municipal government of Monterrey in 1630 and alderman and provincial judge of the Holy Brotherhood from 1636 to 1639. He is described as being "a man of a strong and impudent nature, very daring in danger, so much so that even with his own brothers he had encounters, and in this city there were very few with whom he would not have them." Apparently, in 1639, when he was around fifty years of age, he was murdered in Valle de las Salinas (today Salinas Victoria) "of a gunshot, with four bullets, which he had in his chest." His death apparently occurred as a result of a quarrel he had with another man, Mateo Monzon, concerning the ownership of an Indian. Source: Mendirichaga 1989, 13. Source: The Conquistadores and Crypto-Jews of Monterrey, David T. Raphael, p. 207.
--------------------
Ref."The Conquistadores and the Crypto-Jews of Monterrey" David T. Raphael (c.2001)

--------------------

--------------------
=== GEDCOM Note ===
* Pedro de la Garza Falcn Trevio ca 1589-1639

--------------------
=== GEDCOM Note ===
Founder of Apodaca, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000014352188692

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]