== Notes for [[Item:Q112301|Q112301]] ==

Nuno de Cellanova (1030 -?) foi um nobre e Cavaleiro medieval norte da Península Ibérica onde foi Senhor do Condado de Celanova, actual município da Espanha na província de Ourense, comunidade autónoma da Galiza. Indica-se que tenha sido alferes de Raimundo de Borgonha.

/!\ Relações familiares /!\

Foi filho de '' /!\ Teobaldo Nunes /!\'', Conde de Cellanova e de ''/!\ D. Teresa Moniz /!\''. Casou com D. Sancha Gomes de Sousa, filha de D. Gomes Echigues e de Gontrode Moniz, de quem teve:

D. Sancho Nunes ou Sancho Nunes de Cellanova ou também Sancho Nunes de Barbosa (1070 -1130), Casou por duas vezes, a primeira com D. Sancha Henriques (1097 - 1163), infanta de Portugal, filha do Conde D. Henrique de Borgonha, conde de Portucale e de Teresa de Leão.

O segundo casamento foi com D. Teresa Mendes, filha de Mem Nunes de Riba Douro, e de D. Urraca Mendes, senhora da Casa de Barbosa,

D. Gomes Nunes de Pombeiro (m. depois de 1141) casou antes de 1104 com Elvira Peres de Trava filha de Pedro Froilaz de Trava, conde de Trava e de Maior "Gontrodo" Rodrigues .

Manuel José da Costa Felgueiras Gayo, Nobiliário das Famílias de Portugal, Carvalhos de Basto, 2ª Edição, Braga, 1989. vol. II-pg. 236

https://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nuno_de_Celanova <-- (''that's not what is written here'')
----------

Parents by -https://ancestors.familysearch.org/en/LH8H-YSF/conde-nuno-vasques-gutierrez-1030-1110


----------
''[http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/SPANISH%20NOBILITY%20LATER%20MEDIEVAL.htm#_Toc343597697 Chapter 27. OTHER NOBLE FAMILIES in CASTILE & LEÓN ]'' (''parents not listed'')

1. ''' NUÑO Menéndez '''. Maybe identified as the conde Núño Menéndez who was defeated and killed when he launched a rebellion against García King of Galicia in early 1071[3022]. He was named as father of Gómez and Fernando in a charter issued by the latter 27 Dec 1127[3023].

'''m''' SANCHA Viegas, daughter of ---. Barton names Gómez Núñez as son of Nuño Menéndez and Sancha Viegas[3024]. Nuño & his wife had [three] children:

---------------

/!\ knot also confused with https://www.geni.com/people/Munio-Guterres-de-Celanova-III-Conde-del-Sobrado/6000000021801820504
---------

Lima, Cândido Pinheiro Koren de. Barbosas - de Ruy Capão em Portugal e Nordeste do Brasil. Fundação Gilberto Freire. Recife: 2018, Tomo I, p. 25.

First name originally was Munio.
I have decided to change the surname Munio to the present day spelling of Muniz so that future researchers who are investigating the Muniz's ancient heritage will recognize that name.
Many of you who are into traditional genealogy may not be in total agreement with the liberty I have taken in changing the traditional name to the more modern one. But since this Site reflects my study and research I feel I should have the freedom to add some form of clarity to this family tree.
I have also changed the spelling of Mendes to Menendez while I was at it. A lot of study of the history of names went into this project. Be aware that in my Casa conventional rules have been made to be changed.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]