== Notes for [[Item:Q86668|Q86668]] ==

'''Vipsania Julia Agrippina''', Roman noblewoman.

Julia the Younger (19 BC - c. AD 29) (Classical Latin: IVLIA•MINOR) or Julilla (little Julia), Vipsania Julia Agrippina, Iulilla, Julia, Augustus' granddaughter, or Julia Caesaris Minor, was a Roman noblewoman of the Julio-Claudian dynasty. She was the first daughter and second child of [http://www.geni.com/people/Marcus-Vipsanius-Agrippa/6000000000701119762 Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa] and [http://www.geni.com/people/Julia-Caesaris-Major/6000000007234813810 Julia the Elder]. Along with her sister Agrippina the Elder, Julia was raised and educated by her maternal grandfather Emperor [http://www.geni.com/people/Augustus-Roman-Emperor/6000000001336717255 Augustus] and her maternal step-grandmother [http://www.geni.com/people/Livia-Drusilla-Julia-Augusta/6000000000424886603 Livia Drusilla].

Julia the Younger was the elder granddaughter of the Emperor Augustus, sister-in-law, stepdaughter and daughter-in-law of the Emperor [http://www.geni.com/people/Tiberius-Roman-Emperor/6000000008122648505 Tiberius], maternal aunt of the Emperor [http://www.geni.com/people/Caligula-Emperor-of-the-Roman-Empire/6000000006101240586 Caligula] and Empress [http://www.geni.com/people/Julia-Agrippina-Minor-of-Rome/4994272588560101934 Agrippina the Younger], second cousin of the Emperor [http://www.geni.com/people/Claudius-I-Roman-Emperor/6000000002119140027 Claudius], and maternal great-aunt of the Emperor [http://www.geni.com/people/Nero-Roman-Emperor/6000000000424698537 Nero].

===Life===

About 5 BC or 6 BC, Augustus arranged her to marry [http://www.geni.com/people/Lucius-%C3%86milius-Paullus/6000000000976947983 Lucius Aemilius Paullus]. Paullus had a family relation to her as her first half-cousin, as both had [http://www.geni.com/people/Scribonia/6000000000700912476 Scribonia] as grandmother: Julia's mother was a daughter of Scribonia by Emperor Augustus; Paullus' mother, [http://www.geni.com/people/Cornelia-Scipio/6000000004089117513 Cornelia Scipio], was a daughter of Scribonia resulting from her earlier marriage to [http://www.geni.com/people/Publius-Cornelius-Scipio-Salvito/6000000000700882993 Publius Cornelius Scipio Salvito].

Paullus and Julia had a daughter, [http://www.geni.com/people/Aemilia-Lepida/6000000002106239618 Aemilia Lepida] and (possibly) a son, Marcus Aemilius Lepidus (although the latter may also have been the son to Marcus Aemilius Lepidus (consul 6). According to Suetonius, she built a large pretentious country house. Augustus disliked large overdone houses and had it demolished.

In 8, according to ancient historians, Julia was exiled for having an affair with Decimus Junius Silanus, a Roman Senator. She was sent to [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Isole_Tremiti Trimerus], a small Italian island, where she gave birth to a child. Augustus rejected the infant and ordered it to be exposed, or left on a mountainside to die. Silanus went into voluntary exile, but returned under Tiberius' reign.

Sometime between 1 and 14, her husband Paullus was executed as a conspirator in a revolt. Modern historians theorize that Julia's exile was not actually for adultery but for involvement in Paullus' revolt. Livia Drusilla plotted against her stepdaughter's family and ruined them, according to some. This led to open compassion for the fallen family. In 29 AD, Julia died on the same island where she had been sent in exile twenty years earlier. Due to the adultery that Julia committed, Augustus stated in his will that she would never be buried in Rome. She was survived by daughter, (possibly) a son, and by several grandchildren.

===Unusual naming variants===

Julia the Younger was not a Julia Caesaris by birth: being the daughter of Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa made her a Vipsania Agrippina by birth, although there are no contemporary sources that show that that name was ever used for her. She came to belong to the household of the Julio-Claudian dynasty as she was raised and instructed by her maternal grandfather Augustus. Further, Augustus adopted Tiberius as his son (and heir), and while Tiberius was remarried to Julia the Elder. Augustus became something of a paternal grandfather to Julia the Elder's children, too, including Julia the Younger. A formal adoption "in the family of the Caesars" among the offspring of Agrippa and Julia the Elder is however only recorded regarding Vipsania Julia's brothers Gaius — hence Gaius Caesar — and Lucius — hence Lucius Caesar. Her younnger sister Agrippina the Elder and youngest full brother, Agrippa Postumus, were named after their natural father. Likewise, her eldest half-sisters, Vipsania Agrippina and Vipsania Marcella, were named after their father. Her younger half-brother, unnamed in contemporary sources, was later sometimes dubbed "Tiberillus," after his father Tiberius, and died young.

===Sources===

* English Wikipedia: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Julia_the_Younger Julia the Younger]

* English Wikipedia: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Julio-Claudian_family_tree Julio-Claudian family tree]

* ancestry.com: [http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I22748 Vipsania of Rome]

--------------------
'''
=Julia the Younger=
'''

Julia the Younger (Classical Latin: IVLIA•MINOR) or Julilla (little Julia), Vipsania Julia Agrippina, Iulilla, Julia, Augustus' granddaughter, or Julia Caesaris Minor (19 BC-c. AD 29), was a Roman noblewoman of the Julio-Claudian dynasty. She was the first daughter and second child of Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa and Julia the Elder. Along with her sister Agrippina the Elder, Julia was raised and educated by her maternal grandfather Augustus and her maternal step-grandmother Livia Drusilla.

Julia the Younger was the elder granddaughter of the Emperor Augustus, sister-in-law, stepdaughter and daughter-in-law of the Emperor Tiberius, maternal aunt of the Emperor Caligula and Empress Agrippina the Younger, second cousin of the Emperor Claudius, and maternal great-aunt of the Emperor Nero.

'''Life'''

About 5 BC or 6 BC, Augustus arranged her to marry Lucius Aemilius Paullus. Paullus had a family relation to her as her first half-cousin, as both had Scribonia as grandmother: Julia's mother was a daughter of Scribonia by Augustus; Paullus' mother, Cornelia Scipio, was a daughter of Scribonia resulting from her earlier marriage to Publius Cornelius Scipio Salvito.

Paullus and Julia had a daughter, Aemilia Lepida and possibly a son, Marcus Aemilius Lepidus (although the latter may also have been the son to Marcus Aemilius Lepidus (consul 6). According to Suetonius, she built a large pretentious country house. Augustus disliked large overdone houses and had it demolished.

In 8, according to ancient historians, Julia was exiled for having an affair with Decimus Junius Silanus, a Roman Senator. She was sent to Trimerus, a small Italian island, where she gave birth to a child. Augustus rejected the infant and ordered it to be exposed, or left on a mountainside to die. Silanus went into voluntary exile, but returned under Tiberius' reign.

Sometime between 1 and 14, her husband Paullus was executed as a conspirator in a revolt. Modern historians theorize that Julia's exile was not actually for adultery but for involvement in Paullus' revolt. Livia plotted against her stepdaughter's family and ruined them, according to some. This led to open compassion for the fallen family. In 29 AD, Julia died on the same island where she had been sent in exile twenty years earlier. Due to the adultery that Julia committed, Augustus stated in his will that she would never be buried in Rome. She was survived by a daughter, possibly a son, and by several grandchildren.

'''Unusual naming variants'''

Julia the Younger was not a Julia Caesaris by birth: being the daughter of Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa made her a Vipsania Agrippina by birth, although there are no contemporary sources that show that that name was ever used for her. She came to belong to the household of the Julio-Claudian dynasty as she was raised and instructed by her maternal grandfather Augustus. Further, Augustus adopted Tiberius as his son (and heir), and while Tiberius was remarried to Julia the Elder. Augustus became something of a paternal grandfather to Julia the Elder's children, too, including Julia the Younger. A formal adoption "in the family of the Caesars" among the offspring of Agrippa and Julia the Elder is however only recorded regarding Vipsania Julia's brothers Gaius — hence Gaius Caesar — and Lucius — hence Lucius Caesar. Her younger sister Agrippina the Elder and youngest full brother, Agrippa Postumus, were named after their natural father only until Agrippa Postumus was adopted by Augustus as Marcus Julius Caesar Agrippa Postumus. Likewise, her eldest half-sisters, Vipsania Agrippina and Vipsania Marcella, were named after their father. Her younger half-brother, unnamed in contemporary sources, was later sometimes dubbed "Tiberillus," after his father Tiberius, and died young.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Julia_the_Younger

AKA:
VIPSANIA JULIA MINOR OCTAVIA OF ROME
VIPSANIA AGRIPPINA I DE ROME
JULIA AGRIPPINA CAESONIA
VIPSANIA AGRIPPINA JULIA MINOR

DIED AD 20

DIED AD 13

DIED AD 28

1 NAME /Julia/ 2 SOUR S033320 3 DATA 4 TEXT Date of Import: Jan 17, 2001

Agrippina the Elder was one of the most virtuous and heroic women of hertime, born 12 B.C., died 33 A.D., daughter of Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa,the greatest military commander after Julius Caesar, and of Julia,daughter of Augustus. She accompanied her husband, Caesar Germanicus, inhis military expeditions until his death at Antioch, 19 A.D. Herhusband's uncle, the Emperor Tiberius Claudius Caesar, jealous of theaffection of the people for Agrippina, banished her to a small island,where she died of hunger in 33 A.D.

Agrippina the Elder, who married Germanicus. Agrippina the Elder andGermanicus had the following children:

1. Nero Julius Caesar, born 6 A.D. and died 30 A.D., married Julia,daughter of Drusus, son of Tiberius.

2. Drusus Julius Caesar, born 7 A.D. an died 33 A.D., married AemiliaLepida.

3. Gaius, born 12 A.D. and died 41 A.D., married Caesonia.

4. Agrippina the Younger, born 15 A.D. and died 59 A.D., married (1) Cn.Domitus Ahenobarbus, son of Antonia the Elder, daughter of Mark Antony,and her husband, L. Domitius Ahenobarbus, who died in 40 A.D. She married(3) Claudius. The child from the first marriage was L. DomitiusAhenobarbus (afterwards Nero Claudius Caesar), born in 37 A.D. and diedin 68 A.D., infamous Roman Emperor (54 A.D.-68 A.D.), who succeededClaudius, who had ruled from 41 A.D. to 54 A.D. This Emperor Nerosupposedly "fiddled" while Rome burned to the ground. He married (1)Octavia, daughter of Claudius, and (2) Poppaea Sabina, who died in 65 A.D.

5. Drusilla.

6. Julia Livilla, following her mother's amorous traits, was banished(like her mother) by her grandfather, Emperor Caesar Augustus, to an islein the Adriatic, while her friend, Ovid, the poet, was banished to Tomiin the Black Sea.


wtf 4:565 Vipsania Agrippina (I) Major

[4979] d 33 AD

Agrippina the Elder
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Roman imperial dynasties
Julio-Claudian dynasty
Agrippina the Elder, wife of Germanicus
Augustus
Children
Natural - Julia the Elder
Adoptive - Gaius Caesar, Lucius Caesar, Agrippa Postumus, Tiberius
Tiberius
Children
Natural - Julius Caesar Drusus
Adoptive - Germanicus
Caligula
Children
Natural - Julia Drusilla
Adoptive - Tiberius Gemellus
Claudius
Children
Natural - Claudia Antonia, Claudia Octavia, Britannicus
Adoptive - Nero
Nero
Children
Natural - Claudia Augusta

(Vipsania) Agrippina (Classical Latin: AGRIPPINA•GERMANICI[1]), (14 BC – 18 October 33), most commonly known as Agrippina Major or Agrippina "the Elder", was one of the most prominent women in the Roman Empire in the early 1st century AD. She was the daughter of Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa by his third wife Julia the Elder, was a granddaughter of Augustus and wife of Germanicus. She was mother to the emperor Caligula and grandmother to Nero.

Contents [hide]
1 Early life
2 Traveling wife
3 Time in Rome
4 Exile and death
5 Personality
6 See also
7 References
7.1 Ancient Sources
7.2 Secondary Sources



[edit] Early life
Agrippina was born in Athens, Greece. In 5 she had married Germanicus, her second cousin and step-grandson of the Emperor Augustus.

Agrippina had nine children by Germanicus, three of whom died young. The six who survived to adulthood were:

Nero Caesar
Drusus Caesar
Caligula, future Emperor
Agrippina the Younger, mother of Emperor Nero
Julia Drusilla
Julia Livilla

[edit] Traveling wife
The well regarded Germanicus was a candidate for the succession and had won fame campaigning in Germania and Gaul, where he was accompanied by Agrippina. This was most unusual for Roman wives, as convention required them to stay at home, and earned her a reputation as a model for heroic womanhood. She bore him two children in Gaul, a boy and Agrippina the Younger in the Rhine frontier.

Agrippina and Germanicus travelled to the Near East in 19, incurring the displeasure of the emperor Tiberius. Germanicus quarrelled with Gnaeus Calpurnius Piso, the governor of Syria, and died in Antioch in mysterious circumstances. It was widely suspected that Germanicus had been poisoned – perhaps on the orders of Tiberius himself – and Agrippina returned to Rome to avenge his death. She boldly accused Piso of the murder of Germanicus. According to Tacitus (Annals 3.14.1), the prosecution could not prove the poisoning charge, but other charges of treason seemed likely to stick, and Piso committed suicide.


[edit] Time in Rome

Agrippina landing at Brundisium with the Ashes of Germanicus, Oil on canvas, c. 1768.From 19 to 29, Agrippina remained in Rome, becoming increasingly involved with a group of senators who opposed the growing power of Tiberius' favourite Sejanus. Her relations with the emperor became increasingly fraught as she made it clear that she believed that he was responsible for the death of Germanicus. The climate was further poisoned by the "inveterate hatred" that Tiberius' mother felt for her (Tacitus, Annals 4.12), since Agrippina's ambition, to be the mother of emperors and thus Rome's first woman, was an open secret. In 26, the emperor rejected her request that she be allowed to marry again.


[edit] Exile and death

Cinerary urn of Agrippina, in the tabularium.Agrippina and her sons Nero and Drusus were arrested in 29 on the orders of Tiberius. They were tried by the Senate and Agrippina was banished to the island of Pandataria (now called Ventotene) in the Tyrrhenian Sea off the coast of Campania where her mother had once been banished. There she was treated with great brutality, losing an eye from the blow of a centurion and later undergoing forcible feeding (Suetonius, Tib.53). She died on 18 October 33 in suspicious circumstances. Her death, according to Suetonius the result of voluntary starvation (ibid), was probably hastened by her realisation that the fall of Sejanus had "led to no abatement of horrors" (Tacitus, Annals 6.25). Tacitus also mentions malnutrition as a likely cause. After her death Tiberius accused her of "having had Asinius Gallus as a paramour and being driven by his death to loathe existence" (Annals 6.25). At Tiberius' prompting the Senate decreed that her birthday should be marked as a day of ill omen (Suet.ibid.).

Drusus died of starvation after being imprisoned in Rome and Nero Caesar either committed suicide or was murdered after his trial in 29. Only two of her children are of historical importance: Agrippina the Younger and Gaius Julius Caesar Augustus Germanicus, who succeeded Tiberius under the name of Caligula. Despite Tiberius' enmity towards Caligula's elder brothers, he nonetheless made Caligula and his cousin Tiberius Gemellus joint heirs to his property.

There is a portrait of her in the Capitoline Museums at Rome and a bronze medal in the British Museum showing her ashes being brought back to Rome by order of Caligula.


[edit] Personality
Agrippina was widely regarded by contemporaries as being a woman of the highest character and exemplary Roman morals, notwithstanding a profound arrogance and a vaulting ambition: Tacitus' verdict is of a woman who "could not endure equality and loved to domineer, [and who] with her masculine aspirations was far removed from the frailties of women" (Annals 6.25).

A superficial assessment views Agrippina as the innocent victim of tyranny. In reality, however, Agrippina herself had done much to provoke her fate. Her constant dwelling on her birth (e.g. Annals 1.40) and her being the "sole surviving offspring of Augustus" (Annals 3.4) was not merely an insult to Tiberius, Augustus’ son by adoption, but also to Livia, who was Julia Augusta only by testamentary adoption; her attitude also implied a challenge to Tiberius' own position.


[edit] See also
Wikimedia Commons has media related to:
Agrippina MajorTacitus, Annals i.-vi.
Suetonius, The Twelve Caesars
Julio-Claudian Family Tree

[edit] References
^ E. Groag, A. Stein, L. Petersen - e.a. (edd.), Prosopographia Imperii Romani saeculi I, II et III (PIR), Berlin, 1933 - V 463

[edit] Ancient Sources
Suetonius, De vita Casearum - On the Life of the Caesars Tiberius iii.52.3, 53 and Caligula iv.23.1

[edit] Secondary Sources
Robin Seager, Tiberius, London (Eyre Methuen) 1972
E. Klebs, H. Dessau, P. Von Rohden (ed.), Prosopographia Imperii Romani, 3 vol., Berlin, 1897-1898. (PIR1)

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]