== Notes for [[Item:Q87901|Q87901]] ==

'''
=Gnaeus Cornelius Scipio Calvus=
'''

Gnaeus Cornelius Scipio Calvus (died 211 BC) was a Roman general and statesman.

His father was Lucius Cornelius Scipio, son of the patrician censor of 280, Lucius Cornelius Scipio Barbatus. His younger brother was Publius Cornelius Scipio, father of the most famous Scipio – Scipio Africanus. Gnaeus Cornelius Scipio Calvus served as consul in 222 BC, his co-consul being Marcus Claudius Marcellus, who was serving in the first of his five consulships. Gnaeus Cornelius Scipio was nicknamed Calvus (the bald) to distinguish him from his uncle, another Gnaeus Cornelius Scipio, who was nicknamed Asina (or donkey) and had twice been consul during the First Punic War.

Scipio Calvus fought in Iberia (Hispania) during the Second Punic War, starting with a victory in the Battle of Cissa in 218 BC, until he was killed in the Battle of the Upper Baetis in 211 BC, fighting the Carthaginians and their allies of the Ilergetes tribe, led by Indibilis and Mandonius. His death occurred shortly after the similar death of his younger brother. Both Scipios were capable commanders, both were consuls, and both were killed in Hispania after their armies had separated.

'''Descendants'''

His son was Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica (nicknamed Nasica for his pointed nose), who was consul in 191 BC. He was the first Scipio Nasica and founded the Nasica branch of the Scipiades. Scipio Nasica's son, another Scipio Nasica (nicknamed Corculum, with his full name being Publius Cornelius P.f. G.n. Scipio Nasica Corculum), married his second cousin Cornelia Africana Major, the eldest daughter of Scipio Africanus and thus united the two lines. Their descendants in the male line continued until at least 46 BC, in the person of Metellus Scipio (who was adopted into the Caecilii Metelli family).

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gnaeus_Cornelius_Scipio_Calvus

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]