== Notes for [[Item:Q85427|Q85427]] ==

Flavius Ardabur of the Alans

Wife/Partner: (missing)

Child: Flavius Ardabur Aspar

Lásd / See:

http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.com/~jamesdow/s060/f728186.htm

Flavius Ardabur

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

(Redirected from Ardaburius)

Flavius Ardabur or Ardaburius (Greek: Φλάβιος Αρδαβούριος) served as magister militum in the Byzantine army in the 420s, under Theodosius II.

During the Roman-Persian War of 421, he invaded Arzanene and Mesopotamia, besieging Nisibis but at last he was defeated by Sassanid king Bahramgur.

Three years later, Ardabur and his son Aspar were sent on a campaign to Italy to overthrow the usurper Joannes. Ardabur was captured and held at Ravenna, where he succeeded in subverting some of the usurper's officers. Aspar was then able to capture the city and defeat Joannes.

After his return to Constantinople, he was made consul for the year 427.

Flavius Ardabur should be distinguished from his grandson of the same name, who was consul twenty years later.

Forrás / Source:

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ardaburius

its an interesting note here about the people called the Alans, also known as the Alani.
They were an Indo-Iranian nomadic group among the Samaritan peoples.
Aspar was an emperor maker as well as a patrician and magister militum of the eastern empire.
He fought with his father also a magister militum under Theodosius II, in 421 during the Persian wars. They invaded Arzanene and Mesopotania where they defeated seven Persian Generals.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]