== Notes for [[Item:Q87847|Q87847]] ==

Antiochus III the Great, (Greek Ἀντίoχoς Μέγας; ca. 241–187 BC, ruled 222–187 BC), younger son of Seleucus II Callinicus, became the 6th ruler of the Seleucid Empire as a youth of about eighteen in 223 BC. Ascending the throne at young age, Antiochus was an ambitious ruler. Although his early attempts in war against the Ptolemaic Kingdom were unsuccessful, in the following years of conquest Antiochus proved himself as the most successful Seleucid King after Seleucus I himself. His traditional designation, the Great, reflects an epithet he briefly assumed after his Eastern Campaign (it appears in regnal formulas at Amyzon in 203 and 202 BC, but not later). Antiochos also assumed the title "Basileus Megas" (which is Greek for Great King), the traditional title of the Persian kings, which he adopted after his conquest of Koile Syria.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antiochus_III_the_Great

Main deeds:

April-June 222: Comes to power after the assassination of his elder brother, Seleucus III Keraunos, who has unsuccessfully tried to recover territories that had been lost to king Attalus I Soter of Pergamon

Antiochus' general Achaeus has more success, but proclaims himself king

222: Wedding; Antiochus marries Laodice III

222-220: Antiochus suppresses the revolt of Molon in Media and Persis

219: outbreak of the Fourth Syrian War against king Ptolemy IV Philopator; Antiochus reconquers Seleucia (the port of Antioch, which had been conquered by Ptolemy III in the Third Syrian War) and proceeds to the south, capturing Tyre

217, 13 June: Ptolemy's army defeats the Seleucid army at Raphia with an army that consists partly of Egyptian soldiers

October 217: peace is concluded; the Seleucid Empire keeps Seleucia

216: Alliance with Attalus against Achaeus.

216-213: Antiochus defeats Achaeus and captures Sardes

212-205: Antiochus reconquers the independent kingdoms in Parthia and Bactria and Gandara; he is called Megas, 'the great'

205: Ptolemy IV Philopator falls ill; Antiochus and Philip V of Macedonia agree to attack Egypt

204: Birth of Cleopatra I Syra

204, September: Ptolemy IV succeeded by Ptolemy V Epiphanes

202, May: Outbreak of the Fifth Syrian War; renewed attempt to conquer southern Syria

200: Battle of Paneion: Ptolemy V loses his Asian territories; Antiochus' daughter Cleopatra Syra marries to the Egyptian king

Rome declares war against Macedonia (which leaves the war against the Ptolemies) and orders Antiochus to keep their hands off Egypt, which is vital for Rome's food supply

199-197: Antiochus cancels his invasion of Egypt, and instead attacks Ptolemaic possessions in Cilicia

196: Antiochus appointed as successor; he marries his sister Laodice IV

196: Conquest of Thrace, which is governed by Antiochus' son Seleucus

194: The Pergamene king Eumenes II Soter refuses an alliance; Ariarathes IV Eusebes of Cappadocia marries to Antiochis

193: Death of his crown prince Antiochus

192-188: Syrian War against Rome and its allies Pergamon and Rhodos; the Carthaginian general in Seleucid service, Hannibal Barca, and Antiochus are defeated

191: Marries Euboea of Chalcis

189: Seleucus made co-ruler; he probably marries his sister Laodice IV, widow of Antiochus

Peace of Apamea: cedes all territory north of the Taurus to the Roman ally Pergamon and agrees to pay an indemnity to Rome; his youngest son Antiochus is sent to Italy as hostage

187 Antiochus visits Babylon

3 July 187: in an attempt to obtain money, Antiochus attacks a temple in Susa, but is killed

--------------------
http://www.livius.org/am-ao/antiochus/antiochus_iii.html

=Antiochus III the Great=
'''Antiochus III Megas ('the Great')''': name of a Seleucid king, ruled from 222 to187. Successor of: Seleucus III Keraunos (or Soter)

==Relatives:==
* Father: '''Seleucus II Callinicus'''
* Mother: '''Laodice II'''
* First wife: '''Laodice III''' (daughter of '''Mithradates II of Pontus''')
* Children:
# '''Antiochus''' (died 193)
# '''Seleucus IV Philopator'''
# '''Ardys'''
# '''daughter''' (engaged to '''Demetrius I of Bactria''')
# '''Laodice IV''' (married to her brother '''Seleucus?''')
# '''Cleopatra I Syra''' (married to '''Ptolemy V Epiphanes''')
# '''Antiochis''' (married to '''Ariarathes IV Eusebes of Cappadocia''')
# '''Antiochus IV Epiphanes'''
* Second wife: '''Euboea of Chalcis''' (no children)

----------------------------------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antiochus_III_the_Great

=Antiochus III the Great=
* Reign 223 BC – 187 BC
* Greek Ἀντίoχoς Μέγας (Antiochos Mégas, Antiochus the Great)
* Born 241 BC
* Birthplace Babylon, Mesopotamia
* Died 187 BC (aged 54)
* Place of death Susa, Elymais
* Predecessor Seleucus III Ceraunus
* Successor Seleucus IV Philopator
* Consort Laodice III
* Offspring
# '''Antiochus'''
# '''Seleucus IV Philopator'''
# '''Ardys'''
# '''Laodice IV'''
# '''Cleopatra I Syra'''
# '''Antiochis'''
# '''Antiochus IV Epiphanes'''
* Dynasty Seleucid dynasty

==Family==
'''Antiochus II'''I married as his first wife '''Laodice III''', who was his paternal first cousin. Their children were
# Antiochus,
# Seleucus IV Philopator,
# Ardys,
# an unnamed daughter who was engaged to Demetrius I of Bactria,
# Laodice IV,
# Cleopatra I Syra,
# Antiochis and
# Antiochus IV Epiphanes born as Mithridates.
*Laodice III died about 191 BC. Antiochus III then married to '''Euboea of Chalcis''', by whom he had no children.[4]
*The Seleucid kingdom as Antiochus left it fell to his son, Seleucus IV Philopator.

--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antiochus_III_the_Great

ID: I62190 Name: ANTIOCHUS @@ III OF SYRIA Prefix: King Given Name: ANTIOCHUS @@ III Surname: OF SYRIA Nickname: The Great Sex: M _UID: 2CD1D21D219C66409D1434F413742DE3BFC5 Change Date: 18 Jun 2004 Note: Antiochus III, called The Great (242-187 bc), king of Syria (223-187 bc), the son of Seleucus II and brother of Seleucus III, whom he succeeded. He was the most distinguished of the Seleucids. Having made vassal states out of Parthia and Bactria, he warred successfully against the Egyptian king Ptolemy V and in 198 bc obtained possession of all of Palestine and Lebanon. He later became involved in a conflict with the Romans, who defeated him at Thermopylae in 191 bc and at Magnesia (now Manisa, Turkey) in 190 bc. As the price of peace, he was forced to surrender all his dominions west of the Taurus Mountains and to pay costly tribute. Antiochus, who early in his reign had restored the Seleucid Empire, finally forfeited its influence in the eastern Mediterranean by his failure to recognize the rising power of Rome.

© 1993-2003 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Birth: 247 BC Death: 187 BC

Father: Seleucus II of Syria b: ABT 265 BC Mother: Laodice II of Syria

Marriage 1 Laodice III of Pontus Married: Children

Cleopatra I of Syria Antiochis of Syria

Forrás / Source: http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I62190 <nowiki>--------------------</nowiki> http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antiochus_III_the_Great <nowiki>--------------------</nowiki> Antiochus III the Great, (Greek Ἀντίoχoς Μέγας; ca. 241–187 BC, ruled 222–187 BC), younger son of Seleucus II Callinicus, became the 6th ruler of the Seleucid Empire as a youth of about eighteen in 223 BC.

Ascending the throne at young age, Antiochus was an ambitious ruler. Although his early attempts in war against the Ptolemaic Kingdom were unsuccessful, in the following years of conquest Antiochus proved himself as the most successful Seleucid King after Seleucus I himself. His traditional designation, the Great, reflects an epithet he briefly assumed after his Eastern Campaign (it appears in regnal formulas at Amyzon in 203 and 202 BC, but not later). Antiochos also assumed the title "Basileus Megas" (which is Greek for Great King), the traditional title of the Persian kings, which he adopted after his conquest of Koile Syria.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antiochus_III_the_Great <nowiki>--------------------</nowiki> D: 187 B.C.

General Notes

Antiochus III, called The Great (242-187 bc), king of Syria (223-187 bc), the son of Seleucus II and brother of Seleucus III, whom he succeeded. He was the most distinguished of the Seleucids. Having made vassal states out of Parthia and Bactria, he warred successfully against the Egyptian king Ptolemy V and in 198 bc obtained possession of all of Palestine and Lebanon. He later became involved in a conflict with the Romans, who defeated him at Thermopylae in 191 bc and at Magnesia (now Manisa, Turkey) in 190 bc. As the price of peace, he was forced to surrender all his dominions west of the Taurus Mountains and to pay costly tribute. Antiochus, who early in his reign had restored the Seleucid Empire, finally forfeited its influence in the eastern Mediterranean by his failure to recognize the rising power of Rome.
--------------------
The 6th ruler of the Seleucid Empire, Antiochus III the Great (Greek: Ἀντίoχoς Μέγας; ca. 241–187 BC, ruled 222–187 BC) Seleucid Greek king[1][2][3] ruled over Greater Syria and western Asia towards the end of the 3rd century BC. Rising to the throne at the age of eighteen in 223 BC, his early campaigns against the Ptolemaic Kingdom were unsuccessful, but in the following years Antiochus gained several military victories. His traditional designation, the Great, reflects an epithet he briefly assumed. He also assumed the title "Basileus Megas" (which is Greek for "Great King"), the traditional title of the Persian kings.

Self-declaring himself the "champion of Greek freedom against Roman domination", Antiochus III waged a war against the Roman Republic in mainland Greece in autumn of 192 BC[4][5] only to be defeated.

Antiochus III was a member of the Greek-Macedonian Seleucid dynasty,[6][7][8][9] he was the son of king Seleucus II and Laodice II and was born in 242 BC near Susa in Iran.[10] Antiochus succeeded his brother Seleucus III as the king of the Seleucid Empire.

Antiochus III inherited a disorganized state. Not only had Asia Minor become detached, but the easternmost provinces had broken away, Bactria under the Greek Diodotus of Bactria, and Parthia under the nomad chieftain Arsaces. Soon after Antiochus's accession, Media and Persis revolted under their governors, the brothers Molon and Alexander.

The young king, under the baneful influence of the minister Hermeias, authorised an attack on Ptolemaic Syria instead of going in person to face the rebels. The attack against Egypt of the Ptolemies proved a fiasco, and the generals sent against Molon and Alexander met with disaster. Only in Asia Minor, where the king's cousin, the able Achaeus represented the Seleucid cause, did its prestige recover, driving the Pergamene power back to its earlier limits.

In 221 BC Antiochus at last went east, and the rebellion of Molon and Alexander collapsed which Polybios attributes in part to his following the advice of Zeuxis‎ rather than Hermeias.[11] The submission of Lesser Media, which had asserted its independence under Artabazanes, followed. Antiochus rid himself of Hermeias by assassination and returned to Syria (220 BC). Meanwhile Achaeus himself had revolted and assumed the title of king in Asia Minor. Since, however, his power was not well enough grounded to allow an attack on Syria, Antiochus considered that he might leave Achaeus for the present and renew his attempt on Ptolemaic Syria.

[edit] Early wars against other Hellenistic rulersSee also: Fourth Syrian War and Seleucid–Parthian wars The campaigns of 219 BC and 218 BC carried the Seleucid armies almost to the confines of Ptolemaic Kingdom, but in 217 BC Ptolemy IV defeated Antiochus at the Battle of Raphia. This defeat nullified all Antiochus's successes and compelled him to withdraw north of the Lebanon.

In 216 BC Antiochus' army marched into western Anatolia to suppress the local rebellion led by Antiochus' own cousin Achaeus, and had by 214 BC driven him from the field into Sardis. Capturing Achaeus, Antiochus had him executed. The citadel managed to hold out until 213 BC under Achaeus' widow Laodice who surrendered later.

Having thus recovered the central part of Asia Minor (for the Seleucid government had perforce to tolerate the dynasties in Pergamon, Bithynia and Cappadocia) Antiochus turned to recover the outlying provinces of the north and east. He obliged Xerxes of Armenia to acknowledge his supremacy in 212 BC. In 209 BC Antiochus invaded Parthia, occupied the capital Hecatompylus and pushed forward into Hyrcania. The Parthian king Arsaces II apparently successfully sued for peace.

[edit] Bactrian campaign and Indian expedition Coin of Antiochos III.Year 209 BC saw Antiochus in Bactria, where the Greco-Bactrian king Euthydemus I had supplanted the original rebel. Antiochus again met with success.[12] He was defeated by Antiochus at the Battle of the Arius but after sustaining a famous siege in his capital Bactra (Balkh), Euthydemus obtained an honourable peace by which Antiochus promised Euthydemus' son Demetrius the hand of one of his daughters.[13]

Antiochus next, following in the steps of Alexander, crossed into the Kabul valley, reaching the realm of Indian king Sophagasenus and returned west by way of Seistan and Kerman (206/5). According to Polybius:

"He crossed the Caucasus (Hindu Kush) and descended into India; renewed his friendship with Sophagasenus (Subhashsena in Prakrit) the king of the Indians; received more elephants, until he had a hundred and fifty altogether; and having once more provisioned his troops, set out again personally with his army: leaving Androsthenes of Cyzicus the duty of taking home the treasure which this king had agreed to hand over to him.[13]" [edit] Persia and Coele Syria campaignsSee also: Fifth Syrian War From Seleucia on the Tigris he led a short expedition down the Persian Gulf against the Gerrhaeans of the Arabian coast (205 BC/204 BC). Antiochus seemed to have restored the Seleucid empire in the east, which him the title of "the Great" (Antiochos Megas). In 205/204 BC the infant Ptolemy V Epiphanes succeeded to the Egyptian throne, and Antiochus is said (notably by Polybios) to have concluded a secret pact with Philip V of Macedon for the partition of the Ptolemaic possessions. Under the terms of this pact, Macedon were to receive Egypt's possessions around the Aegean Sea and Cyrene, while Antiochus would annex Cyprus and Egypt.

Once more Antiochus attacked the Ptolemaic province of Coele Syria and Phoenicia, and by 199 BC he seems to have had possession of it before the Aetolian, Scopas, recovered it for Ptolemy. But that recovery proved brief, for in 198 BC Antiochus defeated Scopas at the Battle of Panium, near the sources of the Jordan, a battle which marks the end of Ptolemaic rule in Judea.

[edit] War against Rome and deathMain article: Roman–Syrian War Antiochus then moved to Asia Minor, by land and by sea, to secure the coast towns which belonged to the remnants of Ptolemaic overseas dominions and the independent Greek cities. This enterprise earned him the antagonism of the Roman Republic, since Smyrna and Lampsacus appealed to the republic of the west, and the tension grew after Antiochus had in 196 BC established a footing in Thrace. The evacuation of Greece by the Romans gave Antiochus his opportunity, and he now had the fugitive Hannibal at his court to urge him on.

In 192 BC Antiochus invaded Greece with a 10,000 man army, and was elected the commander in chief of the Aetolian League.[14] In 191 BC, however, the Romans under Manius Acilius Glabrio routed him at Thermopylae, forcing him to withdraw to Asia Minor. The Romans followed up their success by invading Anatolia, and the decisive victory of Scipio Asiaticus at Magnesia ad Sipylum (190 BC), following the defeat of Hannibal at sea off Side, delivered Asia Minor into their hands.

By the Treaty of Apamea (188 BC) the Seleucid king abandoned all the country north of the Taurus, which the Roman Republic distributed amongst its local allies. As a consequence of this blow to the Seleucid power, the outlying provinces of the empire, recovered by Antiochus, reasserted their independence. Antiochus mounted a fresh eastern expedition in Luristan, where he died on while pillaging a temple of Bel at Elymaïs, Persia, in 187 BC.[5]

[edit] Family Coin of Antiochus the Great. The Greek inscription reads ΒΑΣΙΛΕΩΣ ΑΝΤΙΟΧΟΥ, King Antiochus.In 222 BC, Antiochus III married Princess Laodice of Pontus, a daughter of King Mithridates II of Pontus and Princess Laodice of the Seleucid Empire. The couple were first cousins through their mutual grandfather, Antiochus II Theos. Antiochus and Laodice had eight children (three sons and five daughters):

Antiochus (221 - 193 BC), Antiochus III's first heir apparent and joint-king with his father from 210 - 193 BC Seleucus IV Philopator (c. 220 - 175 BC), Antiochus III's successor Ardys unnamed daughter, betrothed in about 206 BC to Demetrius I of Bactria Laodice IV, married all three of her brothers in succession and became Queen of the Seleucid Empire through her second and third marriages Cleopatra I Syra (c. 204 - 176 BC), married in 193 BC Ptolemy V Epiphanes of Egypt Antiochis, married in 194 BC King Ariarathes IV of Cappadocia Mithridates (215 - 164 BC), succeeded his brother Seleucus IV Philopator in 175 BC under the regnal name Antiochus IV Epiphanes Laodice III died in about 191 BC. Later that year, Antiochus III remarried to Euboea of Chalcis. They had no children. [15]

[edit] Antiochus and the JewsAntiochus III resettled 2000 Jewish families from Babylonia into the Hellenistic Anatolian regions of Lydia and Phrygia.[16] He is not the king who oppressed Judea and was resisted by the Maccabees in the Jewish story of Hanukkah; rather, that was his son, Antiochus IV. On the contrary, Josephus portrays him as friendly towards the Jews and cognizant of their loyalty to him (see Antiquities, chapter 3, sections 3-4), in stark contrast to the attitude of his son. In fact, Antiochus III lowered taxes and let the Jews live, as Josephus puts it, "according to the law of their forefathers."

[edit] Cultural portrayalsThe caroline era play Believe as You List is centered around Antiochus resistance to the Romans after the Battle of Thermopylae. The play was originally about Sebastian of Portugal surviving the Battle of Alcazar and returning, trying to gather support to return to the throne. This first version was censored for being considered "subversive" because it portrayed Sebastian being deposed, its comments in favor of an Anglo-Spanish alliance and possible pro-Catholicism, which led to the final version changing to the story of Antiochus (which led to historical innacuracy in exaggerating his defeat at that phase in history to fit the earlier text), turning Spaniards into Romans and the Catholic eremite into a stoic philosopher.

--------------------
BIOGRAFI:

Nicknames: "Antiochus III 'Megas' III", "? King of Syria"

Birthdate: -241

Birthplace: Babel (Babilônia)

Death: Died July 3, -187 in Susa (Pérsia)

Cause of death: killed in attemt to obtain money by attacking a temple in Susa

Occupation: (The Great)

Nærmeste familie

Laodice III of Pontus, Queen of ...

wife

Antiokos III den store

Fra Wikipedia, den frie encyklopedi

Gå til: navigasjon, søk Antiokos III den store

Konge av Selevkideriket

Navn: ??t?o?o? ???a?

Regjeringstid: 223 – 187 f.Kr.

Født: ca. 241f.Kr., Susa, Persia

Død: 187 f.Kr., Elymais, Persia

Foreldre: Selevkos II Kallinikos (far)

Laodike II (mor)

Ektefelle?(r): 1) Laodike III

2) Euboea av Kalkis

Barn: Antiokos

Selevkos IV Filopator

Navnløs datter

Laodike IV

Kleopatra I Syra

Antiokis

Antiokos IV Epiphanes

Antiokos III den store (gresk: ??t?o?o? ???a?; ca. 241–187 f.Kr.) var konge av det hellenistiske Selevkideriket og styrte fra 223 f.Kr. og til 187 f.Kr.[1][2][3] Han var den sjette herskeren av et rike som utgjorde Syria og store deler av Anatolia mot slutten av 200-tallet f.Kr. Han kom på tronen som attenårig i 223 f.Kr. etter at hans bror Selevkos III Keraunos ble myrdet av egne folk i hæren. Antiokos første krigføring mot det ptolemeiske kongedømme i Egypt var i begynnelsen ikke vellykket, men i de påfølgende årene fikk han flere militære seirer. Hans tradisjonelle tilnavn som «den store», reflekterte et epitet han kortvarig benyttet. Han tok også tittelen «Basileos Megas» (gresk for «store konge») var også den tradisjonelle tittelen for de persiske kongene. Sammenlignet med flere svake konger Selevkideriket var ikke tittelen som «den store» helt ufortjent. Han erklærte seg som «forkjemper for gresk frihet mot romersk herredømme» og erklærte krig mot den romerske republikk på det greske fastlandet høsten 192 f.Kr.,[4][5]Innhold [skjul]

1 Bakgrunn og tidlige karriere

1.1 Tidlige kriger mot andre hellenistiske herskere

1.2 Kampanje i Baktria og ekspedisjon i India

1.3 Krigføring i Persia og Koilesyria

1.4 Krig mot Roma og død

2 Familie

3 Antiokos og jødene

4 Kulturelle framstillinger

5 Referanser

6 Litteratur

7 Eksterne lenker

Bakgrunn og tidlige karriere [rediger]

Sølvmynt med Antiochos III

Antiokos III var et medlem av det gresk-makedonske selevkiddynastiet.[6][7] Han var den yngre sønnen av Selevkos II Kallinikos og Laodike II, og ble født ca. 242 f.Kr. i nærheten av Susa i det som i dag er Iran.[8] Han etterfulgte sin bror Selevkos III Keraunos i 223 f.Kr. som konge av Selevkideriket.

Han arvet et uorganisert og kaotisk rike. Ikke bare hadde Anatolia blitt løsrevet, men de østlige provinsene hadde brutt ut, Baktria under greske Diodotos, og Partia under høvdingen Arsakes. Kort tid etter at han kom på tronen gjorde Media og Persis opprør under sine satraper (guvernører), brødrene Molon og Aleksander.

Den unge kongen, under skadelig innflytelse fra ministeren Hermeias (som han arvet fra sin fars styre), ledet et angrep mot ptolemeisk Syria framfor å møte opprørerne personlig. Angrepet mot Egypt ble en fiasko og de hærene som ble sendt mot Molon og Aleksander ble en katastrofe. Kun i Anatolia hvor kongens fetter, den dyktige hærføreren Akaios, representerte Selevkiderikets sak, var det klare bedringer. Han fordrev styrkene til Pergamon tilbake til dets tidligere grenser.

I 221 f.Kr. dro Antiokos III til sist østover og opprøret til Molon og Aleksander falt sammen, noe historikeren Polybios har tilskrevet delvis til at han fulgte rådene til hærføreren Zeuxis framfor å lytte til Hermeias.[9] Underkastelsen av Media, som hadde tatt uavhengighet under Artabazanes, fulgte. Antiokos III kvittet seg med Hermeias ved å få ham myrdet og dro tilbake til Syria i 220 f.Kr. I mellomtiden hadde Akaios selv gjort opprør og tatt tittelen som konge i Anatolia. Ettersom hans makt ikke var godt nok fundert til å kunne angripe Syria, besluttet Antiokos å la ham være for øyeblikket og gjorde et nytt forsøk på å gjenerobre ptolemeiske Syria.

Tidlige kriger mot andre hellenistiske herskere [rediger]

Selevkideriket på den tid Antiokos' kom påtronen.

Selevkideriket etter ekspansjonskrigene.

Krigene i 219 og 218 f.Kr. ble ført mot grenseområdene til ptolemeiske kongedømme, men i 217 f.Kr. beseiret Ptolemaios IV Filopator ham i slaget ved Rafia. Dette nederlaget utjevnet all den framgangen han hittil hadde hatt og tvang ham til å trekke seg tilbake til nord for dagens Libanon.

I 216 f.Kr. marsjerte Antiokos' hær inn i vestlige Anatolia for å slå ned det lokal opprøret som var ledet av hans fetter Akaios, og ved 214 f.Kr. hadde han drevet ham fra området og til Sardis. Etter å ha tatt fetteren til fange ble han henrettet. Festningen greide å holde ut fram til 213 f.Kr. under Akaios' enke Leodike som overga senere.[10]

Etter å ha gjenvunnet de sentrale delene av Anatolia (mens han måtte tolerere kongedømmene i Pergamon, Bitynia, og Kappadokia), vendte Antiokos seg mot å gjenvinne de fjerntliggende provinsene i nord og øst. Han tvang Xerxes av Armenia til å anerkjenne hans overherredømme i 212 f.Kr. I 209 hadde han invadert Partia, okkupert hovedstaden Hekatompylos (i dag byen Schahr-e Qumis i Iran) og presset seg videre inn i Hyrkania. Den partiske kong Arsakes II forhandlet seg til en fredsavtale.

Kampanje i Baktria og ekspedisjon i India [rediger]

Året 209 f.Kr. gikk Antiokos i Baktria[11] hvor den gresk-baktriske kong Euthydemos ble beseiret av Antiokos i slaget ved Arios, men etter å ha beleiret hovedstaden Baktra (i dag Balkh), fikk Eutydemus en ærerik fred av Antiokus som ble bestemt gjennom en ekteskapsallianse hvor Antiokus ga en av sin døtre til Euthydemos' sønn Demetrios. [12]

Antiokos fulgte deretter i Aleksander den stores fotefar, krysset inn i Kabuldalen, nådde det indiske riket til kong Sophagasenas (sanskrit: Subhagasena), vendte deretter vestover ved Seistan og Kerman i 206/205 f.Kr. I henhold til historikeren Polybios:

«Han krysset Kaukasus (Hindu Kush) og gikk ned inn i India; fornyet sitt vennskap med Sophagasenas, indernes konge; mottok flere elefanter inntil han et hundre og femti til sammen; og etter å ha skaffet forsyninger til sine tropper, dro ut igjen personlig med hæren: etterlot Androsthenes fra Kyzikos med plikten av å føre hjem rikdommene som denne kongen hadde gått med på å gi ham.» [12]

Krigføring i Persia og Koilesyria [rediger]

Fra byen Seleukia ved Tigirs ledet Antiokos en kort militær ekspedisjon ned i Persiabukten mot byen Gerrha ved den arabiske kysten i 205/204 f.Kr. Strabon har beskrevet denne byen som svært rik ved å ha «utsmykkede redskaper gjort av gull og sølv, [...] deres store hjem med deres dører, murer, tak fylt med farger, gull, sølv og hellige steiner.»[13]

Antiokos synes å ha gjenopprettet Selevkideriket i øst, noe som skaffet ham tittelen «den store» (Antiochos Megas). Også i 205/204 f.Kr. etterfulgte Ptolemaios V Epifanes som kun et spedbarn på tronen i ptolemeiske Egypt og i henhold til Polybios skal Antiokos ha inngått en hemmelig avtale med Filip V av Makedonia om dele de egyptiske besittelsene ved å dra fordel av en tid hvor egyptisk konge var et barn. Avtalen innebar at Makedonia skulle motta Egypts besittelser rundt Egeerhavet og Kyrene, mens Antiokos skulle annektere Kypros og Egypt.

Atter en gang angrep Antiokos den ptolemeiske provinsen Koilesyria og Fønikia, og ved 199 f.Kr. synes han å ha tatt besittelse av området før hærføreren Skopas fra Aitolia gjenerobret det for Egypt. Men denne gjenerobringen var kortvarig. I 198 f.Kr. klarte Antiokos å beseire Skopas i slaget ved Paneion (i nærheten av Banias/Paneas ved foten av Hermonfjellet). Dette nederlaget betydde slutten på ptolemeiske kongedømmes herredømme over Judea.

Krig mot Roma og død [rediger]

Mynt med Antiokos III hvor baksiden framstiller en krigselefant.

Antiokos forflyttet seg deretter til Anatolia både til lands og til havs for å sikre kystbyene som tilhørte levningene av ptolemeiske oversjøiske besittelser og de uavhengige greske byene. Dette alarmerte den romerske republikk ettersom de greske byene Smyrna og Lampsakos appellerte til Roma om hjelp. Den politiske spenningen i Anatolia vokste etter at Antiokos i 196 f.Kr. etablerte et fotfeste i Trakia på europeisk jord. Grekere som evakuerte grunnet romerne ga Antiokos denne muligheten, og han hadde også flyktningen Hannibal fra Kartago ved sitt hoff som innstendig rådet ham å gå videre inn i Europa.

I 192 f.Kr. invaderte Antiokos Hellas med en hær på 10 000 menn og ble derfor valgt til øverstkommanderende av det aitoliske forbundet. Antiokos skulle bli den store greske frigjøreren. [14] I 191 f.Kr. møtte han romerne, ledet av Manius Acilius Glabrio, som lyktes avskjære Antiokos fra sine forsterkninger i Trakia, og møtte ham til slag ved Thermopylene. Romerne hadde en styrke som var dobbelt så stor, og med sine gjenværende tropper klarte Antiokos å flykte til Khalkis på Euboia, og derfra dro han over havet til Efesos. Romerne fulgte opp sin suksess med å invadere Antaolia, og ledet av Scipio Asiaticus var det igjen seierrike i det avgjørende slaget ved Magnesia i 190 f.Kr. Igjen var romerne tallmessig overlegne. Samtidig ble Hannibal beseiret i et sjøslag utenfor Side i Pamfylia. Det la Anatolia åpent for romerne.

Med den ydmykende freden i Apameia i 188 f.Kr. ble Antiokos III tvunget til å oppgi alle sine erobringer i Europa, alt land vest for Taurusfjellene i Anatolia, overgi hele sine flåte med unntak av tolv triremer, overgi alle sine krigselefanter, og betale en krigserstatning på 15 000 sølvtalenter. De landområdene i Anatolia ble fordelt blant Romas allierte. En annen konsekvens av dette nederlaget i vest var at alle de fjerne provinsene i øst som Antiokos hadde sikret seg, igjen grep anledningen av det svekkede Selevkideriket med å erklære sin uavhengighet. Antiokos dro på et ny militært hærtokt østover, motivert både av at han trengte penger for å betale romerne og for å holde fast på sitt fragmenterte rike. Han døde mens han plyndret et tempel ved Elymais i Persia i 187 f.Kr. [5]

Familie [rediger]

Mynt med Antiokos den store. Gresk inskripsjon: ??S???OS ????????, Kong Antiokos.

I 222 f.Kr. giftet Antiokos III seg med prinsesse Laodike av Pontos, en datter av kong Mithridates II av Pontos og prinsesse Laodike av Selevkideriket. Paret var fetter og kusine gjennom deres felles bestefar, Antiokos II Theos. Antiokos og Laodike hadde åtte barn (tre sønner og fem døtre):

Antiokos (221 - 193 f.Kr.), Antiokos IIIs førstearving og samkonge med sin fra 210 f.Kr. til 193 f.Kr.

Selevkos IV Filopator (ca. 220 - 175 f.Kr.), Antiokos IIIs etterfølger

Ardys

Datter med ukjent navn, forlovet en gang rundt 206 til Demetrios I av Baktria

Laodike IV, gift med alle tre av sin brødre i rekkefølge og ble dronning av Selevkideriket via hennes andre og tredje ekteskap.

Kleopatra I Syra (ca. 204 - 176 f.Kr.), gift i 193 f.Kr. med Ptolemaios V Epifanes av Egypt

Antiokis, gift i 194 f.Kr. med Ariarathes IV av Kappadokia

Mithridates (215 - 164 f.Kr.), etterfulgte sin bror Selevkos IV Filopator i 175 f.Kr. under kongsnavnet Antiokos IV Epifanes

Laodike III døde en gang rundt 191 f.Kr. Senere det samme året giftet Antiokos III seg med Euboea av Kalkis. De fikk ingen barn. [15]

Antiokos og jødene [rediger]

Antiokos III flyttet 2000 jødiske familier fra Babylonia og til de hellenistiske regionene Lydia og Frygia i Anatolia.[16] Han var ikke den kongen fra Selevkideriket som undertrykket Judea og som makkabeerne gjorde væpnet opprør mot slik det er fortalt om i den jødiske fortellingen i Hanukka. Isteden var det hans sønn Antiokos IV Epiphanes. Tilsvarende har den jødiske historikeren Josefus framstilt Antiokos III som vennlig overfor jødene og vitende om deres lojalitet til ham.[17] Det står i sterk motsetning til hans sønn Antiokos IV Epiphanes. Faktisk senket Antiokos III skattene og lot jødene leve, slik Josefus framstilte det, «i henhold til lovene til deres forfedre.»

Kulturelle framstillinger [rediger]

Den engelske tragedien Believe as You List av Philip Massinger fra midten av 1600-tallet har handling som er sentrert rundt Antiokos' motstand mot romerne etter slaget ved Thermopylene. Dramaet handlet opprinnelig om at Sebastian I av Portugal overlevde slaget ved Alcácer Quibir (hvor han faktisk døde) i 1578, og deretter forsøkte å få tilbake sin portugisiske trone. Denne første versjonen ble sensurert ved at stykket ble oppfattet som «nedbrytende» ved at det framstilte kong Sebastian som avsatt, dets kommentarer som støttet en engelsk-spansk allianse og en mulig støtte til katolisismen. Det førte til en omarbeidet versjon som isteden handlet om Antiokos III, noe som også innebar en historisk unøyaktighet i overdrivelsen av hans nederlag i denne fasen av historien for å over i overensstemmelse med den tidligere teksten. Spanjolene ble gjort til romere, og den katolske eremitten til en stoisk filosof.[18]

Referanser

Laodice IV, Queen of the Seleuci...

daughter

Seleucus IV Philopater, King of ...

son

Antiochus IV Epiphanes, King of ...

son

Antiochis

daughter

Cleopatra I Syra, Queen of Egypt

daughter

Ardys Seleucid

son

Laodice II, Queen of the Seleuci...

mother

Seleucus II Callinicus, King of ...

father

Seleucus III "Soter" Ceraunus, K...

brother

Antiochis, Queen of Armenia

sister

N/a daughter of Seleucus II

sister

Antiochus III: portrait coin [Credit: Courtesy of the trustees of the British Museum; photograph, J.R. Freeman & Co. Ltd.] Antiochus III, byname Antiochus The Great, Greek Antiochus Megas (born 242 bc—died 187, near Susa, Iran), Seleucid king of the Hellenistic Syrian Empire from 223 bc to 187, who rebuilt the empire in the East but failed in his attempt to challenge Roman ascendancy in Europe and Asia Minor. He reformed the empire administratively by reducing the provinces in size, established a ruler cult (with himself and his consort Laodice as divine), and improved relations with neighbouring countries by giving his daughters in marriage to their princes.

--------------------
'''
=Antiochus III the Great=
'''
Antiochus III the Great (Greek: Ἀντίoχoς Μέγας; c. 241-187 BC, ruled 222-187 BC) was a Hellenistic Greek king and the 6th ruler of the Seleucid Empire. He ruled over the region of Syria and large parts of the rest of western Asia towards the end of the 3rd century BC. Rising to the throne at the age of eighteen in 222 BC, his early campaigns against the Ptolemaic Kingdom were unsuccessful, but in the following years Antiochus gained several military victories and substantially expanded the empire's territory. His traditional designation, the Great, reflects an epithet he assumed. He also assumed the title Basileus Megas (Greek for "Great King"), the traditional title of the Persian kings. A militarily active ruler, Antiochus restored much of the territory of the Seleucid Empire, before suffering a serious setback, towards the end of his reign, in his war against Rome.

Declaring himself the "champion of Greek freedom against Roman domination", Antiochus III waged a four-year war against the Roman Republic in mainland Greece in autumn of 192 BC before being decisively defeated at the Battle of Magnesia. He died three years later on campaign in the east.

'''Biography'''

''Background and early career''

Antiochus III was a member of the Hellenistic Greek Seleucid dynasty. He was the son of king Seleucus II Callinicus and Laodice II and was born around 242 BC near Susa in Persia. He may have borne a non-dynastic name (starting with Ly-), according to a Babylonian chronicle. He succeeded, under the name Antiochus, his brother Seleucus III Ceraunus, upon the latter's murder in Anatolia; he was in Babylon at the time.

Antiochus III inherited a disorganized state. Not only had Asia Minor become detached, but the easternmost provinces had broken away, Bactria under the Greek Diodotus of Bactria, and Parthia under the nomad chieftain Arsaces. Soon after Antiochus's accession, Media and Persis revolted under their governors, the brothers Molon and Alexander.

The young king, under the influence of the minister Hermeias, headed an attack on Ptolemaic Syria instead of going in person to face the rebels. The attack against the Ptolemaic empire proved a fiasco, and the generals sent against Molon and Alexander met with disaster. Only in Asia Minor, where the king's cousin, Achaeus, represented the Seleucid cause, did its prestige recover, driving the Pergamene power back to its earlier limits.

In 221 BC Antiochus at last went east, and the rebellion of Molon and Alexander collapsed which Polybios attributes in part to his following the advice of Zeuxis rather than Hermeias. The submission of Lesser Media, which had asserted its independence under Artabazanes, followed. Antiochus rid himself of Hermeias by assassination and returned to Syria (220 BC). Meanwhile, Achaeus himself had revolted and assumed the title of king in Asia Minor. Since, however, his power was not well enough grounded to allow an attack on Syria, Antiochus considered that he might leave Achaeus for the present and renew his attempt on Ptolemaic Syria.

''Early wars against other Hellenistic rulers'' The campaigns of 219 BC and 218 BC carried the Seleucid armies almost to the confines of Ptolemaic Kingdom, but in 217 BC Ptolemy IV defeated Antiochus at the Battle of Raphia. This defeat nullified all Antiochus's successes and compelled him to withdraw north of the Lebanon. Despite the military defeat, Antiochus was able to keep control of Seleucia pieria.

In 216 BC Antiochus' army marched into western Anatolia to suppress the local rebellion led by Antiochus' own cousin Achaeus, and had by 214 BC driven him from the field into Sardis. Capturing Achaeus, Antiochus had him executed. The citadel managed to hold out until 213 BC under Achaeus' widow Laodice who surrendered later.

Having thus recovered the central part of Asia Minor (for the Seleucid government had perforce to tolerate the dynasties in Pergamon, Bithynia and Cappadocia) Antiochus turned to recovering the outlying provinces of the north and east. He obliged Xerxes of Armenia to acknowledge his supremacy in 212 BC. In 209 BC Antiochus invaded Parthia, occupied the capital Hecatompylos and pushed forward into Hyrcania. The Parthian king Arsaces II apparently successfully sued for peace.

''Bactrian campaign and Indian expedition''

The year 209 BC saw Antiochus in Bactria, where the Greco-Bactrian king Euthydemus I had supplanted the original rebel. Antiochus again met with success. Euthydemus was defeated by Antiochus at the Battle of the Arius but after sustaining a famous siege in his capital Bactra (Balkh), he obtained an honourable peace by which Antiochus promised Euthydemus' son Demetrius the hand of one of his daughters.

Antiochus next, following in the steps of Alexander, crossed into the Kabul valley, reaching the realm of Indian king Sophagasenus and returned west by way of Seistan and Kerman (206/5). According to Polybius:

''He crossed the Caucasus (Hindu Kush) and descended into India; renewed his friendship with Sophagasenus (Subhashsena in Prakrit) the king of the Indians; received more elephants, until he had a hundred and fifty altogether; and having once more provisioned his troops, set out again personally with his army: leaving Androsthenes of Cyzicus the duty of taking home the treasure which this king had agreed to hand over to him.''

''Persia and Coele Syria campaigns''

From Seleucia on the Tigris he led a short expedition down the Persian Gulf against the Gerrhaeans of the Arabian coast (205 BC/204 BC). Antiochus seemed to have restored the Seleucid empire in the east, which earned him the title of "the Great" (Antiochos Megas). In 205/204 BC the infant Ptolemy V Epiphanes succeeded to the Egyptian throne, and Antiochus is said (notably by Polybios) to have concluded a secret pact with Philip V of Macedon for the partition of the Ptolemaic possessions. Under the terms of this pact, Macedon were to receive the Ptolemaic possessions around the Aegean Sea and Cyrene, while Antiochus would annex Cyprus and Egypt.

Once more Antiochus attacked the Ptolemaic province of Coele Syria and Phoenicia, and by 199 BC he seems to have had possession of it before the Aetolian leader Scopas recovered it for Ptolemy. But that recovery proved brief, for in 198 BC Antiochus defeated Scopas at the Battle of Panium, near the sources of the Jordan, a battle which marks the end of Ptolemaic rule in Judea.

''War against Rome and death''

Antiochus then moved to Asia Minor, by land and by sea, to secure the coast towns which belonged to the remnants of Ptolemaic overseas dominions and the independent Greek cities. This enterprise earned him the antagonism of the Roman Republic, since Smyrna and Lampsacus appealed to the republic of the west at the time when it was claiming to defend Greek freedom, and the tension grew after Antiochus had in 196 BC established a footing in Thrace. The evacuation of Greece by the Romans gave Antiochus his opportunity, and he now had the fugitive Hannibal at his court to urge him on.

In 192 BC Antiochus invaded Greece with a 10,000 man army, and was elected the commander in chief of the Aetolian League.[16] In 191 BC, however, the Romans under Manius Acilius Glabrio routed him at Thermopylae, forcing him to withdraw to Asia Minor. The Romans followed up their success by invading Anatolia, and the decisive victory of Scipio Asiaticus at Magnesia ad Sipylum (190 BC), following the defeat of Hannibal at sea off Side, delivered Asia Minor into their hands.

By the Treaty of Apamea (188 BC) Antiochus abandoned all the country north and west of the Taurus, most of which the Roman Republic gave either to Rhodes or to the Attalid ruler Eumenes II, its allies (many Greek cities were left free). As a consequence of this blow to the Seleucid power, the outlying provinces of the empire, recovered by Antiochus, reasserted their independence. Antiochus mounted a fresh eastern expedition in Luristan, where he died while pillaging a temple of Bel at Elymaïs, Persia, in 187 BC.

'''Family'''

In 222 BC, Antiochus III married Princess Laodice of Pontus, a daughter of King Mithridates II of Pontus and Princess Laodice of the Seleucid Empire. The couple were first cousins through their mutual grandfather, Antiochus II Theos. Antiochus and Laodice had eight children (three sons and five daughters):

# Antiochus (221–193 BC), Antiochus III's first heir apparent and joint-king with his father from 210–193 BC
# Seleucus IV Philopator (c. 220 – 175 BC), Antiochus III's successor
# Ardys
# unnamed daughter, betrothed in about 206 BC to Demetrius I of Bactria
# Laodice IV, married all three of her brothers in succession and became Queen of the Seleucid Empire through her second and third marriages
# Cleopatra I Syra (c. 204 – 176 BC), married in 193 BC Ptolemy V Epiphanes of Egypt
# Antiochis, married in 194 BC King Ariarathes IV of Cappadocia
# Mithridates (215–164 BC), succeeded his brother Seleucus IV Philopator in 175 BC under the regnal name Antiochus IV Epiphanes

In 191 BC, Antiochus III married a girl from Chalcis, whom he named "Euboea". They had no children. Laodike III may have fallen in disgrace; however, she clearly survived Antiochus III, and appears in Susa in 183 BC

'''Antiochus and the Jews'''

Antiochus III resettled 2000 Jewish families from Babylonia into the Hellenistic Anatolian regions of Lydia and Phrygia. He is not the king of the Hanukkah story who was resisted by the Maccabees; rather, that was his son, Antiochus IV. On the contrary, Josephus portrays him as friendly towards the Jews of Jerusalem and cognizant of their loyalty to him (see Antiquities, chapter 3, sections 3-4), in stark contrast to the attitude of his son. In fact, Antiochus III lowered taxes, granted subventions to the Temple, and let the Jews live, as Josephus puts it, "according to the law of their forefathers."

'''Cultural portrayals'''

The Caroline era play Believe as You List is centered around Antiochus' resistance to the Romans after the Battle of Thermopylae. The play was originally about Sebastian of Portugal surviving the Battle of Alcazar and returning, trying to gather support to return to the throne. This first version was censored for being considered "subversive" because it portrayed Sebastian being deposed, its comments in favor of an Anglo-Spanish alliance and possible pro-Catholicism, which led to the final version changing to the story of Antiochus (which led to historical inaccuracy in exaggerating his defeat at that phase in history to fit the earlier text), turning Spaniards into Romans and the Catholic eremite into a Stoic philosopher.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antiochus_III_the_Great

1 NAME Megas //
2 GIVN Megas
2 SURN
2 NICK Megas

1 NAME Megas //
2 GIVN Megas
2 SURN
2 NICK Megas

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]