== Notes for [[Item:Q87865|Q87865]] ==

ID: I6903

Name: Numerius Julius Caesar

Given Name: Numerius Julius

Surname: Caesar

Sex: M

_UID: CC0B2AFA5118D811BE490080C8C142CC6B62

Change Date: 26 Nov 2005

Death: Y

Father: Lucius Julius Caesar of Rome

Marriage 1 Spouse Unknown

Children

Lucius Julius Caesar Caesar

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I6903

--------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sextus_Julius_Caesar

Sextus Julius Caesar I

Lived circa 200 BC. Son of Lucius Julius Caesar I and grandson of Numerius Julius Caesar. Sextus was a military tribune under Lucius Aemilius Paullus, as well as a governor of Liguria. His sons were Gaius Julius Caesar I and Sextus Julius Caesar II.

--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sextus_Julius_Caesar#Sextus_Julius_Caesar_I

=Sextus Julius Caesar I=

Lived circa 200 BC. Son of '''Lucius Julius Caesar I''' and grandson of '''Numerius Julius Caesar'''. Sextus was a military tribune under Lucius Aemilius Paullus, as well as a governor of Liguria.
*His sons were
# '''Gaius Julius Caesar I''' and
# '''Sextus Julius Caesar II'''.

--------------------

He was a military tribune under Lucius Aemilius Paulus, Proconsul in Liguria. (Wurts, 1945)

He was proconsul in Liguria. In his time, 200 B.C. books instead of being written on one long sheet of scroll and rolled, were of many leaves bound together.
--------------------
http://www.mathematical.com/caesarsextus1.html

=Sextus Julius Caesar I=

*father: Lucius Julius Caesar I
*mother: unknown
*siblings: unknown
*spouse: unknown
*children:
#Caius Julius Caesar I
#Sextus Julius Caesar II

*biographical and/or anecdotal:
*Sextus Julius Caesar I was a military tribune under Lucius Aemilius Paulus. He was proconsul in Liguria. In his time, 200 B.C. books instead of being written on one long sheet of scroll and rolled, were of many leaves bound together.
*notes or source: HBJ

RESEARCH NOTES:
of Rome

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per03990.htm#0

FIRST OF THE CAESARS, THE NAME JULIUS HENCEFORWARD BEING OMITTED FOR THAT OF
CAESAR

He was the first of the Caesars.

He was the first of the Caesars.

According to some accounts he was the son of Lucius Libo of Rome. Libowas the son of Lucius Julius Libo of Rome, a Consul BC 267 and somewhere,back in time, they are reported to have been the great-great, etc.grandchildren of Romulus King of Rome whose father was Mars.

Numerius Julius Caesar, the first of the Caesars lived about 300 B.C. Theword "Caesar" originally meant "a hairy head"; some say "an elephant."His son was Lucius Julius Caesar.

Numerius Julius Caesar was the son of Lucius Julius Libo, who was the sonof Lucius Julius Libo. There was a gap of three generations separatinghim from Lucius Julius Julus, who was the son of Lucius Julius Julus, whowas the son of Caius Julius Julus, who was the son of Caius Julius Julus,who was the son of Lucius Julius Julus, who was the son of NumeriusJulius Julus. There is then another gap of about 560 years separating himfrom Julus, who was the son of Ascanius, who was the son of Aeneas,famous hero of The Iliad and The Aenead.

Rootsweb Feldman
URL: http://worldconnect.genealogy.rootsweb.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=:3044567&id=I18815
# ID: I18815
# Name: Sextus Julius CAESAR 1 2 3 4 5
# Sex: M
# Birth: BEF 100 1 2 3 4 5
# Death: BEF 100 1 2 3 4 5
# Change Date: 15 JAN 2004 5
# Change Date: 15 OCT 2001 2 3 4 5
# Note:

[Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED]

2 SOUR S332582
3 DATA
4 TEXT Date of Import: 14 Jan 2004


[daveanthes.FTW]

Sextus Julius Caesar I was a military tribune under Lucius Aemilius Paulus. He was proconsul in Liguria. In his time, 200 B.C. books instead of being written on one long sheet of scroll and rolled, were of many leaves bound together.



Father: Lucius Julias CAESAR b: BEF 100

Marriage 1 Spouse Unknown

Children

1. Has Children Sextus Julius Caesar II ROME
2. Has Children Caius Julius I CAESAR


Sources:

1. Title: daveanthes.FTW
Note: ABBR daveanthes.FTW
Note: Source Media Type: Other
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Book
Text: Date of Import: 14 Jan 2004
2. Title: daveanthes.FTW
Note: ABBR daveanthes.FTW
Note: Source Media Type: Other
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Book
Text: Date of Import: Jan 13, 2004
3. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Jan 18, 2004
4. Title: Spare.FTW
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: 21 Jan 2004
5. Title: Joanne's Tree.1 GED.GED
Repository:
Call Number:
Media: Other
Text: Date of Import: Feb 6, 2004


wtf 4:565

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]