== Notes for [[Item:Q102462|Q102462]] ==

see also: http://www.lexicorient.com/e.o/ali.htm

Ali was the cousin and son-in-law of the Islamic prophet Muhammad, and ruled over the Islamic Caliphate from 656 to 661(40 hegira). Sunni Muslims consider Ali the fourth and final of the Rightly Guided Caliphs, Shia Muslims regard Ali as the first Imam. Shi'as consider him and his descendants the rightful successors to Muhammad, all of which are members of the 'Ahl al-Bayt', the household of Muhammad. This disagreement split the Ummah (Muslim community) into the Sunni and Shi'a branches.

Most records do indicate that during Muhammad's time, Ali was the only person born in the Kaaba sanctuary in Mecca, the holiest place in Islam. His father was Abu Talib ibn Abd al-Muttalib and his mother was Fatima bint Asad, but he was raised in the household of Muhammad, who himself was raised by Abu Talib, Muhammad's uncle. When Muhammad reported receiving a divine revelation, Ali was the first youngest male to accept his message, dedicating his life to the cause of Islam and to his prophet.

Ali migrated to Medina shortly after Muhammad did. Once there Muhammad told Ali that God had ordered him to give his daughter, Fatimah, to Ali in marriage. For the ten years that Muhammad led the community in Medina, Ali was extremely active in his service, leading parties of warriors on battles, and carrying messages and orders. Ali took part in the early raids against caravans from Mecca and later in almost all the battles fought by the early Muslim community.

Ali was appointed caliph by the Sahaba (Muhammad's companions) in Medina after the assassination of the third caliph, Uthman ibn Affan. He encountered defiance and civil war from hypocrisy during his reign. In 661, Ali was attacked from behind while praying in the mosque of Kufa, dying as a martyr a few days later.

In Muslim culture, Ali is respected for his great physical and spiritual courage, bravery, vast knowledge, belief, honesty, unbending devotion to Islam, deep loyalty to Muhammad, equal treatment of all Muslims and generosity in forgiving his defeated enemies, and therefore is central to mystical traditions in Islam such as Sufism. Ali retains his stature as an authority on Qur'anic exegesis, Ahadees nabawi, Islamic jurisprudence and religious thoughts. Ali holds a high position in almost all Sufi orders which trace their lineage through him to our holly prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him). Ali's influence has thus continued throughout Islamic history.

--------------------

Ali dilahirkan di Mekkah, daerah Hejaz, Jazirah Arab, pada tanggal 13 Rajab. Menurut sejarawan, Ali dilahirkan 10 tahun sebelum dimulainya kenabian Muhammad, sekitar tahun 599 Masehi. Muslim Syi’ah percaya bahwa Ali dilahirkan di dalam Ka’bah. Usia Ali terhadap Nabi Muhammad masih diperselisihkan hingga kini, sebagian riwayat menyebut berbeda 25 tahun, ada yang berbeda 27 tahun, ada yang 30 tahun bahkan 32 tahun.

Beliau bernama asli Haydar bin Abu Thalib, paman Nabi Muhammad SAW. Haydar yang berarti Singa adalah harapan keluarga Abu Thalib untuk mempunyai penerus yang dapat menjadi tokoh pemberani dan disegani diantara kalangan Quraisy Mekkah.Setelah mengetahui sepupu yang baru lahir diberi nama Haydar, Nabi SAW memanggil dengan Ali yang berarti Tinggi (derajat di sisi Allah).

Ali dilahirkan dari ibu yang bernama Fatimah binti Asad, dimana Asad merupakan anak dari Hasyim, sehingga menjadikan Ali, merupakan keturunan Hasyim dari sisi bapak dan ibu.

Kelahiran Ali bin Abi Thalib banyak memberi hiburan bagi Nabi SAW karena beliau tidak punya anak laki-laki. Uzur dan faqir nya keluarga Abu Thalib memberi kesempatan bagi Nabi SAW bersama istri beliau Khadijah untuk mengasuh Ali dan menjadikannya putra angkat. Hal ini sekaligus untuk membalas jasa kepada Abu Thalib yang telah mengasuh Nabi sejak beliau kecil hingga dewasa, sehingga sedari kecil Ali sudah bersama dengan Muhammad.

Ali bin Abi Thalib, seseorang yang memiliki kecakapan dalam bidang militer dan strategi perang, mengalami kesulitan dalam administrasi negara karena kekacauan luar biasa yang ditinggalkan pemerintahan sebelumya. Ia meninggal di usia 63 tahun karena pembunuhan oleh Abdrrahman bin Muljam, seseorang yang berasal dari golongan Khawarij (pembangkang) saat mengimami shalat subuh di masjid Kufah, pada tanggal 19 Ramadhan, dan Ali menghembuskan nafas terakhirnya pada tanggal 21 Ramadhan tahun 40 Hijriyah. Ali dikuburkan secara rahasia di Najaf, bahkan ada beberapa riwayat yang menyatakan bahwa ia dikubur di tempat lain.

--------------------
Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib (Arabic: علي بن أﺑﻲ طالب; Transliteration: ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ali
--------------------
* Wilaadat: 27th Rajjab 24 BH (c. 4th November 598 AD)
* Wafaat: 21st Ramzaan-ul-Kareem 40 AH (30th January 661 AD)

Source 1: Sahifa

Source 2: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ali
--------------------
Born: March 17, 599 AD, Kaaba, Mecca, Saudi Arabia Assassinated: January 27, 661 AD, Great Mosque of Kufa, Najaf Governorate, Iraq Buried: Imam Ali Mosque, Iraq Children: Husayn ibn Ali, Hasan ibn Ali, Zaynab bint Ali,... Spouse: Fatimah (m. 623 AD–632 AD), Umamah bint Zainab (m. ?–661 AD), Umm ul-Banin, Asma bint Umais

In 661 CE, Ali was assassinated by Ibn Muljam as part of a Kharijite plot to assassinate all the different Islamic leaders meaning to end the civil war, whereas the Kharijites failed to assassinate Mu'awiya and 'Amr ibn al-'As.

Ali was the fourth of the Rashidun (or The Rightly Guided Caliphs) of Sunni Islam and the first Imam of Shia Muslims. 1.1 Abu Bakr

1.2 Umar ibn al-Khattab

1.3 Uthman ibn Affan

1.4 Ali ibn Abi Talib

His predecessor was Muhammad, in the Shi'ite view. In the Sunni view, Ali's predecessor was Uthman ibn Affan who was the second caliphe of the Rashidun and conquered Armenia in 640.

He was succeeded by his son Hassan and then by Muawiyah I (as first caliph of the Umayyad dynasty)

The Alids are the dynasties descended from Ali ibn Abi Talib, son-in-law of the Islamic prophet Muhammad (see Family tree of Muhammad and Family tree of Husayn ibn Ali). Shia Muslims consider him the First Imam appointed by Muhammad and the first rightful caliph.

During Ali's Caliphate, the Muslim world became divided and war broke between him and Muawiyah I. When Ali was assassinated by Ibn Muljam (a Kharijite) who struck his head with a sword whilst he was in prostration in prayer in 661, his elder son, Hasan ibn Ali, succeeded him but soon signed a peace treaty with Muawiyah to avoid further bloodshed.

After the third caliph (Uthman ibn Affan), a struggle for succession ensued between Caliph Ali and Muawiyah I, the governor of Syria and cousin of Uthman, in league with a variety of other opponents.

The Khawarij initially supported the authority of Ali the son-in-law and cousin of the Islamic prophet Muhammad. They later rejected his leadership after he agreed to arbitration with Muawiyah rather than combat to decide the succession to the Caliphate following the Battle of Siffin.

In the Hasan-Muawiya treaty, Hasan ibn Ali handed over power to Muawiya on the condition that he be just to the people and keep them safe and secure and that he not establish a dynasty. Hasan and Husayn then moved to Medina. Following this, Mu'awiyah broke the conditions of the agreement and began the Umayyad dynasty, with its capital in Damascus. This brought to an end the era of the Rightly Guided Caliphs for the Sunnis and Hasan ibn Ali was also the last Imam for the Shias to be a Caliph.

http://bit.ly/1NoAVo7 http://bit.ly/1LYEx1Y Abū al-H̩asan ʿAlī ibn Abī T̩ālib (v. 600 - 661) (en arabe : أبو الحسن علي بن أبي طالب, en persan علی پسر ابو طالب), souvent désigné simplement par son prénom Ali (ʿAlī) est le fils d'Abû Tâlib, oncle du prophète de l'islam Mahomet, qui l’a élevé et protégé comme son propre fils après la mort de son grand-père ‘Abd al-Mottalib. Ali est né vers 600, à La Mecque (actuelle Arabie saoudite), une dizaine d'années avant le début de la mission prophétique de Mahomet. Il a été à la fois le protégé, le cousin, le disciple et le gendre de Mahomet en épousant sa fille Fâtima, née de sa première épouse Khadija en 622.

De nombreuses sources, notamment chiites, attestent qu'Ali est né à l'intérieur de la Kaaba à La Mecque, où il est resté avec sa mère pendant trois jours. Selon une tradition, Mahomet est la première personne qui a vu Ali. Mahomet a pris le nouveau-né dans ses mains et l'a nommé Ali, qui signifie « celui exalté ». Ali fait partie des ahlul bayt, la famille du Prophète, qui tiennent une place de haut rang dans l’islam.

Il a été le quatrième calife de l'islam (656-661). Alî a été le premier imam pour les chiites et l'ascendant du reste des imams. Il fut le père de al-Hassan et de al-Hussein.
--------------------
Abū al-H̩asan ʿAlī ibn Abī T̩ālib (v. 600 - 661) (en arabe : أبو الحسن علي بن أبي طالب, en persan علی پسر ابو طالب), souvent désigné simplement par son prénom Ali (ʿAlī) est le fils d'Abû Tâlib, oncle du prophète de l'islam Mahomet, qui l’a élevé et protégé comme son propre fils après la mort de son grand-père ‘Abd al-Mottalib. Ali est né vers 600, à La Mecque (actuelle Arabie saoudite), une dizaine d'années avant le début de la mission prophétique de Mahomet. Il a été à la fois le protégé, le cousin, le disciple et le gendre de Mahomet en épousant sa fille Fâtima, née de sa première épouse Khadija en 622.

De nombreuses sources, notamment chiites, attestent qu'Ali est né à l'intérieur de la Kaaba à La Mecque, où il est resté avec sa mère pendant trois jours. Selon une tradition, Mahomet est la première personne qui a vu Ali. Mahomet a pris le nouveau-né dans ses mains et l'a nommé Ali, qui signifie « celui exalté ». Ali fait partie des ahlul bayt, la famille du Prophète, qui tiennent une place de haut rang dans l’islam.

http://bit.ly/1LYEx1Y

In 656 when Ali became Caliph, and appointed Salman as the governor of Al-Mada'in at the age of 88. [Salman the Persian or Salman al-Farsi (Arabic: سلمان الفارسي‎), born Ruzbeh (Persian: روزبه‎‎), was a companion of the Islamic prophet Muhammad and the first Persian who converted to Islam.---Salman translated part of the Coran into Persian and is also well known as prominent figure in Sufi traditions]

As could be gleaned from the book "al-Mustadrak as-Sahihayn” by the famous Sunni Muslim scholar Hakem an-Nisabouri, the only one defending Prophet Muhammad (SAWA) was his cousin and son-in-law Imam Ali (AS). He has recorded a hadith that reads:
"Ali has four distinctions which no one share with him: He was the first male who prayed with the Messenger of God. He was the bearer of his banner in every battle and he was the one who stayed with him at the Battle on the day of al-Mihras (the Battle of Ohad), and he is the one who washed his blessed body and laid him in his grave.”
--------------------

* ''Imaamate Period/ Reign: 30 years; 10-40 AH (632-661 AD)''

* Wilaadat (Birth):
* Wafaat (Death): 21st Ramadhan ul-Kareem 40 AH (30th January 661 AD)
--------------------
Ali - 4th Sunni Rashidun - - father of 1st Shia Imāmah : Hossein

--------------------
Paternal cousin and son-in-law of the Prophet Muhammad.

Ali is known for his courage, knowledge, belief, honesty, unbending devotion to Islam, deep loyalty to Muhammad, equal treatment of all Muslims and generosity in forgiving his defeated enemies. (wikipedia)

He was the 4th Rightly Guided Caliph of Islam and regarded as the first Imam of Shias.

He was also the Chelf Judge of Madina during the caliphate of Umar (2nd Caliph).

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000002640501087

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]]
[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]][[Category:Pages]]