== Notes for [[Item:Q89646|Q89646]] ==

'''
=Lucius Valerius Maximus=
'''

Lucius Valerius Maximus --- Acilius Priscillianus (fl. 3rd century) was a Roman senator who was appointed consul twice, once in AD 233, and again in AD 256.

'''Biography'''

Valerius Maximus, a member of the third century gens Valeria, was possibly the son of Lucius Valerius Messalla. He began his career in the military, serving as the sevir equitum Romanorum (or commander of a cavalry unit). His first political appointment was as the Triumvir Monetalis, followed by a posting as Quaestor in some unknown province.

This was followed by his being appointed Quaestor urbanus, after which he filled the office of Praetor tutelaris (the official responsible for matters of guardianship). Then in AD 233, Valerius Maximus was made consul prior alongside Gnaeus Cornelius Paternus. For his proconsular command, Valerius Maximus was appointed Curator alvi Tiberis riparum cloacarumque sacrae urbis (responsible for maintaining the sewers and the banks of the Tiber river within the city of Rome).

In AD 238, Valerius Maximus was one of the Italian nobility who was involved in the senatorial revolt against the emperor Maximinus Thrax. He perhaps had a role in the negotiations which saw Gordian I offered the imperial office, and was the Comes Augusti of one of the replacement emperors, Pupienus. During that year he was also one of the vigintivirs.[2] This was followed by his appointment as Curator Laurentium Lavinatium.

Apparently falling out of imperial favour during the reign of Philip the Arab, it was only during the reign of the emperor Valerian that Valerius Maximus was again restored to high political office, with his appointment as Praefectus Urbi of Rome in AD 255. This was followed in the following year with his second consulship, this time serving with Marcus Acilius Glabrio.

Valerius Maximus probably had a son Lucius Valerius Poplicola Balbinus Maximus, who was Roman consul in AD 253.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucius_Valerius_Maximus_(consul_256)

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]