== Notes for [[Item:Q88461|Q88461]] ==

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alexander_I_of_Macedon

Birth: 515 B.C.

Death: 450 B.C.

General Notes

King of Macedonia Alexander I Philhellene Argaead was the son of King of Macedonia Amyntas I Argaead .1,2 He fought in the army of Xerxes with a Macedonian contingent during the Persian wars 0484 B.C..3,4 He was elected as king to succeed his father 0495 B.C. In circa.5 King of Macedonia, Persian Empire, 0495-0452 B.C..5 He was honored by a poem from Pindar, which addressed him as "bold-scheming son of Amyntas".5 He managed to secretly help the Greeks against the Persians, earning the surname "Philhellen", that is, "friend of the Greeks," and as a result, obtained for Macedon the freedom from Persian dominion after the victory of the Greeks.4 A bronze tripod, with an inscription on it's rim, showing that it was won in the Heraia games held at Argos, was found in the Royal Macedonian tombs. The inscription, by it's lettering dated to 430-420 B.C., read: "I am from the games of the Argive Hera." While not definiate that is Alexander I's prize, it shows that some Macedonian king participated in the games.6 Sources: 1. Hammond, N.G.L. and Griffith, G.T. 'A History of Macedonia' Vol.II, chart between pp.176-177. "Men of Athens... Had I not greatly at heart the common welfare of Hellas I should not have come to tell you; but I am myself Hellene by descent, and I would not willingly see Hellas exchange freedom for slavery.... If you prosper in this war, forget not to do something for my freedom; consider the risk I have run, out of zeal for the Hellenic cause, to acquaint you with what Mardonius intends, and to save you from being surprised by the barbarians. I am Alexander of Macedon." (Herodotus, The Histories, 9.45).7 He was the first Macedonian to take part in the Olympic games.

Children of King of Macedonia Alexander I Philhellene Argaead:

Amyntas II Argaead+

King of Macedonia Perdiccas II Argaead + d. 0413 B.C.

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, Royalty for Commoners: The Complete Lineage of John of Gaunt, Son of Edward III, Kings of England, and Queen Philippa (.: ., 3rd Ed., 1998), 413-85. Hereinafter cited as RfC.

[S723] Herodotus of Halicarnassus, The History of Herodotus (London and New York: MacMillan and Co., 1890). Hereinafter cited as Herodotus' History.

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 413-84.

[S1078] Plato and his dialogues, online . Hereinafter cited as Plato and his dialogues.

[S669] M. B. Sakellariou, Macedonia, 4000 Years of Greek History and Civilization, Greek Lands in History (8, Philadelphias Street, Athens, Greece: Ekdotike Athenon S.A., 1983/1988), pg. 68. Hereinafter cited as Sakellariou.

[S959] Manolis Andronicos, Vergina: The Royal Tombs (Athens, Greece: Ekdotike Hellados S.A., 1989), pg. 164-166. Hereinafter cited as Vergina.

[S723] Herodotus of Halicarnassus, Herodotus' History, 9.45.
--------------------
Alejandro I El Filoheleno; Dinastía argénida Rey de Epiro aproximadamente 342 aC, el hermano de Olimpia, la madre de Alejandro Magno, y el hijo-en-ley de Filipo de Macedonia, cuya hija se casó con Cleopatra (336). En 322 cruzó a Italia para asistir a los Tarentinos contra los lucanos, brucios y samnitas. Obtuvo un éxito considerable e hizo un arreglo con los romanos para un ataque conjunto sobre los samnitas; pero los Tarentinos, sospechando del diseño de fundar un reino independiente, se volvieron contra él. Aunque la ventaja en un principio correspondía a Alexander, que perdió poco a poco, y sus partidarios se redujo de distancia. En 330 (o anterior) fue derrotado en Pandosia y asesinado por un emigrante Lucania.

Enciclopedia Britanica - 1911

--------
https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Argead_dynasty

-------

SOURCE NOTES:

http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per01301.htm#0
http://www.gbnf.com/genealogy/sahlin/html/d0066/I8049.HTM

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Macedonia 498-454 BCE

KNOWN AS "THE PHILHELLENE"; KING OF THE MACEDONIANS 498 BC-454 BC

He lived about 500 b.c. and was a protector of Athens.

He lived about 500 b.c. and was a protector of Athens.

Event: Ruled c. 495 - 450 BC, King of Macedonia 2
Note:
Alexander I, byname ALEXANDER PHILHELLENE, or ALEXANDER THE WEALTHY (d. c. 450 BC), 10th king of ancient Macedonia, who succeeded his father, Amyntas I, about 500 BC. More than a decade earlier, Macedonia had become a vassal state of Persia; and in 480 Alexander was obliged to accompany Xerxes I in a campaign through Greece, though he secretly aided the Greek allies. With Xerxes' apparent acquiescence, Alexander seized the Greek colony of Pydna and advanced his frontiers eastward to the Strymon, taking in Crestonia and Bisaltia, with the rich silver deposits of Mt. Dysorus.
It was probably Alexander who organized the mass of his people as a hoplite army called pezhetairoi ("foot companions"), with rudimentary political rights, to act as a counterweight to the nobility, the cavalry hetairoi ("companions"). His byname, the Philhellene, indicates hisefforts to win Greek sympathies. He spread the legend deriving his Argead house from the Temenids of Argos and thus obtained admission to the Olympic Games. From Persian spoil he erected a golden statue at Delphi, and he entertained the poet Pindar at his court. [Encyclopædia Britannica CD '97, ALEXANDER I]
----------
Amyntas' successor, Alexander I (reigned before 492-c. 450), advancedhis frontiers eastward to the Strymon (Struma) River. His byname, "the Philhellene," indicates his efforts to win Greek sympathies. He spread the legend deriving his Argead house from the Temenids of Argos and thus obtained admission to the Olympic Games

Event: Ruled c. 495 - 450 BC, King of Macedonia 2
Note:
Alexander I, byname ALEXANDER PHILHELLENE, or ALEXANDER THE WEALTHY (d. c. 450 BC), 10th king of ancient Macedonia, who succeeded his father, Amyntas I, about 500 BC. More than a decade earlier, Macedonia had become a vassal state of Persia; and in 480 Alexander was obliged to accompany Xerxes I in a campaign through Greece, though he secretly aided the Greek allies. With Xerxes' apparent acquiescence, Alexander seized the Greek colony of Pydna and advanced his frontiers eastward to the Strymon, taking in Crestonia and Bisaltia, with the rich silver deposits of Mt. Dysorus.
It was probably Alexander who organized the mass of his people as a hoplite army called pezhetairoi ("foot companions"), with rudimentary political rights, to act as a counterweight to the nobility, the cavalry hetairoi ("companions"). His byname, the Philhellene, indicates hisefforts to win Greek sympathies. He spread the legend deriving his Argead house from the Temenids of Argos and thus obtained admission to the Olympic Games. From Persian spoil he erected a golden statue at Delphi, and he entertained the poet Pindar at his court. [Encyclopædia Britannica CD '97, ALEXANDER I]
----------
Amyntas' successor, Alexander I (reigned before 492-c. 450), advancedhis frontiers eastward to the Strymon (Struma) River. His byname, "the Philhellene," indicates his efforts to win Greek sympathies. He spread the legend deriving his Argead house from the Temenids of Argos and thus obtained admission to the Olympic Games

Event: Ruled c. 495 - 450 BC, King of Macedonia 2
Note:
Alexander I, byname ALEXANDER PHILHELLENE, or ALEXANDER THE WEALTHY (d. c. 450 BC), 10th king of ancient Macedonia, who succeeded his father, Amyntas I, about 500 BC. More than a decade earlier, Macedonia had become a vassal state of Persia; and in 480 Alexander was obliged to accompany Xerxes I in a campaign through Greece, though he secretly aided the Greek allies. With Xerxes' apparent acquiescence, Alexander seized the Greek colony of Pydna and advanced his frontiers eastward to the Strymon, taking in Crestonia and Bisaltia, with the rich silver deposits of Mt. Dysorus.
It was probably Alexander who organized the mass of his people as a hoplite army called pezhetairoi ("foot companions"), with rudimentary political rights, to act as a counterweight to the nobility, the cavalry hetairoi ("companions"). His byname, the Philhellene, indicates hisefforts to win Greek sympathies. He spread the legend deriving his Argead house from the Temenids of Argos and thus obtained admission to the Olympic Games. From Persian spoil he erected a golden statue at Delphi, and he entertained the poet Pindar at his court. [Encyclopædia Britannica CD '97, ALEXANDER I]
----------
Amyntas' successor, Alexander I (reigned before 492-c. 450), advancedhis frontiers eastward to the Strymon (Struma) River. His byname, "the Philhellene," indicates his efforts to win Greek sympathies. He spread the legend deriving his Argead house from the Temenids of Argos and thus obtained admission to the Olympic Games

Alexander I of Macedon
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Alexander I (Greek: ????a?d??? ? ?a?ed??) was ruler of Macedon from 498 BC to 454 BC. He was the son of Amyntas I of Macedon.

According to Herodotus he was unfriendly to Persia, and had the envoys of Darius I killed when they arrived at the court of his father during the Ionian Revolt. However, he was forced to submit to Persia during the invasion of Greece by Darius' son Xerxes I, and he acted as a representative of the Persian governor Mardonius during peace negotiations after the Persian defeat at the Battle of Salamis in 480 BC. Despite his cooperation with Persia, he frequently gave supplies and advice to the Greeks, and warned them of Mardonius' plans before the Battle of Plataea in 479 BC. Alexander eventually regained Macedonia's independence after the end of the Persian Wars.

Although Macedon was considered a semi-barbaric state by some Greeks (especially those whose colonies near Macedonia were threatened by Macedonian expansion), Alexander claimed descent from Argive Greeks and Hercules. After a court of hellanodikai determined his claim to be true, he was permitted to participate in the Olympic Games, an honor reserved only for Greeks. He modeled his court after Athens and was a patron of the poet Pindar.

In 450 he was succeeded by his son Perdiccas II.
Preceded by:
Amyntas I King of Macedon
498 BC–454 BC Succeeded by:
Perdiccas II

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]