== Notes for [[Item:Q88437|Q88437]] ==

Atossa (from Old Persian *Utauθa, and Avestan Hutaosā) was an Achaemenid queen and daughter of Cyrus the Great. She lived from 550 BC to 475 BC and probably was a sister (or half-sister) of the Persian king Cambyses II.

Atossa married Darius I during 522 BC after Darius, with the help of the nobleman Otanes, defeated the followers of a man claiming to be Bardiya, the younger brother of Cambyses II.

Xerxes I was the eldest son of Atossa and Darius. Atossa lived to see Xerxes invade Greece. Being a direct descendent of Cyrus the Great, Atossa had a great authority within Achamenian royal house and court. Atossa's special position enabled Xerxes, who was not the eldest son of Darius, to succeed his father. [1]

Aeschylus also included her as a central character in his tragedy The Persians. Also Atossa is one of the major characters in the Gore Vidal work, Creation. The book's account of how Darius ascended the throne has been disputed.

--------------------

ID: I62235

Name: Atossa of Persia

Given Name: Atossa

Surname: of Persia

Sex: F

_UID: 25264574EB60444ABC3AA34C142883D45500

Change Date: 26 Nov 2005

Death: Y

Father: Cyrus of Persia b: ABT 600 BC

Marriage 1 DARIUS @@ OF PERSIA b: 558 BC

Married:

Children

XERXES @@ OF PERSIA b: ABT 519

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I62235

--------------------

Atossa, Queen Consort of Persia, was born circa 550 BC; died circa 475 BC.

--------------------

Birth: 550 B.C.

General Notes

tossa Achaemenid died 0480-0465 B.C..2 She married King of Persia and Egypt Darius I "the Great" Achaemenid, son of Satrap of Parthia Hystaspes Achaemenid and Rhodogune (?) , 0522 B.C; His 2nd. Her 3rd. 3rd cousins.3,4 She married King of Persia and Egypt Cambyses II Achaemenid , son of Shahan Shah Cyrus II "the Great" Achaemenid and Cassandane Achaemenid , 0525 B.C. In circa; Her 2nd.3,1 She was born 0545 B.C..1,2 She was the daughter of Shahan Shah Cyrus II "the Great" Achaemenid and Princess Neithiyi of Egypt.4,5 Princess of Persia. Also called Hutautha.1 Also called Hattuosa.1 Sources: 2. Gershevitch, I. (ed.) 'The Cambridge History of Iran' Vo. 2, pp.299.

Children of Atossa Achaemenid and King of Persia and Egypt Darius I "the Great" Achaemenid:

King of Persia and Egypt Xerxes I Achaemenid+ b. 0521 B.C., d. 0465 B.C.

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, Royalty for Commoners: The Complete Lineage of John of Gaunt, Son of Edward III, Kings of England, and Queen Philippa (.: ., 3rd Ed., 1998), 419-88. Hereinafter cited as RfC.

[S447] Anna Sybilla v. Mumm - eine Nachfahrin Pharao Ramses' in 105 Generationen?, online . Hereinafter cited as Anna v. Mumm to Ramses.

[S723] Herodotus of Halicarnassus, The History of Herodotus (London and New York: MacMillan and Co., 1890). Hereinafter cited as Herodotus' History.

[S1132] "A 4000-Year Old DFA", A 4000-Year Old Descent from Antiquity: From the 12th Egyptian Dynasty to the Capetians and Beyond., online soc.medieval.gen, printout dated May 2001. Previously published in hard copy (.: ., 1995–1998). Hereinafter cited as "DFA (4000 yr)".

[S723] Herodotus of Halicarnassus, Herodotus' History, 3.68, "If thou dost not know Smerdis son of Cyrus thyself, ask queen Atossa who it is with whom ye both live - she cannot fail to know her own brother

--------------------
"Atossa (from Old Persian *Utauθa, and Avestan Hutaosā) was an Achaemenid queen and daughter of Cyrus the Great and his second wife, Amitis. She lived from 550 BC to 475 BC and probably was a sister (or half-sister) of the Persian king Cambyses II.
Atossa married Darius I during 522 BC after he, with the help of the nobleman Otanes, defeated the followers of a man claiming to be Bardiya (Smerdis), the younger brother of Cambyses II.[1]
Herodotus records in The Histories that Atossa was troubled by a bleeding lump in her breast. She wrapped herself in sheets and sought a self-imposed quarantine. Ultimately, a Greek slave, Democedes, persuaded her to allow him to excise the tumor. [2]
Xerxes I was the eldest son of Atossa and Darius. Atossa lived to see Xerxes invade Greece. Being a direct descendent of Cyrus the Great, Atossa had a great authority within Achamenian royal house and court. Atossa's special position enabled Xerxes, who was not the eldest son of Darius, to succeed his father.[1] Sources: Wikipedia.org 1. a b Schmitt, Rüdiger (1989). "Atossa". Encyclopaedia Iranica. vol. 3. Encyclopaedia Iranica Foundation. ISBN 0-7100-9121-4. 2. Mukherjee, The Emperor of All Maladies, p.41. See Herodotus, The Histories, OUP, 1998, pt. VIII 3. Mukherjee, The Emperor of All Maladies, pp. 463–467

--------------------
Atosa 550 Ac- 474 ac. Reina consorte de Persia I cc Cambises y II - Dario I Atosa probablemente muriera antes de que Jerjes llegara al poder, posiblemente antes del 515 a. C., porque no es mencionada en las tablillas de Persepolis.

RESEARCH NOTES:
Princess/Queen Persia; children: Xerxes I King of Persia
- - Candravarnna Princess of Persia
- - Masistes Prince of Persia
- - Achaemenes Prince of Persia

CA 545 - 465.

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per00538.htm#0

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per01192.htm#0

RESEARCH NOTES:
Princess of Anshan

OR "HUTAUTHA""HATTUOSA"; b. ca. 545 BC

Name Suffix:<NSFX> Princess Of Persia

Atossa
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.

Atossa or Hutaosa (550 BC-475 BC) was a Queen consort of Persia. In Modern Persian, her name is ???? She was the daughter of Cyrus the Great and a half-sister of Cambyses II. Cambyses insisted on marrying her, although there was no legal precedent for this in Persia; to avoid offending the king, Cambyses' advisors instead informed him that the laws allowed him to do whatever he wished. Atossa then married Smerdis, who overthrew Cambyses, and in 522 BC she married Darius I when Darius overthrew Smerdis. Xerxes I was one of their children.

Atossa probably died before Xerxes came to power, although Herodotus believed she was still alive during Xerxes' reign. Aeschylus also included her as a central character in his tragedy The Persians. Very little is known about the real Atossa, although it is speculated that she came from a Zoroastrian family, as Atossa is a mythical figure in that religion. According to Herodotus she also had Greek slaves, whom she preferred to Persian slaves.

Name Suffix:<NSFX> Princess Of Persia

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]