== Notes for [[Item:Q88165|Q88165]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arsinoe_of_Macedonia

Arsinoe of Macedonia (Greek: Ἀρσινόη; lived 4th century BC) was the mother of Ptolemy I Soter (323 BC – 283 BC), king of Egypt. She was originally a concubine of Philip II, king of Macedon, and it is said she was given by Philip to Lagus, a Macedonian, while she was pregnant with Ptolemy. Ptolemy was regarded by the Macedonians as the son of Philip.

NB: this is revisionist history that was created after the death of Alexander.

Ptolemy was the son of the nobleman Lagus, a native of the Macedonian district of Eordaea whose family was undistinguished until Ptolemy’s time, and of Arsinoe, who was related to the Macedonian Argead dynasty. He was probably educated as a page at the royal court of Macedonia, where he became closely associated with Alexander.
--------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arsinoe_of_Macedonia
--------------------
Arsinoé I ; Reina de Egipto.300 AC. 270 AC. Hija del Rey Lisímaco de Tracia. Se le acusó de traición y repudio ; 281 AC. Se le obligó a exiliarse en Copto ( Alto Egipto.)
--------------------
'''https://books.google.com/books?id=hYGL8RM_jb0C&pg=PA147&lpg=PA147&dq=Arisone+The+Argead&source=bl&ots=HkdaEhUGQJ&sig=UsVhTupcUM68GTyJmz8JgCRDaUc&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0CE0Q6AEwCGoVChMI5r30g622xwIViKKACh15EQX-#v=onepage&q=Arisone%20The%20Argead&f=false'''''''''

2ND COUSIN OF PHILIP II

Arsinoe of Macedonia
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Arsinoe (in Greek A?s????; lived 4th century BC) was the mother of Ptolemy I Soter (323–283 BC), king of Egypt, was originally a concubine of Philip II, king of Macedon, and it is said she was given by Philip to Lagus, a Macedonian, while she was pregnant with Ptolemy. Hence, if we can believe our sources, Ptolemy was regarded by the Macedonians as the son of Philip.1
[edit]

References

* Smith, William (editor); Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology, "Arsinoe (1)", Boston, (1867)

[edit]

Notes
1 Pausanias, Description of Greece, i. 6; Curtius Rufus, Historiae Alexandri Magni, ix. 8; Suda, s.v. "Lagos"

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]