== Notes for [[Item:Q111572|Q111572]] ==

'''Fruela II de León''' (c. 875 – 925), hijo de Alfonso III el Magno y de Jimena de Navarra. Heredó el reino de Asturias a la muerte de su padre en 910, y accedió al trono leonés en 924, a la muerte de su hermano Ordoño II, desplazando del poder a los hijos de éste.

Fruela II se titula ya rey de León y muere hacia el verano de 925 habiendo perdido el importante apoyo navarro al enviudar de Munia Jimena, hija de Sancho Garcés I y volverse a casar con Urraca (de los Banu Qasi de Tudela).

Se sucede entonces un período de intrigas y disputa de derechos sucesorios: se proclamaría primero rey su hijo Alfonso Froilaz, pero pronto sería desplazado por los hijos de Ordoño II.

==Matrimonio y descendencia==

Casó con Munia Jimena. Fueron sus hijos:

* Alfonso Froilaz, rey de León (925) y de Galicia (926).

* Ramiro.

* Ordoño.

''in: <http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fruela_II_de_Asturias_y_Le%C3%B3n>''

_____________________________________________________________________________

Fruela II (Froila II) (c. 875–925) was the King of Asturias from the death of his father, Alfonso III of Asturias, in 910 to his own death. When his father died, the kingdom was divided, with the third son, Fruela, taking the original portion (Asturias); the second, Ordoño, taking Galicia; and the eldest, García, taking León. As king of Asturias, he had the job of consolidating the region later called Castile and keeping its counts in check.

Fruela's mother was Jimena of Pamplona. He himself married twice, first to a woman of unknown origin named Nunila or Nunilona (late sources make her a member of the Basque Jimenez dynasty, but this is unsupported). His second wife, Urraca, according to Ibn Khaldun and Ibn Hazm, was the daughter of the Banu Qasi governor of Tudela. They were married by 917.

[source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fruela_II_of_Leon]

_____________________________________________________________________________

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fruela_II_of_Leon

--------------------

Fruela II of León

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

(Redirected from Fruela II of Leon)

Fruela II (Froila II) (c. 875–925) was the King of Asturias from the death of his father, Alfonso III of Asturias, in 910 to his own death. When his father died, the kingdom was divided, with the third son, Fruela, taking the original portion (Asturias); the second, Ordoño, taking Galicia; and the eldest, García, taking León. As king of Asturias, he had the job of consolidating the region later called Castile and keeping its counts in check.

Fruela's mother was Jimena, daughter of García I of Pamplona. He himself married a Basque from Navarre, but not of the Íñiguez dynasty, but the Jiménez. In 911, he married Nomilia Ximenes (Nunilo Jimena), called Nunila or Nunilona, daughter of Jimeno II of Pamplona.

Fruela maintained good relations with his brother Ordoño, who had the hegemony. They cooperated in the Reconquista and Fruela undersigned Ordoño's diplomas as Froila rex with his second wife, Urraca regina. According to Ibn Khaldun, Urraca was the daughter of the Banu Qasi governor of Tudela. They were married by 917.

When Ordoño died in 924, the magnates ignored his heirs and elected Fruela king. Fruela had never been popular with the nobles and his subjects and his election has been doubted by some, who see it as a likely usurpation. He assassinated Gebuldo and Aresindo, sons of Olmundo, who claimed descent from King Witiza, and thus further alienated the nobility. For this, one chronicler relates, he was condemned to a reign of only fourteen months. According to Ramón Menéndez Pidal, he exiled the bishop Frunimio of León, a relation of Olmundo. Whatever the case, he did reign for a mere fourteen more months and died in early summer 925, some say after having contracted leprosy. Following Fruela's death, there were several competing claimants to his lands, including his younger brother Ramiro (who appears to have married the widowed queen Urraca bint Qasi and used the royal title but was eventually unsuccessful), and the sons of his brother Ordoño II, along with his own young sons. There is some debate as to the immediate succession, although eventually his family lost out to that of brother Ordoño.

According to the Bishop Pelayo, he left three sons by Nunila: Alfonso, Ordoño, and Ramiro. Ibn Khaldun gives Ordoño and Ramiro to Urraca and leaves open the possibility of other children by either wife.

--------------------
Nacido ~875, fallecido en VII-925. Rey de Asturias 910, 14º Rey de Asturias 910-25, Rey de León y Galicia 924-25. Casó en 1ªnp antes de 911 con Nunilo Jimena de Navarra.

--------------------
http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fruela_II
--------------------
Fruela II - (?-925) Rey de Asturias (910-925) y de León (924-925). Parece ser que en 910 destronó a su padre, Alfonso III el Magno, y repartió con sus hermanos los reinos, quedándose él con Asturias. A la muerte de su hermano Ordoño II se proclamó rey de León, desplazando a sus sobrinos. Le sucedió su hijo Alfonso Froilaz el Jorobado, pero los primos de éste no le reconocieron y, ayudados por Sancho Garcés de Pamplona, le destronaron. El trono leonés fue ocupado por su sobrino Alfonso IV el Monje.

Probablemente Fruela II intervino, en compañía de sus hermanos, en la conspiración que en el año 910 separó del trono a su padre, Alfonso III el Magno. Tras el éxito de la conjura, Fruela recibió el reino de Asturias; su hermano García I accedió al trono León, donde reinó entre 910 y 914; y otro hermano suyo, Ordoño II, recibió la corona de Galicia (910-924) y posteriormente la de León, tras la muerte en el año 914 de García I.

Fruela II estableció su residencia en Oviedo, y mantuvo buenas relaciones con el reino de León. Tras la muerte en el año 924 de su hermano Ordoño II, Fruela II se convirtió en rey de León, desplazando a sus sobrinos Sancho y Alfonso (futuros Sancho I, rey de Galicia entre 925 y 929, y Alfonso IV el Monje, rey de Asturias entre 926 y 932). Según las crónicas, Fruela II ordenó matar a los hijos de Olmundo y desterró al obispo de León, Frunimio.

Se casó con Nunilo Jimena, y en segundas nupcias con Urraca, hija del príncipe de Tudela Muhammad ibn Lope, de la familia de los Banu Qasi. Fruela confirmó las donaciones que su padre había hecho a la catedral ovetense. A su muerte, provocada por la lepra, se abrió una crisis sucesoria debido a que sus sobrinos, Sancho y Alfonso, se negaron a reconocer a Alonso Froilaz el Jorobado, hijo de Fruela II, como heredero de la Corona; auxiliados por las huestes de Sancho Garcés I de Pamplona, terminaron derrocándole. Finalmente heredó el trono de León su sobrino Alfonso IV el Monje.

http://www.biografiasyvidas.com/biografia/f/fruela_ii.htm

KING OF LEON

Rey de León (924-925)

Rey de León (924-925)

Infante de Leon
Source:
Historia Genealogica de Casa Real Portuguesa,
D. Antonio Caetano de Sousa,
Atlantida Livaria editora, Lda, 2a Edizao Coimbra, 1946

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]