== Notes for [[Item:Q113064|Q113064]] ==

-------------------
Not the wife of https://www.geni.com/people/Munio-Rodr%C3%ADguez-conde-de-Bierzo/6000000011812551151?through=6000000001864373690

----


D. Nuño Rodriguez, hijo primogénito de D. Rodrigo Nuñez, vivió en tiempo del Rey D. Alonso V y en los sucesivos hasta el reinado de D. Fernando primero, llamado el Magno, y este es á quien la Historia de Asturias llama Munion Rodriguez de Cangas, y dice que era natural de esta Villa en Asturias, teniendo sin duda allí muchos bienes, porque hay repetidas memorias de él en escrituras de aquel tiempo, hasta los años de 1040: algunos pretenden dar á este Munion Rodriguez el apellido de Guzman, por haber vivido en el Castillo de este nombre; pero aunque sea cierto que ya D. Munio ó Nuño. Rodiguez poseia este Castillo, que desde su abuelo Gundemaro tenia el nombre de Guzman, no lo es que los de esta familia usasen de este apellido hasta algunos años despues, como repara muy bien D. José de Pellicer. El matrimonio de este Caballero, es sin disputa entre los Historiadores haberle celebrado con doña '''Jimena Ordoñez''', hija del Infante D. Ordoño, y de doña Fronilda: la general dice, que doña Jimena fué hija de D. Bermudo II y de la Infanta doña Fronilda, á quien llama doña Frovilla Pelaez, cuando otros aseguran haber sido doña limena, Nieta de D. Bermudo II. Unas memorias del Convento de Cornelia, que copia Sota, dicen: El Rey D. Bermudo II tuvo dos amigas hermanas, de la una tuvo al Infante D. Ordoño, y de la otra á la Infanta doña Elvira: D. Ordoño casó con la Infanta doña Fronilda, y tuvo estos hijos, D. Alonso, D. Pelayo, D. Sancho, y doña Jimena Ordoñez: esta caso con el Conde Munio Rodriguez : este Conde Munio Rodriguez lo fué de Astorga, y tambien su hijo.

''in: Diccionario histórico, genealógico y heráldico de las familias ilustres de la monarquía española, tomo VII, pp. 211-212 <http://books.google.com.br/books?pg=PA211&lpg=PA209&dq=Diccionario+histo%CC%81rico,+genealo%CC%81gico+y+hera%CC%81ldico+de+las+familias+ilustres+de+la+monarqui%CC%81a+espan%CC%83ola++gontroda+gundemariz&sig=9lk8WdMonOGGLb3QpGQNJ8MYzI8&ei=8dPCTeitKsWftgeU_ZW9BQ&ct=result&id=dt4VAAAAYAAJ&ots=STajQJnRBP#v=onepage&q&f=false>''


----


-http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/Galicia.htm#JimenaOrdonez


ORDOÑO Vermúdez, illegitimate son of VERMUDO II King of León & his mistress --- (-16 Oct, after 18 Sep 1042). m FRONILDE Peláez, daughter of conde PELAYO Rodríguez & his wife Gotina Vermúdez (-20 Feb or 14 Mar, after 1 Oct 1059).



Ordoño Vermúdez & his wife had [eight] children (the order of the births of these children, taken from the Chronicon Regum Legionensium for those who are named therein[539], is uncertain):

7. ''' JIMENA Ordóñez''' (-after 18 Sep 1042). The Chronicon Regum Legionensium names (in order) "Alfonso Ordóñez, Pelayo Ordóñez, Vermudo Ordóñez, Sancho Ordóñez and Jimena Ordóñez" as the children of "Infante Ordoño" & his wife, specifying that Jimena married "count Muño Rodríguez"[629]. “Pelagius” donated property to Sobrado, with the consent of “comiti Munio Roderici et comitisse domna Eximena”, by charter dated 13 Feb 1033[630]. "Ordonius domni Veremundis regis filius…cum coniuge mee Fronilde Pelagius comite filia…et filiis nostris Veremundo Ordoniz, Sanctio Ordoniz et Fredenando Ordoniz et Ximena" donated property to León Cathedral by charter dated 18 Sep 1042[631]. "Fronildi Pelagius comité filia…et filiis nostris Ueremundo Ordoniz, Sanctio Ordoniz et Fredenando Ordoniz et Xemena" donated "…villa…Kastellelin…de genitore nostro Pelagio Rudarici…de avio nostro Fredenando Uermudi" to León Cathedral by charter dated 18 Sep 1042[632].

'''m''' (before 1033) as his first wife, conde MUNIO Rodríguez Señor del Solar, son of conde RODRIGO Romániz & his wife Elvira Rodríguez (-[1074/75]).

http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/Galicia.htm#MunioRodriguezdied1074

Munio & his first wife had [four] children:
* a) RODRIGO Muñoz (-killed in battle Zalaca [Sagrajas] 23 Oct 1086). m --. The name of Rodrigo's wife is not known.
* b) SUERO Muñoz (-after 1094) m SANCHA Velaz, daughter of conde VELA Ovéquiz & his wife Ildonza Muñoz .
* c) MUNIO Muñoz (-after 20 Oct 1086).
* d) [FERNANDO Muñoz (-1103 or after).
--------------------
Jimena was the daughter of Count Munio Muñiz and his wife Velasquita. Munio Muñiz was the son of Count Munio Rodríguez and Jimena Ordóñez, who was the daughter of the infant Ordoño, illegitimate son of Bermudo II of Leon.

<Hr>

TRUNK BRANCH OF THE GUZMANES

I Count Nuño Rodríguez lived in the days of Alfonso V until the reign of Fernando I, and married Doña Jimena Ordóñez. He followed II Rodrigo Núñez, who married Doña Urraca and died in 1,086, leaving the kingdom to his son III Nuño Ruiz, who died in 1130 and was married to Doña Elvira de Manzaneda and had IV Ruiz Núñez, who married Godo Guzmán and They had V Alvar Ruiz de Guzmán, who married Doña Urraca de Castro



----

https://www.geni.com/people/Jimena-Ord%C3%B3%C3%B1ez/6000000004533651416 primary sourced wife of https://www.geni.com/people/Munio-Rodr%C3%ADguez-conde-de-Bierzo/6000000008463025320


*Nota: http://www.sologenealogia.com/gen/getperson.php?personID=I2664&tree=001 ''(don't work)''


*Nota: http://www.vegasdelcondado.com/guzmanes.htm

*Nota: http://carmenchorda.blogspot.com/2019/03/genealogia-de-los-guzmanes-burgos.html

* Nota: http://www.xenealoxiasdoortegal.net/ortegal/ordonezgalicia.htm ''(spam site: Kwakol Markets Trading Website. Start investing)''

DIY:
* /!\ https://gw.geneanet.org/maite2021?lang=es&iz=2&p=jimena&n=ordonez+de+leon /!\
* /!\ https://www.genealogieonline.nl/fr/family-tree-cromer-russell-buck-pratt/P57233.php /!\

1 NAME Ximena /Ordoñez/
2 GIVN Ximena
2 SURN Ordoñez

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]