== Notes for [[Item:Q117068|Q117068]] ==

Wikipédia [http://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nuno_Pires_Maldonado PT]

'''Nuno Pires Maldonado''' foi um nobre e cavaleiro medieval do Reino de Portugal onde foi Senhor da Casa de Aldana.

Debió ser el primero que se llamó Maldonado, como lo indican algunas fuentes. Varios autores lo presentan como el hijo del primer Maldonado, a quien ubican como nacido 1105-1130, lo cual es imposible si la leyenda del nombre Maldonado tiene como protagonista al rey Felipe Augusto de Francia, dato en que todos coinciden. Firmado Canta, 03.06.2008.

Aka: Nuno Fernandes Maldonado.
Served Fernando II de Leon and his cousin, Alfonso VIII. Sited in the Parrafo VII of the genealogy of the Aldana. Don Hernan Perez lived during the fourth Crusade which began in 1158 and ended in 1214.
First to bear the name Maldonado.
I am not going to beat the dead cat over a bush. The story of Hernan Perez de Aldana has been hashed and rehashed ad infinitum. Its not going to happen within these pages. I am going to share his descendants with you. Now that's good genealogy because those Web Masters that hash and rehash the legend never really give you any real genealogy that's because they don't really know how to research it like I do.
As a result of my research I have worked hard at gathering information and compiling it. As a result I now have one of the most complete Maldonado family trees on the Island of Puerto Rico as well as the world.
This Maldonado family tree's research copyright 2008, John J. Browne Ayes

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]