== Notes for [[Item:Q82256|Q82256]] ==

The clan of Banu Umayyad as well as the dynasty that ruled the Umayyad Caliphate are named after Umayya ibn Abd Shams.

Umayya was the son of Abd Shams ibn Abd Manaf, and the father of Harb ibn Umayya and Abu al-'As. According to the Shia view, Ummaya was the adopted son of Abd Shams ibn Abd Manaf.[1]

Shia Version

Abd Shams ibn Abd Manaf had no offspring. One day he saw some traders who were on their way to Yemen and had stopped in Mecca for rest. These traders had a young slave boy whom they intended to sell. This boy unlike most Arabs was very fair and had brown or blonde hair. Abd Shams ibn Abd Manaf was amazed to see the boy's features, so he bought the boy, adopted him as his son, and named him Umayya. The traders of Yemen usually went to Syria and the boy was possibly a European. This story is intended to explain why Abu Sufian, his grandson, had blue eyes and many who who were born later in the line had lighter hair and eyes, even before their migration to Spain.

His sons were

Abu al-'As ibn Umayyah

Harb ibn Umayya

--------------------
* Adopted son of Sayyidi Abde Shams bin Imaam Abde Manaaf.
* Progenitor of ''Banu Umayyah'' Tribe.

Source 1: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Umayya_ibn_Abd_Shams

Source 2: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Banu_Umayyad
--------------------
در ابتدای قرن هفتم میلادی اعقاب امیه یکی از خانواده‌های پرنفوذ اعراب مکه بودند. در این زمان بود که محمد بن عبدالله از خاندان هاشم اعلام پیامبری کرد. هنگامی که محمد در سال۶۲۲ میلادی به مدینه مهاجرت کرد و در پی آن نبردهایی با مکیان داشت با اعضای خانواده امویان که در سمت سپاه مکه بودند، جنگید. از این میان ابوسفیان بن حرب پدر معاویه اولین حاکم امویان رهبری سپاه مکه را بر عهده داشت. مدینه بر سر راه شام قرار داشت و تجارت با شام مهم ترین منبع درآمد خانواده بنی امیه بود. محمد با بستن این مسیر توانست سرانجام ابوسفیان را ناتوان کرده و منجر به سقوط مکه شد. ابوسفیان کمی قبل از فتح مکه توسط مسلمانان ناگزیر به دین اسلام درآمد. در نهایت با این تغییر جهت، ضمن بازگشت صلح به دو خانواده رقیب اموی و هاشمی در قریش، باعث شد که امویان بتوانند در سیاست آینده حکومت اسلامی- عربی نوپا نقش مهمی بازی کنند. معاویه پسر ابوسفیان کمی بعد به عنوان کاتب وحی درآمد. بعد از مرگ محمد، معاویه در نبردهای سپاه اسلام علیه امپراتوری روم شرقی در آسیای صغیر (سوریه یا شام)شرکت کرد و موفق به فتح دمشق شد.

Umayya ibn Abd Shams
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopediah

Umayya ibn Abd Shams is whom the clan of Banu Umayyad is named after.

Umayya was son of Abd Shams ibn Abd Manaf, and the father of Harb ibn Umayya.

However, the Shi'a Islam History claims that Umayya was not the real son of Abd-Shams, but that the latter, when visiting Rome, he saw a child being sold in miserable conditions. Being childless he adopted Ummaya and took him to Arabia where he was brought up. When Ummaya was young he departed from Quraish tribe [citation needed][original research?].

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]