== Notes for [[Item:Q112063|Q112063]] ==

"Assur Fernández o Asur Fernández o Ansur Fernández fue el primer conde de Monzón (c.943-?) y conde de Castilla (944-945).
-Vida-
Situación del condado de Monzón de Assur Fernández.
Assur Fernández fue hijo de Fernando Ansúrez y Muniadona y miembro de la familia Ansúrez, de la que llegó a ser jefe. Apareció por primera vez en un documento de 929 junto a su padre y a Fernán González. Los Anales castellanos primeros nos hablan de la participación de Assur Fernández en la batalla de Simancas el año 939.

'...invenerunt enim ibidem rex Ranemirus et eius comites qui exierunt cum illo congregati cum suas ostes id est Fredenando Gundesalbiz et Asur Fredenandiz et alia multitudo acmina preliatores.
Anales castellanos primeros.'

Después del 941 se establecerá en León junto al rey Ramiro II, a quien apoyará contra la rebelión de los condes de Castilla y Saldaña. La primera aparición del título de conde de Monzón data de 943, en una donación de Assur Fernández y su mujer Gontrodo al monasterio de San Pedro de Cardeña (Burgos) de tierras situadas entre Peñafiel y Sacramenia. Es perfectamente posible que el título fuera anterior. La zona de actuación de este condado entraba en conflicto con los dominios de Fernán González, quién también intentaba actuar en la zona de Peñafiel y Sacramenia, y con los del conde Diego Muñoz de Saldaña, que vio frenada su expansión hacia la zona gobernada por Assur Fernández. Fue el responsable de la repoblación de la zona de Peñafiel, pudiendo llegar hasta Cuéllar.

Recibió el condado de Castilla tras la rebelión de Fernán González (944). Este título le duró poco tiempo pues al año siguiente parece que Fernán González ya se había reconciliado con el rey leonés y volvía a ostentar el cargo (aunque con la condición de que el infante Sancho Ramírez residiera en Burgos, seguramente para vigilar de cerca las actuaciones de Fernán González).

Tras su muerte, el gobierno del condado de Monzón recayó en su hijo Fernando Ansúrez.
-Nupcias y descendientes-
Contrajo matrimonio con Gontrodo Núñez, hija de Nuño Vela y posiblemente nieta del conde Vela Jiménez. En 943, aparece con su marido cuando entregaron la fuente de Adrada al monasterio de San Pedro de Cardeña, donación confirmada por todos sus hijos en el siguiente orden:2​

Fernando Ansúrez.
Oveco Ansúrez.
Munio Ansúrez.
Gutierre Ansúrez.
Gonzalo Ansúrez.
Teresa Ansúrez, reina de León por su matrimonio con Sancho I.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Assur Fernández or Asur Fernández or Ansur Fernández was the first Count of Monzón (c. 943 -?) and Count of Castile ( 944 - 945 ).
-Life-
Assur Fernández was the son of Fernando Ansúrez y Muniadona and a member of the Ansúrez family , of which he became head. He appeared for the first time in a document from 929 together with his father and Fernán González. The first Castilian Annals tell us about the participation of Assur Fernández in the battle of Simancas in the year 939.'...invenerunt enim ibidem rex Ranemirus et eius comites qui exierunt cum illo congregati cum suas ostes id est Fredenando Gundesalbiz et Asur Fredenandiz et alia multitudo acmina preliatores.
First Castilian Annals.'

After 941 he will establish himself in León together with King Ramiro II, whom he will support against the rebellion of the counts of Castilla y Saldaña. The first appearance of the title of count of Monzón dates from 943, in a donation from Assur Fernández and his wife Gontrodo to the monastery of San Pedro de Cardeña ( Burgos ) of lands located between Peñafiel and Sacramenia . It is perfectly possible that the title was earlier. The area of ​​operation of this county came into conflict with the domains of Fernán González , who also tried to operate in the area of ​​Peñafiel and Sacramenia, and with those of Count Diego Muñoz de Saldaña, which saw its expansion towards the area governed by Assur Fernández halted. He was responsible for the repopulation of the Peñafiel area, being able to reach Cuéllar .

It received the county of Castilla after the rebellion of Fernán González (944). This title did not last long because the following year it seems that Fernán González had already reconciled with the King of Leon and returned to hold the position (although with the condition that the infante Sancho Ramírez resided in Burgos, surely to closely monitor the proceedings by Fernán González).

After his death, the government of Monzón County fell to his son Fernando Ansúrez .

Marriages and descendants
He married Gontrodo Núñez, daughter of Nuño Vela and possibly granddaughter of count Vela Jiménez . In 943, she appears with her husband when they delivered the Adrada fountain to the monastery of San Pedro de Cardeña, a donation confirmed by all her children in the following order: 2

Fernando Ansurez .
Oveco Ansurez.
Munio Ansurez.
Gutierre Ansurez.
Gonzalo Ansurez.
Teresa Ansúrez , Queen of León by her marriage to Sancho I."
[http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Assur_Fern%C3%A1ndez]

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]