== Notes for [[Item:Q116478|Q116478]] ==

Not to be confused with her niece, known as Almodis de La Marche, who married Roger "le Poitevin' de Montgommery.

===Almodis de la Marche===

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Almodis_de_la_Marche

Spouse(s)
* Hugh V of Lusignan
* Pons of Toulouse
* Ramon Berenguer I, Count of Barcelona

Father Bernard I, Count of Marche Mother Amélie

Almodis de la Marche (c. 1020 – 16 October 1071) was a French noble. She was famed for her marriage career, in particularly for her third marriage to Ramon Berenguer I, Count of Barcelona, with whom she committed double bigamy in 1053, for which the Pope had them excommunicated.

Almodis was the daughter of Bernard I, Count of Marche and wife Amélie.[2] She married '''Hugh V of Lusignan''' around 1038 and they had two sons and one daughter. Almodis and Hugh of Lusignan divorced due to consanguinity.[3] She later, with Hugh's assistance, married '''Count Pons of Toulouse''' in 1040.[4] Almodis was still Pons' wife in April 1053, when '''she was abducted by Ramon Berenguer I, Count of Barcelona.[5] He kidnapped her from Narbonne with the aid of a fleet sent north by his ally, the Muslim emir of Tortosa.[5] They married immediately (despite the fact both of her previous husbands were still alive)''' and they appear with their twin sons in a charter the next year. Pope Victor II excommunicated Almodis and Ramon for this illegal marriage until 1056.[6]

Almodis maintained contact with her former husbands and many children, and in 1066/1067 she traveled to Toulouse for her daughter's wedding. A few years before, in 1060, Hugh V of Lusignan had revolted against his lord, Duke William VIII of Aquitaine, in support of Almodis' son William IV of Toulouse.[4] Her sons supported one another in military campaigns; Hugh VI of Lusignan, Raymond IV of Toulouse, and Berenguer Ramon all took the Cross.

Her third husband Ramon was married to her niece, Isabela Trencavel, the daughter of Rangearde de la Marche. Their son, Peter Raymundi, was Ramon's original heir. Peter Raymundi resented Almodis' influence and was concerned she was trying to replace him with her own two sons, his consanguinous nephews, both who had claims through their father, Count La Marche. '''He murdered her in October 1071'''.[7] William of Malmesbury reflected that she was, "sad, [of] unbridled lewdness".[5]

Pere-Ramon was disinherited and exiled for his crime and fled the country. When his father died in 1076, Barcelona was split between Almodis' sons, Berenguer Ramon and Ramon Berenguer. The family history of murder did not end with Pere-Ramon, as Berenguer Ramon earned his nickname "The Fratricide" when he killed his own twin brother.

'''Family'''

She married Hugh V of Lusignan[5] around 1038 and they had two sons and one daughter:

* Hugh VI of Lusignan (c. 1039–1101)[2]
* Jordan de Lusignan
* Mélisende de Lusignan (b. bef. 1055), married before 1074 to Simon I "l'Archevêque", Vidame de Parthenay

Almodis and Hugh of Lusignan divorced due to consanguinity, and Hugh arranged for her to marry Count Pons of Toulouse in 1040.[5] Together they produced several children, including:

* William IV of Toulouse[2]
* Raymond IV of Toulouse[2]
* Hugh,[2] Abbot of Saint-Gilles
* Almodis of Toulouse, married Count Pierre of Melgueil[2]

In 1053, she married Ramon Berenguer I, Count of Barcelona.[5] Together they produced four children:

* Berenguer Ramon II, Count of Barcelona[2]
* Ramon Berenguer II, Count of Barcelona[2]
* Agnes of Barcelona, married Count Guigues II of Albon
* Sancha of Barcelona, married Count Guillermo Ramon I of Cerdagne[2]

'''Notes'''

# Bishko 1968, p. 40.
# Aurell 1995, p. 258.
# Kagay 1993, p. 38.
# Riley-Smith 1997, p. 46.
# Cheyette 1988, p. 839.
# Aurell 1995, p. 231.
# Peña 1991, p. 47.

'''Sources'''

* Aurell, Martin (1995). Les noces du comte: mariage et pouvoir en Catalogne (785-1213). Publications de la Sorbonne.
* Bishko, Charles Julian (1968). "Fernando I and the Origins of the Leonese-Castilian Alliance with Cluny". Studies in Medieval Spanish Frontier History. Variorum.
* Cheyette, Fredric L. (1988). "The "Sale" of Carcassonne to the Counts of Barcelona (1067-1070) and the Rise of the Trencavels". Speculum. The University of Chicago Press. Vol. 63, No. 4 Oct.
* Kagay, Donald J. (1993). "Countess Almodis of Barcelona: "Illustrious and Distinguished Queen" or "Woman of Sad, Unbridled Lewdness"". In Vann, Theresa M. (ed.). Queens, Regents and Potentates. Academia Press.
* Peña (1991). The Chronicle of San Juan de la Peña: A Fourteenth-century Official History of the Crown of Aragon. Translated by Nelson, Lynn H. University of Pennsylvania Press.
* Riley-Smith, Jonathan (1997). The First Crusaders, 1095-1131. Cambridge University Press.

https://it.wikipedia.org/wiki/Almodis_de_La_Marche

Almodis de La Marche

Almodis de La Marche, o Adalmode de la Marche, Almodis, anche in spagnolo, in catalano in francese, in aragonese, in portoghese e in galiziano, Almodis anche in latino e in occitano (1020 circa – 16 ottobre 1071), signora di Lusignano dal 1038 a poco dopo il 1040, contessa consorte di Tolosa dal 1045 al 1053 e contessa consorte di Barcellona dal 1053 al 1071.

===Origine===

Per quanto riguarda la sua origine[1][2], essa era figlia di Bernardo I (ca. 991- 16 giugno 1047) conte de La Marche e della moglie, Amelia de Rasés (? - † 1053); secondo altre fonti la madre di Almodis potrebbe essere anche Amelia di Montignac (ca. 989 -† ca. 1072) oppure Amelia d'Aulnay (ca. 990 -† ca. 1072), mentre altri la mettono in relazione con Ermengarda di Corson, viscontessa di Comborn (deducendolo dal documento n°97 del Cartulaire de l'abbaye d'Uzerche (Corrèze)[3]. Il nome della madre, ripreso da un documento del 1053 ("Almodis comitissa, filia que es Amelie comitisse") è citato dallo storico José Enrique Ruiz Domenec nel suo libro Quan els vescomtes de Barcelona eren (Barcelona, 2006), quando cita la figlia, Almodis, contessa di Barcellona, che riceve il giuramento di fedeltà dal vescovo di Barcellona, Guislaberto[4].

Secondo il Chronicon sancti Maxentii Pictavensis, Chroniques des Eglises d'Anjou Bernardo I de La Marche era figlio primogenito (ed unico) del Conte di Périgord e Conte de La Marche, Adalberto I[5] e della moglie, Almodia o Adalmoda, come ci riferisce la Cronaca di Ademaro di Chabannes[6].

===Biografia===

Nel 1038 circa Almodis sposò il signore di Lusignano, Ugo V detto il Pio[7] († 1060), che era il figlio primogenito del quarto Signore di Lusignano, Ugo IV detto il Bruno (le Brun) e di Adelarda, come ci conferma il documento n° 440 del Cartulaire de l'abbaye de Saint-Cyprien de Poitiers : (931-1155), che riporta di una donazione di Ugo IV di Lusignano (Ugo Liziniacensis), fatta ai monaci di Lusignano, citando come testimoni la moglie Adelarda (Hildeardis uxoris sue) e i due figli maggiori, Ugo e Rorgone (infantum suorum Hugonis et Rorgonis)[8].
Della madre Adelarda non si conoscono né gli ascendenti né il casato (secondo il Duguet era imparentata con i signori di Chabanais[9]).

Dopo il 1040 il matrimonio fu annullato per motivi di consanguineità[7], e Almodis, nel 1045, si risposò in seconde nozze con Ponzio[7], conte di Tolosa, che era vedovo, dal 1044 circa, della sua prima moglie, Mayor[10], che, secondo lo storico Justo Pérez de Urbel, era Mayor Sánchez di Navarra[11] (ca. 1015- prima del 1044)[12], che i cronisti francesi chiamavano "Majorie"[13], figlia del re di Pamplona, Sancho III Garcés di Navarra.

Nel giugno del 1053, secondo il documento n° 235 del volume V delle Preuves de l'Histoire Générale de Languedoc, Almodis suggerì al marito, Ponzio di codificare l'unione delle abbazie di Cluny, che avrebbe avuto la preminenza, e di Moissac[14]. Tale avvenimento viene ricordato anche dal documento n° 3344 delle Chartes de l'abbaye de Cluny del 29 giugno 1053[15].

Nell'estate del 1053, Raimondo Berengario I detto el Vell ("il Vecchio") (1024-1076), conte di Barcellona, fece rapire Almodis dal suo alleato[16], l'emiro musulmano di Tortosa, che con una flotta musulmana assalì Narbona e rapì la contessa, che fu portata a Barcellona, dove il conte Raimondo Berengario la convinse a sposarlo[5], pur essendo ancora in vita i rispettivi consorti[17], il suo secondo marito, Ponzio, e Bianca di Narbona, la moglie di Raimondo. Mentre Ponzio, tenuto in considerazione il documento del 29 giugno 1053, succitato, ripudiò Almodis, nella seconda metà del 1053[12], Bianca, sostenuta dalla nonna di Raimondo Berengario, Ermesinda di Carcassonne, si appellò al papa Vittore II che, qualche tempo dopo il matrimonio tra Raimondo e Almodis, avvenuto poco dopo il giugno 1053, li scomunicò.

Almodis compare citata in due documenti di donazione, assieme al terzo marito, Raimondo: una prima volta, verso la metà degli anni cinquanta, nella Colleció Diplomática de la casa de Temple de Barberà[1]; una seconda volta nel documento n° CCLXXIV, del Cartulaire de l'abbaye de Lérins, 1ère partie[18].

Nonostante le vicissitudini matrimoniali Almodis conservò un buon rapporto con tutti i figli ed anche i mariti:

* nel 1060, convinse Ugo V di Lusignano a schierarsi con suo figlio Guglielmo IV di Tolosa, quindi contro il suo sovrano il duca d'Aquitania Guido Goffredo, che avanzava delle pretese sul ducato di Tolosa
* nel 1065, si recò a Tolosa per il matrimonio della figlia Almodis di Tolosa
* infine i suoi figli presero parte, insieme, a diverse spedizioni militari e nel 1097, Ugo VI di Lusignano, Raimondo di Saint-Gilles e Berengario Raimondo II presero parte alla Prima crociata.

Il conte Raimondo Berengario dalla prima moglie, Isabella di Carcassonne, aveva avuto un figlio (altri due erano morti in tenera età), l'erede designato alla successione paterna, Pietro Raimondo (1050- dopo il 1073), che era molto affezionato ad Almodis, che l'aveva cresciuto come un figlio proprio; ma quando raggiunse la maggiore età ebbe la sensazione, forse a ragione, che la matrigna si adoperasse per rimpiazzarlo con i suoi due figli maschi, gemelli, nella successione alla contea di Barcellona; così l'assassinò[19], strangolandola, nel 1071. L'avvenimento è confermato dal Los Condes de Barcelona Vindicados, Tomos II, che cita il necrologio del monastero di San Cucufate il giorno 17 novembre[20] Pietro Raimondo per il suo crimine fu diseredato ed esiliato, ed anche papa Gregorio VII, appena eletto, nel 1073 gli inflisse una penitenza per l'uccisione della matrigna[21].

Quando nel 1076 Raimondo Berengario morì, gli successero i figli gemelli Raimondo Berengario el Cap d'Estopes ("Testa di Stoppia") e Berengario Raimondo el Fratricida ("il Fratricida").

===Figli===

Almodis ebbe, dai vari mariti, numerosi figli:[2][22]:

ad Ugo diede tre figli[23]:
* Ugo[24], detto il Diavolo (ca. 1039 † tra il 1106 e il 1110), signore di Lusignano, che partecipò alla prima crociata, in Terra Santa e rientrò in Francia, dove morì.
* Giordano, gemello di Ugo[7], morto tra il 1060 e il 1078
* Melissenda (ca. 1040-1075) sposò Simone I di Parthenay, figlio di Guglielmo di Parthenay[23].

a Ponzio ne diede quattro[12]:
* Guglielmo IV[5] (ca.1046- Huesca 1094), conte di Tolosa e d'Albì e marchese di Provenza[25].
* Raimondo di Saint Gilles[5] (1048-1105), conte di Nîmes, conte di Tolosa e d'Albì, marchese di Provenza, che partecipò alla prima crociata, in Terra Santa, dove divenne conte di Tripoli[25] e morì durante l'assedio della città[26].
* Ugo di Tolosa, nominato nel documento n° 3392 delle Chartes de l'abbaye de Cluny del 1063[27], che dal 1066 fu abate a Saint-Gilles di Nîmes, e poi fu abate a Cluny[28].
* Almodis (ca. 1050- dopo il 1132) che sposò nel 1065: il conte Pietro di Melgueil, figlio del conte Raimondo e di Beatrice del Poitou, citata in diversi documenti del volume V delle Preuves de l'Histoire Générale de Languedoc, il n° 334[29], 353 I[30], 353 II[31] e 365[32].

a Raimondo Berengario ne diede cinque[22][33]:
* Raimondo Berengario II el Cap d'Estopes ("Testa di Stoppia")[34] (1054-1082, assassinato, sembra da un uomo della sua scorta in un bosco nei pressi di Barcellona), conte di Barcellona
* Berengario Raimondo II el Fratricida ("il Fratricida")[34] (1054-1097, a cui la voce popolare addebitò l'omicidio del fratello), conte di Barcellona e crociato in Terra Santa
* Arnaldo Pietro (ca. 1054-tra il 2 gennaio 1068 e il 12 novembre 1076), citata in due documenti di donazione, assieme ai genitori: una prima volta, nel 1054, nella Colleció Diplomática de la casa de Temple de Barberà[1]; una seconda volta nel documento n° CCLXXIV, del Cartulaire de l'abbaye de Lérins, 1ère partie, del 1068[18], ma non citato nel testamento del padre
* Inès o Agnese di Barcellona (ca. 1056-prima del 12 novembre 1076), che sposò, il 10 maggio 1070, il conte Ghigo II d'Albon, figlio di Ghigo I d'Albon e di Gotelene. Entrambi i coniugi non furono citati nel testamento di Raimondo Berengario I[33]
* Sancha di Barcellona (ca. 1058- dopo il 13 aprile 1102 in questa data è ricordata nel testamento del figlio, Guglielmo Giordano di Cerdanya[35]), che, secondo le Europäische Stammtafeln[36], vol III, 137 (non consultate), sposò, dopo il 12 novembre 1076, il conte di Cerdagna, Guglielmo Raimondo (?-ca. 1095) figlio del conte Raimondo Goffredo e di Adelaide[33].

===Almodis de La Marche nella letteratura===

Almodis de La Marche è un personaggio del romanzo Il signore di Barcellona (Te daré la tierra, 2008) di Chufo Lloréns.

Note
# (EN) #ES Foundation for Medieval Genealogy : ANGOULEME- AlmodislaMarche
# (EN) Almodis de La Marche- PEDIGREE
# ^ (LA) Cartulaire de l'abbaye d'Uzerche (Corrèze), doc. 97, pag 133
# ^ (LA) Quan els vescomtes de Barcelona eren, doc. 77, pag 325
# (LA) Chronicon sancti Maxentii Pictavensis, Chroniques des Eglises d'Anjou, anno MXLVII, pag 396
# ^ (LA) Chronique / Ademar de Chabannes, par. 25, pag 148
# (LA) Chronicon sancti Maxentii Pictavensis, Chroniques des Eglises d'Anjou pag 401
# ^ (LA) Cartulaire de l'abbaye de Saint-Cyprien de Poitiers : (931-1155), doc 440, pag 276
# ^ (EN) for Medieval Genealogy : Signori di Lusignano - HUGUES IV
# ^ (LA) Histoire générale de Languedoc, Preuves, tomus V, Documento 211 colonne 428 e 429
# ^ Non confermata da tutte le genealogie
# (EN) #ES Foundation for Medieval Genealogy : Conti di Tolosa - AlmodislaMarche (PONS GUILLAUME)
# ^ (EN) #ES Dinastie reali di Navarra
# ^ (LA) Histoire générale de Languedoc, Preuves, tomus V, Documento 235 colonne 470 e 471
# ^ (LA) Chartes de l'abbaye de Cluny, Tome IV, documento n° 3344, pagg. 825 - 827
# ^ (EN) Dinastie comitali catalane
# ^ In quella data era vivo anche il primo marito di Almodis, Ugo V di Lusignano
# (LA) Cartulaire de l'abbaye de Lérins, 1ère partie, documento n° CCLXXIV, pagg. 280 e 281
# ^ (LA) Rerum Gallicarum et Francicarum Scriptores, tomus XI, Gesta Comitum Barcinonensium, pag. 290
# ^ (ES) Los Condes de Barcelona Vindicados, Tomos II, pag. 46
# ^ (ES) Los Condes de Barcelona Vindicados, Tomos II, pagg. 48 e 49
# (EN) Barcellona
# (EN) for Medieval Genealogy : Signori di Lusignano - AlmodislaMarche (HUGUES V)
# ^ (LA) Chronicon sancti Maxentii Pictavensis, Chroniques des Eglises d'Anjou pag 402
# (LA) Documenta Germaniae Historica, Scriptores, tomus XXIII, Chronica Albrici Monachi Trium Fontium 1100, pag. 813
# ^ Tripoli si arrese solo il 12 luglio 1109.
# ^ (LA) Chartes de l'abbaye de Cluny, Tome IV, documento n° 3392, pagg. 495 e 496
# ^ (EN) #ES Foundation for Medieval Genealogy : Conti di Tolosa - PONS GUILLAUME
# ^ (LA) Histoire générale de Languedoc, Preuves, tomus V, Documento 334 colonne 644 - 646
# ^ (LA) Histoire générale de Languedoc, Preuves, tomus V, Documento 353 I colonne 677 e 678
# ^ (LA) Histoire générale de Languedoc, Preuves, tomus V, Documento 353 II colonne 678 e 679
# ^ (LA) Histoire générale de Languedoc, Preuves, tomus V, Documento 365 colonne 695 e 696
# (EN) #ES Foundation for Medieval Genealogy : Catalogna - AlmodislaMarche (RAMON BERENGUER [I] "el Viejo")
# (LA) Rerum Gallicarum et Francicarum Scriptores, Tomus XI, Ex Gestis Comitum Barcinonensium, par. 11, pag 290
# ^ (LA) Marca Hispanica Appendix, doc. CCCXXX, colonna 1224
# ^ Le Europäische Stammtafeln sono una raccolta di tavole genealogiche delle (più influenti) famiglie europee.

===Bibliografia===
===Fonti primarie===

* (LA) Preuves de l'Histoire Générale de Languedoc, tome V.
* (LA) Chronicon sancti Maxentii Pictavensis, Chroniques des Eglises d'Anjou.
* (LA) Documenta Germaniae Historica, Scriptores, tomus XXIII.
* (LA) Chartes de l'abbaye de Cluny.
* (LA) Cartulaire de l'abbaye de Lérins, 1ère partie.
* (LA) Rerum Gallicarum et Francicarum Scriptores, tomus XI.
* (LA) Ruiz-Domenèc, J. E. (2006) Quan els vescomtes de Barcelona eren (Barcelona).
* (LA) Cartulaire de l'abbaye d'Uzerche (Corrèze).

===Letteratura storiografica===

* Louis Alphen, La Francia nell'XI secolo, in «Storia del mondo medievale», vol. II, 1999, pp. 770–806
* Rafael Altamira, La Spagna (1031-1248), in «Storia del mondo medievale», vol. V, 1999, pp. 865–896
* (FR) Archives du Gard.
* (ES) Los Condes de Barcelona Vindicados, Tomos II.
* (LA) Marca Hispanica.

===Voci correlate===

* Elenco di conti di Tolosa
* Elenco dei conti di Barcellona
* Elenco dei marchesi di Provenza
* Elenco di duchi d'Aquitania
* Elenco di duchi di Borgogna
* Elenco di duchi, re e conti di Provenza
* Imperatori del Sacro Romano Impero
* Tabella cronologica dei regni della Penisola iberica

===Altri progetti===

Collabora a Wikimedia Commons Wikimedia Commons contiene immagini o altri file su Almodis de La Marche

===Collegamenti esterni===

* (EN) Foundation for Medieval Genealogy : ANGOULEME- AlmodislaMarche, su fmg.ac.
* (EN) Foundation for Medieval Genealogy : Signori di Lusignano - AlmodislaMarche (HUGUES V), su fmg.ac.}
* (EN) Foundation for Medieval Genealogy : Conti di Tolosa - AlmodislaMarche (PONS GUILLAUME), su fmg.ac.
* (EN) Foundation for Medieval Genealogy : Catalogna - AlmodislaMarche (RAMON BERENGUER [I] "el Viejo"), su fmg.ac.
* (FR) Histoire des comtes de Foix : Les comtes de Toulouse (Pons-AlmodislaMarche), su foixstory.com. URL consultato il 4 aprile 2007 (archiviato dall'url originale il 4 aprile 2007).

http://genealogics.org/getperson.php?personID=I00106196&tree=LEO

Almodis de la Marche (990 or c. 1020 – 16 October 1071) was the daughter of Bernard I, Count of Marche and wife Amélie. She married Hugh V of Lusignan around 1038 and they had two sons and one daughter: Hugh VI of Lusignan (c. 1039-1101) Jordan de Lusignan Mélisende de Lusignan (b. bef. 1055), married before 1074 to Simon I "l'Archevêque", Vidame de Parthenay

Almodis and Hugh of Lusignan divorced due to consanguinity, and Hugh arranged for her to marry Count Pons of Toulouse in 1040. Together they produced several children, including: William IV of Toulouse Raymond IV of Toulouse Hugh, Abbot of Saint-Gilles Almodis of Toulouse, married Count Pierre of Melgueil

She was still Pons' wife in April 1053, but shortly thereafter Almodis was abducted by Ramon Berenguer I, Count of Barcelona. He kidnapped her from Narbonne with the aid of a fleet sent north by his ally, the Muslim emir of Tortosa. They married immediately (despite the fact both of her previous husbands were still alive) and they appear with their twin sons in a charter the next year. Pope Victor II excommunicated Almodis and Ramon for this illegal marriage until 1056. Together they produced four children: Berenguer Ramon II, Count of Barcelona Ramon Berenguer II, Count of Barcelona Inés of Barcelona, married Count Guigues I of Albon Sancha of Barcelona, married Count Guillermo Ramon I of Cerdagne

Almodis maintained contact with her former husbands and many children, and in 1066/1067 she traveled to Toulouse for her daughter's wedding. A few years before, in 1060, Hugh V of Lusignan had revolted against his lord, Duke William VIII of Aquitaine, in support of Almodis' son William IV of Toulouse. Her sons supported one another in military campaigns; Hugh VI of Lusignan, Raymond IV of Toulouse, and Berenguer Ramon all took the Cross.

Her third husband Ramon had a son from a previous marriage, Pedro Ramon, who was his heir. Pedro apparently resented Almodis' influence and was concerned she was trying to replace him with her own two sons. He murdered her in October 1071. Pedro was disinherited and exiled for his crime, and fled the country. When his father died in 1076, Barcelona was split between Berenguer Ramon and Ramon Berenguer, Almodis' sons. The family history of murder did not end with Pedro Ramon, as Berenguer Ramon earned his nickname "The Fratricide" when he killed his own twin brother.

--------------------
Almodis de la Marche (990 or c. 1020 – 16 October 1071) was the daughter of Bernard I, Count of Marche (whose parents were both descendants of Charlemagne) and wife Amélie de Montignac. She married Hugh V of Lusignan around 1038 and they had two sons and one daughter:

* Hugh VI of Lusignan (c. 1039-1101)
* Jordan de Lusignan
* Mélisende de Lusignan (b. bef. 1055), married before 1074 to Simon I "l'Archevêque", Vidame de Parthenay

Almodis and Hugh of Lusignan divorced due to consanguinity, and Hugh arranged for her to marry Count Pons of Toulouse in 1040. Together they produced several children, including:

* William IV of Toulouse
* Raymond IV of Toulouse
* Hugh, Abbot of Saint-Gilles
* Almodis of Toulouse, married Count Pierre of Melgueil

She was still Pons' wife in April 1053, but shortly thereafter Almodis was abducted by Ramon Berenguer I, Count of Barcelona. He kidnapped her from Narbonne with the aid of a fleet sent north by his ally, the Muslim emir of Tortosa. They married immediately (despite the fact both of her previous husbands were still alive) and they appear with their twin sons in a charter the next year. Pope Victor II excommunicated Almodis and Ramon for this illegal marriage until 1056. Together they produced four children:

* Berenguer Ramon II, Count of Barcelona
* Ramon Berenguer II, Count of Barcelona
* Inés of Barcelona, married Count Guigues I of Albon
* Sancha of Barcelona, married Count Guillermo Ramon I of Cerdagne

Almodis maintained contact with her former husbands and many children, and in 1066/1067 she traveled to Toulouse for her daughter's wedding. A few years before, in 1060, Hugh V of Lusignan had revolted against his lord, Duke William VIII of Aquitaine, in support of Almodis' son William IV of Toulouse. Her sons supported one another in military campaigns; Hugh VI of Lusignan, Raymond IV of Toulouse, and Berenguer Ramon all took the Cross.

Her third husband Ramon had a son from a previous marriage, Pedro Ramon, who was his heir. Pedro apparently resented Almodis' influence and was concerned she was trying to replace him with her own two sons. He murdered her in October 1071. Pedro was disinherited and exiled for his crime, and fled the country. When his father died in 1076, Barcelona was split between Berenguer Ramon and Ramon Berenguer, Almodis' sons. The family history of murder did not end with Pedro Ramon, as Berenguer Ramon earned his nickname "The Fratricide" when he killed his own twin brother.
--------------------
Almodis de la Marche (990 or c. 1020 – 16 October 1071) was the daughter of Bernard I, Count of Marche and wife Amélie. She married Hugh V of Lusignan around 1038 and they had two sons and one daughter:

Hugh VI of Lusignan (c. 1039-1101) Jordan de Lusignan Mélisende de Lusignan (b. bef. 1055), married before 1074 to Simon I "l'Archevêque", Vidame de Parthenay Almodis and Hugh of Lusignan divorced due to consanguinity, and Hugh arranged for her to marry Count Pons of Toulouse in 1040. Together they produced several children, including:

William IV of Toulouse Raymond IV of Toulouse Hugh, Abbot of Saint-Gilles Almodis of Toulouse, married Count Pierre of Melgueil She was still Pons' wife in April 1053, but shortly thereafter Almodis was abducted by Ramon Berenguer I, Count of Barcelona. He kidnapped her from Narbonne with the aid of a fleet sent north by his ally, the Muslim emir of Tortosa. They married immediately (despite the fact both of her previous husbands were still alive) and they appear with their twin sons in a charter the next year. Pope Victor II excommunicated Almodis and Ramon for this illegal marriage until 1056. Together they produced four children:

Berenguer Ramon II, Count of Barcelona Ramon Berenguer II, Count of Barcelona Inés of Barcelona, married Count Guigues I of Albon Sancha of Barcelona, married Count Guillermo Ramon I of Cerdagne Almodis maintained contact with her former husbands and many children, and in 1066/1067 she traveled to Toulouse for her daughter's wedding. A few years before, in 1060, Hugh V of Lusignan had revolted against his lord, Duke William VIII of Aquitaine, in support of Almodis' son William IV of Toulouse. Her sons supported one another in military campaigns; Hugh VI of Lusignan, Raymond IV of Toulouse, and Berenguer Ramon all took the Cross.

Her third husband Ramon had a son from a previous marriage, Pedro Ramon, who was his heir. Pedro apparently resented Almodis' influence and was concerned she was trying to replace him with her own two sons. He murdered her in October 1071. Pedro was disinherited and exiled for his crime, and fled the country. When his father died in 1076, Barcelona was split between Berenguer Ramon and Ramon Berenguer, Almodis' sons. The family history of murder did not end with Pedro Ramon, as Berenguer Ramon earned his nickname "The Fratricide" when he killed his own twin brother.
--------------------
Almodis de la Marche From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Almodis de la Marche (990 or c. 1020 – 16 October 1071) was the daughter of Bernard I, Count of Marche and wife Amélie. She married Hugh V of Lusignan around 1038 and they had two sons and one daughter: Hugh VI of Lusignan (c. 1039-1101) Jordan de Lusignan Mélisende de Lusignan (b. bef. 1055), married before 1074 to Simon I "l'Archevêque", Vidame de Parthenay Almodis and Hugh of Lusignan divorced due to consanguinity, and Hugh arranged for her to marry Count Pons of Toulouse in 1040. Together they produced several children, including: William IV of Toulouse Raymond IV of Toulouse Hugh, Abbot of Saint-Gilles Almodis of Toulouse, married Count Pierre of Melgueil She was still Pons' wife in April 1053, but shortly thereafter Almodis was abducted by Ramon Berenguer I, Count of Barcelona. He kidnapped her from Narbonne with the aid of a fleet sent north by his ally, the Muslim emir of Tortosa. They married immediately (despite the fact both of her previous husbands were still alive) and they appear with their twin sons in a charter the next year. Pope Victor II excommunicated Almodis and Ramon for this illegal marriage until 1056. Together they produced four children: Berenguer Ramon II, Count of Barcelona Ramon Berenguer II, Count of Barcelona Inés of Barcelona, married Count Guigues I of Albon Sancha of Barcelona, married Count Guillermo Ramon I of Cerdagne Almodis maintained contact with her former husbands and many children, and in 1066/1067 she traveled to Toulouse for her daughter's wedding. A few years before, in 1060, Hugh V of Lusignan had revolted against his lord, Duke William VIII of Aquitaine, in support of Almodis' son William IV of Toulouse. Her sons supported one another in military campaigns; Hugh VI of Lusignan, Raymond IV of Toulouse, and Berenguer Ramon all took the Cross.

Her third husband Ramon had a son from a previous marriage, Pedro Ramon, who was his heir. Pedro apparently resented Almodis' influence and was concerned she was trying to replace him with her own two sons. He murdered her in October 1071. Pedro was disinherited and exiled for his crime, and fled the country. When his father died in 1076, Barcelona was split between Berenguer Ramon and Ramon Berenguer, Almodis' sons. The family history of murder did not end with Pedro Ramon, as Berenguer Ramon earned his nickname "The Fratricide" when he killed his own twin brother. [edit]Sources

Chronicles of the abbey of St. Maixent (pub. 1886 by A. Richard) Reilly, B. F. The Conquest of Christian and Muslim Spain, 1992 [edit]

--------------------
Almodis de la Marche From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Almodis de la Marche (990 or c. 1020 – 16 October 1071) was the daughter of Bernard I, Count of Marche (whose parents were both descendants of Charlemagne) and wife Amélie de Montignac. She married Hugh V of Lusignan around 1038 and they had two sons and one daughter: Hugh VI of Lusignan (c. 1039-1101) Jordan de Lusignan Mélisende de Lusignan (b. bef. 1055), married before 1074 to Simon I "l'Archevêque", Vidame de Parthenay Almodis and Hugh of Lusignan divorced due to consanguinity, and Hugh arranged for her to marry Count Pons of Toulouse in 1040. Together they produced several children, including: William IV of Toulouse Raymond IV of Toulouse Hugh, Abbot of Saint-Gilles Almodis of Toulouse, married Count Pierre of Melgueil She was still Pons' wife in April 1053, but shortly thereafter Almodis was abducted by Ramon Berenguer I, Count of Barcelona. He kidnapped her from Narbonne with the aid of a fleet sent north by his ally, the Muslim emir of Tortosa. They married immediately (despite the fact both of her previous husbands were still alive) and they appear with their twin sons in a charter the next year. Pope Victor II excommunicated Almodis and Ramon for this illegal marriage until 1056. Together they produced four children: Berenguer Ramon II, Count of Barcelona Ramon Berenguer II, Count of Barcelona Inés of Barcelona, married Count Guigues I of Albon Sancha of Barcelona, married Count Guillermo Ramon I of Cerdagne Almodis maintained contact with her former husbands and many children, and in 1066/1067 she traveled to Toulouse for her daughter's wedding. A few years before, in 1060, Hugh V of Lusignan had revolted against his lord, Duke William VIII of Aquitaine, in support of Almodis' son William IV of Toulouse. Her sons supported one another in military campaigns; Hugh VI of Lusignan, Raymond IV of Toulouse, and Berenguer Ramon all took the Cross. Her third husband Ramon had a son from a previous marriage, Pedro Ramon, who was his heir. Pedro apparently resented Almodis' influence and was concerned she was trying to replace him with her own two sons. He murdered her in October 1071. Pedro was disinherited and exiled for his crime, and fled the country. When his father died in 1076, Barcelona was split between Berenguer Ramon and Ramon Berenguer, Almodis' sons. The family history of murder did not end with Pedro Ramon, as Berenguer Ramon earned his nickname "The Fratricide" when he killed his own twin brother.

Sources

Chronicles of the abbey of St. Maixent (pub. 1886 by A. Richard) Reilly, B.F. The Conquest of Christian and Muslim Spain, 1992

--------------------
Almodis de la Marche (990 or c. 1020 – 16 October 1071) was the daughter of Bernard I, Count of Marche and wife Amélie. She married Hugh V of Lusignan around 1038 and they had two sons and one daughter:

* Hugh VI of Lusignan (c. 1039-1101)
* Jordan de Lusignan
* Mélisende de Lusignan (b. bef. 1055), married before 1074 to Simon I "l'Archevêque", Vidame de Parthenay

Almodis and Hugh of Lusignan divorced due to consanguinity, and Hugh arranged for her to marry Count Pons of Toulouse in 1040. Together they produced several children, including:

* William IV of Toulouse
* Raymond IV of Toulouse
* Hugh, Abbot of Saint-Gilles
* Almodis of Toulouse, married Count Pierre of Melgueil

She was still Pons' wife in April 1053, but shortly thereafter Almodis was abducted by Ramon Berenguer I, Count of Barcelona. He kidnapped her from Narbonne with the aid of a fleet sent north by his ally, the Muslim emir of Tortosa. They married immediately (despite the fact both of her previous husbands were still alive) and they appear with their twin sons in a charter the next year. Pope Victor II excommunicated Almodis and Ramon for this illegal marriage until 1056. Together they produced four children:

* Berenguer Ramon II, Count of Barcelona
* Ramon Berenguer II, Count of Barcelona
* Inés of Barcelona, married Count Guigues I of Albon
* Sancha of Barcelona, married Count Guillermo Ramon I of Cerdagne

Almodis maintained contact with her former husbands and many children, and in 1066/1067 she traveled to Toulouse for her daughter's wedding. A few years before, in 1060, Hugh V of Lusignan had revolted against his lord, Duke William VIII of Aquitaine, in support of Almodis' son William IV of Toulouse. Her sons supported one another in military campaigns; Hugh VI of Lusignan, Raymond IV of Toulouse, and Berenguer Ramon all took the Cross.

Her third husband Ramon had a son from a previous marriage, Pedro Ramon, who was his heir. Pedro apparently resented Almodis' influence and was concerned she was trying to replace him with her own two sons. He murdered her in October 1071. Pedro was disinherited and exiled for his crime, and fled the country. When his father died in 1076, Barcelona was split between Berenguer Ramon and Ramon Berenguer, Almodis' sons. The family history of murder did not end with Pedro Ramon, as Berenguer Ramon earned his nickname "The Fratricide" when he killed his own twin brother
--------------------
***NOTE: SOME records claim Death date is c. 1111-1112. However, other records show death in 1083 as death date in her young 20s which would be soon after marriage to Count Raymond Berenger II. At least most records and profile managers concur with DOB c. 1055-1059***
--------------------
Ramon Berenguer II, Count of Barcelona From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Ramon Berenguers's marriages and descendants

First wife, Aimeris of Narbonne Second wife, Mahalta (or Maud) of Apulia, born ca. 1059, died 1111/1112, daughter of Duke Robert Guiscard and of Sikelgaita de Salerno Ramon Berenguer III the Great, count of Barcelona and Provence (before 1082-1131)
--------------------
Almodis de la Marche (990 or c. 1020 – 16 October 1071) was the daughter of Bernard I, Count of Marche and wife Amélie. She married Hugh V of Lusignan around 1038 and they had two sons and one daughter:

Hugh VI of Lusignan (c. 1039-1101)

Jordan de Lusignan

Mélisende de Lusignan (b. bef. 1055), married before 1074 to Simon I "l'Archevêque", Vidame de Parthenay

Almodis and Hugh of Lusignan divorced due to consanguinity, and Hugh arranged for her to marry Count Pons of Toulouse in 1040. Together they produced several children, including:

William IV of Toulouse

Raymond IV of Toulouse

Hugh, Abbot of Saint-Gilles

Almodis of Toulouse, married Count Pierre of Melgueil

She was still Pons' wife in April 1053, but shortly thereafter Almodis was abducted by Ramon Berenguer I, Count of Barcelona. He kidnapped her from Narbonne with the aid of a fleet sent north by his ally, the Muslim emir of Tortosa. They married immediately (despite the fact both of her previous husbands were still alive) and they appear with their twin sons in a charter the next year. Pope Victor II excommunicated Almodis and Ramon for this illegal marriage until 1056. Together they produced four children:

Berenguer Ramon II, Count of Barcelona

Ramon Berenguer II, Count of Barcelona

Inés of Barcelona, married Count Guigues I of Albon

Sancha of Barcelona, married Count Guillermo Ramon I of Cerdagne

Almodis maintained contact with her former husbands and many children, and in 1066/1067 she traveled to Toulouse for her daughter's wedding. A few years before, in 1060, Hugh V of Lusignan had revolted against his lord, Duke William VIII of Aquitaine, in support of Almodis' son William IV of Toulouse. Her sons supported one another in military campaigns; Hugh VI of Lusignan, Raymond IV of Toulouse, and Berenguer Ramon all took the Cross.

Her third husband Ramon had a son from a previous marriage, Pedro Ramon, who was his heir. Pedro apparently resented Almodis' influence and was concerned she was trying to replace him with her own two sons. He murdered her in October 1071. Pedro was disinherited and exiled for his crime, and fled the country. When his father died in 1076, Barcelona was split between Berenguer Ramon and Ramon Berenguer, Almodis' sons. The family history of murder did not end with Pedro Ramon, as Berenguer Ramon earned his nickname "The Fratricide" when he killed his own twin brother.
--------------------
http://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Almodis_de_la_Marche
--------------------
http://gw.geneanet.org/pierfit?lang=fr;p=almodis;n=de+la+marche
--------------------
https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Almodis_de_la_Marca


from &quot;Our Folk&quot; by Albert D Hart, Jr.

Murdered

Murdered

Divorced

! (1) Also AFN 9HM8ZD

! (1) Also AFN 9HM8ZD

"Plantagenet Ancestry", Turton.
"Europaische Stammtafeln", Isenburg.
"Pedigrees from Mike Talbot of Metairie, LA".[Custer February 1, 2002Family Tree.FTW]

[merge G675.FTW]

"Plantagenet Ancestry", Turton.
"Europaische Stammtafeln", Isenburg.
"Pedigrees from Mike Talbot of Metairie, LA".

859747673. Grevinne Mathilde (Mahud) ROBERTSDTR av Apulia died after Jun 1111. (20027) She was a Grevinne in Apulia.

--Other Fields

Ref Number: 397

!Title is; Countess of Barcelona.

_P_CCINFO 1-20792

! (1) Also AFN 9HM8ZD

was the daughter of Bernard I, Count of Marche (whose parents were both descendants of Charlemagne) and wife Amélie de Montignac. She married Hugh V of Lusignan around 1038 and they had two sons and one daughter. Almodis and Hugh of Lusignan divorced due to consanguinity, and Hugh arranged for her to marry Count Pons of Toulouse in 1040. Together they produced several children. She was still Pons' wife in April 1053, but shortly thereafter Almodis was abducted by Ramon Berenguer I, Count of Barcelona. He kidnapped her from Narbonne with the aid of a fleet sent north by his ally, the Muslim emir of Tortosa. They married immediately (despite the fact both of her previous husbands were still alive) and they appear with their twin sons in a charter the next year. Pope Victor II excommunicated Almodis and Ramon for this illegal marriage until 1056. Together they produced four children

Murdered

Murdered

Divorced

Aka Mahalta, Maud, Matilde

! (1) Also AFN 9HM8ZD

Murdered

Almodis de la Marche (990 or c. 1020 - 16 October 1071) was the daughter of Bernard I, Count of Marche and wife Amélie. She married Hugh V of Lusignan around 1038 and they had two sons and one daughter:

Hugh VI of Lusignan (c. 1039-1101)
Jordan de Lusignan
Mélisende de Lusignan (b. bef. 1055), married before 1074 to Simon I "l'Archevêque", Vidame de Parthenay
Almodis and Hugh of Lusignan divorced due to consanguinity, and Hugh arranged for her to marry Count Pons of Toulouse in 1040. Together they produced several children, including:

William IV of Toulouse
Raymond IV of Toulouse
Hugh, Abbot of Saint-Gilles
Almodis of Toulouse, married Count Pierre of Melgueil
She was still Pons' wife in April 1053, but shortly thereafter Almodis was abducted by Ramon Berenguer I, Count of Barcelona. He kidnapped her from Narbonne with the aid of a fleet sent north by his ally, the Muslim emir of Tortosa. They married immediately (despite the fact both of her previous husbands were still alive) and they appear with their twin sons in a charter the next year. Pope Victor II excommunicated Almodis and Ramon for this illegal marriage until 1056. Together they produced four children:

Berenguer Ramon II, Count of Barcelona
Ramon Berenguer II, Count of Barcelona
Inés of Barcelona, married Count Guigues I of Albon
Sancha of Barcelona, married Count Guillermo Ramon I of Cerdagne
Almodis maintained contact with her former husbands and many children, and in 1066/1067 she traveled to Toulouse for her daughter's wedding. A few years before, in 1060, Hugh V of Lusignan had revolted against his lord, Duke William VIII of Aquitaine, in support of Almodis' son William IV of Toulouse. Her sons supported one another in military campaigns; Hugh VI of Lusignan, Raymond IV of Toulouse, and Berenguer Ramon all took the Cross.


Sepulchers of Ramon Berenguer I and Almodis de la Marche. Cathedral of Barcelona.Her third husband Ramon had a son from a previous marriage, Pedro Ramon, who was his heir. Pedro apparently resented Almodis' influence and was concerned she was trying to replace him with her own two sons. He murdered her in October 1071. Pedro was disinherited and exiled for his crime, and fled the country. When his father died in 1076, Barcelona was split between Berenguer Ramon and Ramon Berenguer, Almodis' sons. The family history of murder did not end with Pedro Ramon, as Berenguer Ramon earned his nickname "The Fratricide" when he killed his own twin brother.

Sources
Chronicles of the abbey of St. Maixent (pub. 1886 by A. Richard)
Reilly, B. F. The Conquest of Christian and Muslim Spain, 1992

Notes
^ Charles Julian Bishko (1968-9), "Fernando I and the Origins of the Leonese-Castilian Alliance with Cluny," Studies in Medieval Spanish Frontier History (Variorum Reprints), 40.

_P_CCINFO 1-20792
Original individual @@P2447683491@@ (@@MS_NHFETTERLYFAMIL0@@) merged with @@P2308141564@@ (@@MS_NHFETTERLYFAMIL0@@)
Original individual @@P2447683491@@ (@@MS_NHFETTERLYFAMIL0@@) merged with @@P2442109190@@ (@@MS_NHFETTERLYFAMIL0@@)
Original individual @@P2447683491@@ (@@MS_NHFETTERLYFAMIL0@@) merged with @@P2447676769@@ (@@MS_NHFETTERLYFAMIL0@@)

867789489. Grevinne Almodis (Adalumz) BERNHARDSDTR av la Marche(20653) died in Nov 1071.(20654) Myrdet av sin stesønn Hugo She was a Grevinne in la Marche. (20655) Noen mener hun var enke etter grev Adelbert I av la Marche og datter av Gerard, vicomte av Limoges. dette er sikkert uriktig. Der forveksles her med den Almodis, som kanskje var hennes bestemor og som ble g.m Wilhelm den Store, greve av Poitou, i dennes første ekteskap og som døde allerede 1005/11.
Almodis var åpenbart temmelig intrigant, Hun hadde 3 ektemenn i live samtidig, og det heter at hun med Berengar Raimund I. hadde tvillingsønnene Raimund Berengar II og Berengar Raimund II, samt to døtre Sancha og Ines. Mellom Almodis og Pedro Raimund (sønn av Raimund Berengar I., i hans første ekteskap med Isabell) oppstod det en bitter strid, utvilsom t fordi Almodis intrigerte for å berøve ham hans førstefødselsrett. Det gikk på vidt at Pedro myrdet henne.

Murdered by her husband's son Pere Ramon Berenguer

1 NAME Almodis /De La Marche/ 1 NAME Almodis /Marche/ 1 DEAT 2 DATE 17 NOV 1075

--Other Fields

Ref Number: 970

There is some doubt as to the identity of Geoffrey's wife Almodis.

GIVN Maud de
SURN Hauteville
AFN 9B68-6Q
DATE 9 SEP 2000
TIME 13:15:38

GIVN Almodis de la
SURN Marche
NSFX [Countess Of Bar
AFN 9HM9-8W
DATE 9 SEP 2000
TIME 13:15:34

Weis, p. 159

Murdered by her stepson, Peter Raimond of Barcelona.

Mathilde (Mahud) var gift 2. gang ca. 1085 med Aymeri I, vicomte av Narbonne. Hun
beholdt sin grevinne-tittel.

Murdered by her stepson, Peter Raimond of Barcelona.

Basic Life Information

Almodis de la Marche

Almodis de la Marche (990 or c. 1020 - 16 October 1071) was the daughter of Bernard I, Count of Marche and wife Amélie.

Marriages and Children

She married Hugh V of Lusignan around 1038 and they had two sons and one daughter:
Hugh VI of Lusignan (c. 1039-1101)
Jordan de Lusignan
Mélisende de Lusignan (b. bef. 1055), married before 1074 to Simon I "l'Archevêque", Vidame de Parthenay

Almodis and Hugh of Lusignan divorced due to consanguinity, and Hugh arranged for her to marry Count Pons of Toulouse in 1040. Together they produced several children, including:
William IV of Toulouse
Raymond IV of Toulouse
Hugh, Abbot of Saint-Gilles
Almodis of Toulouse, married Count Pierre of Melgueil

Abduction and Children

She was still Pons' wife in April 1053, but shortly thereafter Almodis was abducted by Ramon Berenguer I, Count of Barcelona. He kidnapped her from Narbonne with the aid of a fleet sent north by his ally, the Muslim emir of Tortosa. They married immediately (despite the fact both of her previous husbands were still alive) and they appear with their twin sons in a charter the next year. Pope Victor II excommunicated Almodis and Ramon for this illegal marriage until 1056. Together they produced four children:
Berenguer Ramon II, Count of Barcelona
Ramon Berenguer II, Count of Barcelona
Inés of Barcelona, married Count Guigues I of Albon
Sancha of Barcelona, married Count Guillermo Ramon I of Cerdagne

Almodis maintained contact with her former husbands and many children, and in 1066/1067 she traveled to Toulouse for her daughter's wedding. A few years before, in 1060, Hugh V of Lusignan had revolted against his lord, Duke William VIII of Aquitaine, in support of Almodis' son William IV of Toulouse. Her sons supported one another in military campaigns; Hugh VI of Lusignan, Raymond IV of Toulouse, and Berenguer Ramon all took the Cross.

Death

Her third husband Ramon had a son from a previous marriage, Pedro Ramon, who was his heir. Pedro apparently resented Almodis' influence and was concerned she was trying to replace him with her own two sons. He murdered her in October 1071. Pedro was disinherited and exiled for his crime, and fled the country. When his father died in 1076, Barcelona was split between Berenguer Ramon and Ramon Berenguer, Almodis' sons. The family history of murder did not end with Pedro Ramon, as Berenguer Ramon earned his nickname "The Fratricide" when he killed his own twin brother.

<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Almodis_de_la_Marche>

Name Suffix:<NSFX> Of Ampulia

Human Family Project
URL: http://users.legacyfamilytree.com/NorthernEurope/f249.htm#f50520
Husband Roger The Poitevin La Marche, Lord La Marche-[129188]

Born: 1058 at: Of, Nottingham, Nottinghamshire, England
Christened: at:
Died: 1102 at:
Buried: at:
Bapt.(LDS): Submitted 2 May 2001 (23) #9 at:

Married: Place:


Wife Almodis or Audmodis De La Haute Marche, Countess La Marche-[170574]

AKA: Almode De La Haute Marche, Adelmonde De La Marche
Born: 1015 at: Of, Lamarche, Normandy, France
Christened: at:
Died: 16 Nov 1071 at:
Buried: at:
Bapt.(LDS): Submitted 2 May 2001 (18) #7 at:


Father: Bernard I , Count De La Marche & Perigord-[171360] (0974-Bef 1047)
Mother: Amelie or Aldearde De Thouars-[117973] (0989-1072)

SealP (LDS): Submitted 2 May 2001 (18) #7 Temple:


Other Spouse: Raimund Berenger II The Elder or Raymond De Barcelona, Count De Barcelona-[133084] (1023-1076) Date: 1053, Of, Barcelona, Spain

SealS (LDS): Temple:

Other Spouse: Pons De Toulouse Count De Toulouse-[115519] (0990-1061) Date: 1044-1045, Of, Toulouse, Aquitaine, France

SealS (LDS): Submitted 2 May 2001 (18) #7 Temple:

Other Spouse: Hugh V Le Debonnaire De La Marche, Sn De La Marche-[117819] (1013-1060) Date: Bef 1039, Of, Lamarche, Normandy, France

SealS (LDS): Submitted 2 May 2001 (18) #7 Temple:

Other Spouse: Guillaume III D' Arles, Count De Arles-[133095] (1016- ) Date: 1040, Of, Lamarche, Normandy, France

SealS (LDS): Submitted 2 May 2001 (18) #7 Temple:

Events 1. Notes, Of, Toulouse, France
2. Alt Birth, Abt 1062, Of, Marche, Poitou, France

Children 1 F Avice De Lancaster-[129187]

Born: 1088 at: Of, Nottingham, Nottinghamshire, England
Christened: at:
Died: 1149 at:
Buried: at:
Bapt.(LDS): Submitted 2 May 2001 (18) #7 at:

Spouse: William II Peverel, Lord Nottingham-[123641] (1080-1155) Marr: Of, Nottingham, Nottinghamshire, England Kinship II - A collection of family, friends and U.S. Presidents
URL: http://worldconnect.genealogy.rootsweb.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=:2902060&id=I575151950
ID: I575151950
Name: Almodis De La HAUTE MARCHE
Given Name: Almodis De La
Surname: HAUTE MARCHE
Sex: F
Birth: Abt 1000 in Of, Toulouse, , France
Death: 16 Nov 1071 in Murdered
Change Date: 9 Feb 2004 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
Note: Ancestral File Number: 9HM9-8W

Father: Bernard I Comte De La MARCHE b: Abt 0970 in
Mother: Amelie Countess Of AUBNAY b: Abt 0974 in

Marriage 1 Pons III Count Of TOULOUSE & ALBI b: Abt 0990 in Of, , Toulouse, France
Married: (div) 1053?
Note: _UIDF1C7883682FB2449A50DAF2B71C55B951293
Children
Guillaume IV Count Of TOULOUSE b: 1040 in Of, , Toulouse, France

Marriage 2 Raimund Berenger I (II) "el Viejo" Count Of BARCELONA b: 1023 in Of, , Barcelona, Spain
Married: 1056
Note: _UIDD3938DE211D38C4D8060195F7F4361DBE87A
Children
Raimund Berenger II (III) Count Of BARCELONA b: Abt 1055 in Of, , Barcelona, Spain

Marriage 3 Hugh V "Le Debonnaire" SIRE b: Abt 1015 in Of, Lusignan, Vienne, France
Note: _UID7C7F4A8C1AF8C94CA69D8F372F47F345AF63
Children
Hugh VI "Le Diable" SIRE b: Abt 1039 in Of, Lusignan, Vienne, France

Sources:
Author: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
Title: Ancestral File (R)
Publication: Copyright (c) 1987, June 1998, data as of 5 January 1998
Repository:

Almodis de la Marche
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.

Almodis de la Marche (c. 1020 – 16 October 1071) was the daughter of Bernard I, Count of Marche. She married Hugh V of Lusignan around 1038 and they had one son:

Hugh VI of Lusignan (c. 1039-1101)
Almodis and Hugh of Lusignan divorced due to consanguinity, and Hugh arranged for her to marry Count Pons of Toulouse in 1040. Together they produced several children, including:

William IV of Toulouse
Raymond IV of Toulouse
Hugues of Toulouse (died young)
Almodis of Toulouse, married Count Pierre of Melgueil
She was still Pons' wife in April 1053, but shortly thereafter Almodis was abducted by Ramon Berenguer I, Count of Barcelona. He kidnapped her from Narbonne with the aid of a fleet sent north by his ally, the Muslim emir of Tortosa. They married immediately (despite the fact both of her previous husbands were still alive) and they appear with their twin sons in a charter the next year. Pope Victor II excommunicated Almodis and Ramon for this illegal marriage until 1056. Together they produced four children:

Berenguer Ramon II, Count of Barcelona
Ramon Berenguer II, Count of Barcelona
Inés of Barcelona, married Count Guigues I of Albon
Sancha of Barcelona, married Count Guillermo Ramon I of Cerdagne
Almodis maintained contact with her former husbands and many children, and in 1066/1067 she traveled to Toulouse for her daughter's wedding. A few years before, in 1060, Hugh V of Lusignan had revolted against his lord, Duke William VIII of Aquitaine, in support of Almodis' son William IV of Toulouse. Her sons supported one another in military campaigns; Hugh VI of Lusignan, Raymond IV of Toulouse, and Berenguer Ramon all took the Cross.

Her third husband Ramon had a son from a previous marriage, Pedro Ramon, who was his heir. Pedro apparently resented Almodis' influence and was concerned she was trying to replace him with her own two sons. He murdered her in October 1071. Pedro was disinherited and exiled for his crime, and fled the country. When his father died in 1076, Barcelona was split between Berenguer Ramon and Ramon Berenguer, Almodis' sons. The family history of murder did not end with Pedro Ramon, as Berenguer Ramon earned his nickname "The Fratricide" when he killed his own twin brother.

[edit]
Sources
Chronicles of the abbey of St. Maixent (pub. 1886 by A. Richard)

Basic Life Information

Almodis de la Marche

Almodis de la Marche (990 or c. 1020 - 16 October 1071) was the daughter of Bernard I, Count of Marche and wife Amélie.

Marriages and Children

She married Hugh V of Lusignan around 1038 and they had two sons and one daughter:
Hugh VI of Lusignan (c. 1039-1101)
Jordan de Lusignan
Mélisende de Lusignan (b. bef. 1055), married before 1074 to Simon I "l'Archevêque", Vidame de Parthenay

Almodis and Hugh of Lusignan divorced due to consanguinity, and Hugh arranged for her to marry Count Pons of Toulouse in 1040. Together they produced several children, including:
William IV of Toulouse
Raymond IV of Toulouse
Hugh, Abbot of Saint-Gilles
Almodis of Toulouse, married Count Pierre of Melgueil

Abduction and Children

She was still Pons' wife in April 1053, but shortly thereafter Almodis was abducted by Ramon Berenguer I, Count of Barcelona. He kidnapped her from Narbonne with the aid of a fleet sent north by his ally, the Muslim emir of Tortosa. They married immediately (despite the fact both of her previous husbands were still alive) and they appear with their twin sons in a charter the next year. Pope Victor II excommunicated Almodis and Ramon for this illegal marriage until 1056. Together they produced four children:
Berenguer Ramon II, Count of Barcelona
Ramon Berenguer II, Count of Barcelona
Inés of Barcelona, married Count Guigues I of Albon
Sancha of Barcelona, married Count Guillermo Ramon I of Cerdagne

Almodis maintained contact with her former husbands and many children, and in 1066/1067 she traveled to Toulouse for her daughter's wedding. A few years before, in 1060, Hugh V of Lusignan had revolted against his lord, Duke William VIII of Aquitaine, in support of Almodis' son William IV of Toulouse. Her sons supported one another in military campaigns; Hugh VI of Lusignan, Raymond IV of Toulouse, and Berenguer Ramon all took the Cross.

Death

Her third husband Ramon had a son from a previous marriage, Pedro Ramon, who was his heir. Pedro apparently resented Almodis' influence and was concerned she was trying to replace him with her own two sons. He murdered her in October 1071. Pedro was disinherited and exiled for his crime, and fled the country. When his father died in 1076, Barcelona was split between Berenguer Ramon and Ramon Berenguer, Almodis' sons. The family history of murder did not end with Pedro Ramon, as Berenguer Ramon earned his nickname "The Fratricide" when he killed his own twin brother.

<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Almodis_de_la_Marche>

Basic Life Information

Almodis de la Marche

Almodis de la Marche (990 or c. 1020 - 16 October 1071) was the daughter of Bernard I, Count of Marche and wife Amélie.

Marriages and Children

She married Hugh V of Lusignan around 1038 and they had two sons and one daughter:
Hugh VI of Lusignan (c. 1039-1101)
Jordan de Lusignan
Mélisende de Lusignan (b. bef. 1055), married before 1074 to Simon I "l'Archevêque", Vidame de Parthenay

Almodis and Hugh of Lusignan divorced due to consanguinity, and Hugh arranged for her to marry Count Pons of Toulouse in 1040. Together they produced several children, including:
William IV of Toulouse
Raymond IV of Toulouse
Hugh, Abbot of Saint-Gilles
Almodis of Toulouse, married Count Pierre of Melgueil

Abduction and Children

She was still Pons' wife in April 1053, but shortly thereafter Almodis was abducted by Ramon Berenguer I, Count of Barcelona. He kidnapped her from Narbonne with the aid of a fleet sent north by his ally, the Muslim emir of Tortosa. They married immediately (despite the fact both of her previous husbands were still alive) and they appear with their twin sons in a charter the next year. Pope Victor II excommunicated Almodis and Ramon for this illegal marriage until 1056. Together they produced four children:
Berenguer Ramon II, Count of Barcelona
Ramon Berenguer II, Count of Barcelona
Inés of Barcelona, married Count Guigues I of Albon
Sancha of Barcelona, married Count Guillermo Ramon I of Cerdagne

Almodis maintained contact with her former husbands and many children, and in 1066/1067 she traveled to Toulouse for her daughter's wedding. A few years before, in 1060, Hugh V of Lusignan had revolted against his lord, Duke William VIII of Aquitaine, in support of Almodis' son William IV of Toulouse. Her sons supported one another in military campaigns; Hugh VI of Lusignan, Raymond IV of Toulouse, and Berenguer Ramon all took the Cross.

Death

Her third husband Ramon had a son from a previous marriage, Pedro Ramon, who was his heir. Pedro apparently resented Almodis' influence and was concerned she was trying to replace him with her own two sons. He murdered her in October 1071. Pedro was disinherited and exiled for his crime, and fled the country. When his father died in 1076, Barcelona was split between Berenguer Ramon and Ramon Berenguer, Almodis' sons. The family history of murder did not end with Pedro Ramon, as Berenguer Ramon earned his nickname "The Fratricide" when he killed his own twin brother.

<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Almodis_de_la_Marche>

Marriage: 1040 Spouse: Taillefer, Pons III C/Tousouse & Tripoli Birth: 990 Toulouse, France Death: 1060 Gender: Male Children:

Toulouse, William IV C/Toulouse ===================================================== Family:

Marriage: ABT 1038 Toulouse, France spouse ??
Children:

Diable, Hugh VI le (Sire)

Marriage: 1040 Spouse: Taillefer, Pons III C/Tousouse & Tripoli Birth: 990 Toulouse, France Death: 1060 Gender: Male Children:

Toulouse, William IV C/Toulouse ===================================================== Family:

Marriage: ABT 1038 Toulouse, France spouse ??
Children:

Diable, Hugh VI le (Sire)

Almodis de la Marca

Almodis de la Marca. Nacida hacia 1020 y fallecida en Barcelona el 1 de noviembre de 1071. Era hija del conde occitano Bernardo I de la Marca (cuyos padres eran descendientes de Carlomagno) y de Amelia de Rasés.

Se casó en 1038 con Hugo V de Lusignan, naciendo un hijo:
Hugo VI de Lusignan (1039-1101)

El matrimonio fue anulado por motivos de consanguinidad, y Almodis se vuelve a casar en 1040 con el conde Ponce III de Tolosa, naciendo cuatro hijos:
Guillermo V de Tolosa
Raimundo IV de Tolosa
Hugo, Abad de Saint-Gilles
Almodis, casada en 1066 con el conde Pedro I de Melgueil

Este matrimonio duró unos diez años, hasta que el conde de Barcelona Ramón Berenguer I la secuestró y se casó con ella en el año 1052, repudiando a su segunda esposa, la condesa Blanca. Ésta apeló al Papa, y consiguió el apoyo de la abuela de Ramón Berenguer, la condesa Ermesenda, obteniéndose de Víctor II la excomunión para ambos, hecho que provocó una guerra que no se resolvió hasta finales de 1057. La pareja tuvo cuatro hijos:
Berenguer Ramón II de Barcelona
Ramón Berenguer II de Barcelona
Inés de Barcelona, casada con el conde Guigues II de Albon
Sancha de Barcelona, casada con el conde Guillermo Ramón I de Cerdaña.

Esta alianza matrimonial aportaba derechos sobre el Languedoc que reafirmaban las relaciones entre la casa de Barcelona con las tierras más allá de los Pirineos. Almodis, mujer madura,hermosa, y de una notable formación cultural, se asoció al gobierno de su marido y cooperó con él en la compra de los derechos sobre los condados de Carcasona y Rasés. Pero por cuestiones de sucesión se ganó la enemistad de su hijastro Pedro Ramón de Barcelona que la asesinó en el año 1071.

First of all, that ca. 990 birthdate is just wrong. As to remarrying while her former husband was still living, yes, she did that, twice, and it raised a few eyebrows at the time. She first appears as the wife of Ramon on 15 Feb 1054. Ramon Berenguer I had abducted her sometime the previous year, in Narbonne, with the aid of a fleet sent north by his ally the Muslim Emir of Tortosa. Although she appears at his side in 1054, they may not have sought formally to marry until closer to 1056, when their excommunication for the attempt was lifted after some months. She remained countess of Barcelona until she was murdered by his son (her stepson) Pere Berenguer on 16 October 1071. During the time Almodis was married to Ramon Berenger she had been instrumental in directing an intricate policy between her husband (Barcelona) and her sons by her second marriage (Toulouse). She helped secure Raymond Berenguer's purchase of Carcassonne, probably as an appanage for Pere Berenguer, to allow her own twin sons by Ramon Berenguer I to succeed in Barcelona. After her (third) husband's death in 1076, their twin sons succeeded, but one murdered the other 10 years later.4

!Title is; Countess of Barcelona.

Grevinne av La Marche.
Noen mener at Almodis var enke etter greve Adelbert I av La Marche og datter til
Gerard, vicomte av Limoges. Dette er sikkert uriktig og en forveksling med den Almodis som
kanskje var hennes bestemor og som ca. 997 ble gift med Wilhelm den Store, greve av
Poitou, i hans første ekteskap og som døde allerede ca. 1005-11.
Almodis var åpenbart temmelig intrigant. Hun hadde tre ektemenn i live samtidig.
Hennes første ektemann var greve Hugo av Leizignan. I ?Enciclopedia universal
illustrada Evropo-Americana? heter det at det var en greve av Arles som ble drept
08.10.1060 og som forstøtte henne under påskudd av for nært slektskap.
Hun var gift 2. gang ca. 1040-45 med Pons av Toulouse som forstøtte henne ca. 1053.
Hun ble så gift med Raimund mellom 04.11.1053 og 04.11.1054. Dette
ekteskap ble bekreftet av Pons i et dokument av
04.11.1056. Med Raimund hadde hun tvillingsønnene Raimund Berengar II og Berengar
Raimund II, samt to døtre, Sancha og Inés.
Mellom Almodis og Pedro Raimund, sønn til Raimund Berengar I i hans første ekteskap
med Isabel, oppstod det en bitter strid, utvilsomt fordi Almodis intrigerte for å berøve ham hans
førstefødselsrett. Det gikk så vidt at Pedro myrdet henne.

!Title is; Countess of Barcelona.

One LDS site suggests that Mathilda's parents were Robert I 'Guiscard ' de Hautville, b. 965 and his wife Sigelgaita Princess of Salerno b.9 70. That would make Mathilda's parents in their mid 80's at the timeo f her birth, this needs additional investigaiton.

GIVN Maud de
SURN Hauteville
AFN 9B68-6Q
DATE 9 SEP 2000
TIME 13:15:38

GIVN Almodis de la
SURN Marche
NSFX [Countess Of Bar
AFN 9HM9-8W
DATE 9 SEP 2000
TIME 13:15:34

!Title is; Countess of Barcelona.

Murdered by her stepson, Peter Raimond of Barcelona.

GIVN Almodis de la
SURN Marche
NSFX [Countess Of Bar
AFN 9HM9-8W
DATE 9 SEP 2000
TIME 13:15:34

[1859] EDWARD3.TXT b 1000 d 1060

-- MERGED NOTE ------------

Wikidata: https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q291372 | Geni: https://www.geni.com/people/6000000000656886819

[[Category:Wikipedia overwrite]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]