== Notes for [[Item:Q56645|Q56645]] ==

NOTE: the information below pertains to the Jorg Frey’s parents and could be understood more easily on their profiles rather than on Jorg’s....

Marti FREY Birth 1521 SWITZERLAND, Died in SWITZERLAND

Spouse: Ursula WYSY, b. 1524, SWITZERLAND

Children

* Fridi FREY, b. 1 Jan 1551
*Jorg FREY, b. 6 Jan 1553, Knonau, Zurich,SWITZERLAND, d. 4 Nov 1635, Knonau, Zurich,SWITZERLAND
*Melchoir FREY, b. 1556
==================================

1. MARTI1 FREY was born Abt. 1521 in Switzerland, and died 1556 in Switzerland. He married URSULA WYSY Abt. 1540. She was born Abt. 1524 in Switzerland, and died Aft. 1556 in Knonau, Zurich, Switzerland.

More About MARTI FREY and URSULA WYSY:
Marriage: Abt. 1540
Children of MARTI FREY and URSULA WYSY are: i. FRIDLI2 FREY, b. 1552. 2. ii. JORG FREY, b. January 06, 1553/54, Knonau, Zurich, Switzerland; d. November 04, 1635, Knonau, Zurich, Switzerland. iii. MELCHIOR FREY, b. 1556, Knonau, Zurich, Switzerland; m. MARGRETH HUBER.

http://familytreemaker.genealogy.com/users/f/l/e/Joseph-F-Fleetwood/FILE/0006text.txt
--------------------
=== GEDCOM Note ===
Ahnenliste Syz-Hegetschweiler von Mario von Moos and Matthias Zimmermann

https://books.google.ch/books?id=F9h4eg1KHk4C&pg=PA752&dq=steuerbücher+stadt+landschaft+zürich&hl=de&sa=X&ei=dQCbUs_XIMeI7AbmqICQDw#v=onepage&q=frey&f=false

=== GEDCOM Note ===
=== Life Sketch ===
seine erste Frau verstarb nach dem gemeinsamen vierten Kind er heiratete ein zweites Mal

=== GEDCOM Note ===
=== Ahnenlinie ===

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]