== Notes for [[Item:Q112013|Q112013]] ==

Name seen as Oria (Aurea) Bint Ibn Musa Banu Qasi. She was the wife of https://www.geni.com/people/Fort%C3%BAn-Garc%C3%A9s-el-Monje-rey-de-Pamplona/4069355645200020817?through=6000000007427665201

----
[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Auria '''Auria''']—also known as '''Oria'''—was an early consort of Pamplona. She is known from a single historical source, the Códice de Roda, which only gives her name and not her parentage. Historian and professor Antonio Rei has put forward the hypothesis that she could have been the granddaughter of Musa ibn Musa al-Qasawi,[1] while genealogist Christian Settipani suggested this and two other alternatives when addressing her possible parentage.[2]


----

===Biography

[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fort%C3%BAn_Garc%C3%A9s_of_Pamplona Fortún Garcés of Pamplona] (Wikipedia)

'''Fortún Garcés''' (Basque: Orti Gartzez; died 922) nicknamed the One-eyed (el Tuerto), and years later the Monk (el Monje), was king of Pamplona from 870/882 until 905. He appears in Arabic records as Fortoûn ibn Garsiya (فرتون بن غرسية). He was the eldest son of García Iñíguez and grandson of Íñigo Arista, the first king of Pamplona. Reigning for about thirty years, Fortún Garcés would be the last king of the Íñiguez dynasty.

Fortún was born at an unknown date, being the eldest son of García Íñiguez,[1] king of Pamplona, and a woman named '''Urraca''', who could have been the granddaughter of Musa ibn Musa al-Qasawi, the leader of the Banu Qasi clan.[2]

Fortún Garcés permanently retired to the Monastery of Leyre in 905,[6] where he died in 922.[7]

Fortún was married to Auria, whose undocumented origin has been subject to conflicting speculation,[8][9] to whom the Códice de Roda assigns the following children:[10]

* Íñigo Fortúnez, married to Sancha Garcés, daughter of García Jiménez of Pamplona and Onecca 'rebel of Sancosa'.
* Aznar Fortúnez; little is known about him.
* Velasco Fortúnez, who had three children: Jimena, wife of Íñigo Garcés, son of García Jiménez of Pamplona.
* Lope Fortúnez
* Onneca Fortúnez, according to the Códice de Roda first married to Abdullah ibn Muhammad al-Umawi of Córdoba[11] and later to Aznar Sánchez of Larraun, with whom she had three children, including Queens Toda and Sancha of Pamplona.[1] However, the order of Onneca's marriages has been questioned, as has the identity of Fortún's daughter as the Onneca who married Abdullah.[12]



----

There is a huge inaccuracy on this page in the lowest parts of the text written by someone adding information earlier sometime, because :
The Banu Qasi were '''NOT''' a christian family who converted to islam, they were descendants of '''ONE visigoth''' who converted to islam and whose family largely remained muslim, for the exception of a few later members that converted to christianity. This means they were not at large european christians who just practiced islam, but they would have also mainly been married to other muslims, despite of also having married into the royal families of the christian kingdoms -which makes a big difference in how this family is presented in the lowest part of this textpage.
Here is a proper source in its original form:

"ORDO NVMERVM REGVM PAMPILONENSIVM

1. [E]nneco, cognomento Aresta, genuit Garsea Enneconis, et domna Assona, qui fuit uxor de domno Muza, qui tenuit Borza et Terrero, et domna (lac.) qui fuit uxor de Garsea Malo.
2. Garsea Enneconis accepit uxor domna (lac.) filia de (lac.) et genuit Fortunio Garseanis et Sanzio Garseanis et domna Onneca qui fuit uxor de Asnari Galindones de Aragone.
3. Furtunio Garseanis accepit uxor domna Oria filia de (lac.) et genuit Enneco Furtunionis, et Asenari Furtuniones, et Belasco Furtuniones, et Lope Furtuniones, et domna Onneca qui fuit uxor de Asenari Sanzones de Larron.
4. Sanzio Garseanis accepit uxor domna (lac.) et genuit Asnari Sanziones qui et Larron.
5. Asnari Sanzionis accepit uxor domna Onneca, Furtuni Garseanis filia, et genuit Santio Asnari, et domna Tota regina, et domna Sanzia. Ista Onneca postea accepit urium regi Abdella, et genuit Mahomat Iben Abdella.
6. Enneco Furtuniones accepit uxor domna Sanzia, filia de Garsea Scemenonis, et genuit Furtunio Enneconis (lac.) et domna Auria, qui fuit uxor de Munio Garseanis, et domna Lopa uxor Sanzio Lupi de Araquil. Ista domna Sanzia postea accepit uirum domno Galindo comes de Aragone, et genuit ex eo domna Andregoto regina et domna Belasquita.
Ista Belasquita habuit uirum Enneco Lopiz de Estigi et de Zillegita.
7. Asnari Furtunionis accepit uxor (lac.) et genuit Furtuni Asnari qui et cognomento Orbita pater fuit Garsea Furtuniones de Capannas.
8. Belasco Furtunionis accepit uxor (lac.) et genuit domna Scemena qui fuit uxor de rege Enneco Garseanis, et domna Tota uxor de Enneco Manzones de Lucentes, et domna Sanzia uxor Galindo Scemenonis de Pinitano.
9. Furtunio Enneconis accepit uxor (lac.) et genuit Garsea Furtunionis et Enneco Furtunionis et domna Sanzia.
10. [G]arsea Scemenonis et Enneco Scemenonis fratres fuerunt. Iste Garsea accepit uxor Onneca Rebelle de Sancossa et genuit Enneco Garseanis et domna Sanzia. Postea accepit uxor domna Dadildi de Paliares soror Regimundi comitis, et genuit Sanzio Garseanis et Scemeno Garseanis.
11. Enneco Garseanis accepit uxor domna Scemena, et genuit Garsea Enneconis qui fuit occisus in Ledena, et Scemeno Enneconis, et Furtunio Enneconis, et Sanzio Enneconis. Isti tres ad Cordobam fugierunt. Eorum soror uxor fuit Garsea Enneconis de Olza. Nomine domna Tota. Esta Belasquita tuvo por esposo a Eneko Lópiz de Estigi y de Zeligeta.
12. Scemeno Garseanis accepit uxor domna Sanzia, Asnari Santionis filia, et genuit Garsea Scemenonis et Sanzio Scemenonis qui habuit uxor domna Quissilo filia de domno Garsea comitis Bagilliensis et alia filia domna Dadildis uxor de domno Muza Asnari. Iste Garsea Scemenonis occidit sua mater in Galias in uilla que dicitur Laco et occiderunt eum in Salerazo Ihoannes Belescones et Cardelle Belascones. Iste Scemeno Garseanis habuit ex anzilla filium Garsea un [ ]is qui est mortus in Cortoba.
13. Sanzio Garseanis, obtime imperator, accepit uxor Tota Asnari et genuit Garsea rex, et domna Onneca, et domna Sanzia, et domna Urraca, hac domna Belasquita, necnon et domna Orbita, et ex anzilla habuit alia filia domna Lopa qui fuit mater de Regemundo de Bigorra. Domna Onneca fuit uxor Adefonsi regis Legionensis, et genuit filum Ordonii qui est mortuus in Cortoba.

Fol. 192.

14. Domna Sanzia fuit uxor Ordonii imperatoris. Postea habuit virum Albaro Harramelliz de Alaba. Demumque fuit uxor redenando comitis.
15. Domna urraca fuit uxor domni Ranimiri regis, frater Adefonsi regis et Froila, et habuit filios domno Sanzio rex et domna Gilbira Deuo uota.
16. Iste Ranimirus ex alia uxore Galliciensis nomine (lac.) habuit filium Ordonii regis.
17. Domna Belasquita uxor fuit domni Momi comitis Bizcahiensis et genuit filios Azenari Momiz et Lupe Momiz hac Sanzio Momiz, et domna Belasquita. Postea uxor fuit domni Galindi filium Uernardi comitis et domne Tute Demumque habuit uirum Furtunio Galindonis."

( https://www.condadodecastilla.es/cultura-sociedad/fuentes-historicas/genealogias-del-codice-de-roda/)

"Awriya bint Lubb u Oria, esposa del rey Fortún Garcés de Pamplona

[med. s. IX] Reina consorte de Pamplona, esposa de Fortún Garcés. Llamada también Oria o Áurea
Awriya bint Lubb era probablemente hija de Lubb ben Mūsà, hijo de Mūsà ben Mūsà de los Banū Qasī , y de Ayab al-Bulatiyya. "
( https://www.condadodecastilla.es/personajes/awriya-ben-lubb-u-oria/ )

Translation:

"[med. s. IX] Queen consort of Pamplona, wife of Fortún Garcés. Also called Oria or Golden

Awriya bint Lubb was probably the daughter of Lubb ben, the son of M.T. ben, of the Ban Qas, and of Ayab al-Bulatiyya."
( https://www.condadodecastilla.es/personajes/awriya-ben-lubb-u-oria/ )

There is no reason to question these conclusions, large part of the land that is now Spain and Portugal, was in moorish control and called Al Andalus. Awriya is definitely an arabic sounding name and the Auria/Oria is most likely just a spanification of that name, not the other way around. Most is not all spaniards and portuguese people living today, and also many people descending of these lines present guanche, north african and moorish(mixture of north african and arabic) dna-markers and clearly match ancient north african and moorish ancient samples from the time of Al Andalus -additionally to having actual arabic markers present.

Here MedLands about

"BANU QASI FAMILY
Descendants of a Visigoth who converted to Islam and assumed the name "Qasi" soon after the Moorish invasion in 711/12, this family rose to considerable prominence during the 9th and early 10th centuries in north-western Spain in the area adjacent to the Carolingian "March" of Spain. The sources which are quoted below show participation by the Banu Qasi family in various conflicts with their Carolingian neighbours, and it is likely that such talented local Muslim leaders represented the best hope of the emirate of Córdoba for further territorial expansion to the north. Indeed, the Muslim historian Al-Udri records that at one time (probably dated to the 850s) Muhammad Emir of Córdoba appointed Musa ibn Musa, great-grandson of the original Qasi, as "gobernador de la Marca", implying wide territorial responsibility[384], although the appointment was later withdrawn and was not repeated among Musa´s descendants. This passage should, however, probably not be taken as indicating that the emirate of Córdoba established its own "March" on the northern borders of its territories. Al-Udri´s works were written some two centuries after these events and, as a resident of Zaragoza, he must have been familiar with the local concept of "la Marca", probably using it in his writing as a convenient geographical descriptive term rather to indicate an established political entity on the Muslim side of the divide.

Various members of the Banu Qasi family were appointed as "wali" (governor, but sometimes translated as king, in the sense of "local" king) of the cities of Tudela and Zaragoza by the emirs of Córdoba during the second half of the 9th and early 10th centuries. However, they were unruly vassals, and the sources reveal numerous rebellions against the central authority of the emirate, especially by Musa ibn Musa and, after his death, his sons. The sources also show temporary alliances agreed, throughout the same period, between the Banu Qasi and the local Christian magnates to fight the emir or other rival local Muslim leaders. As will be seen below, these alliances were confirmed by several marriages, mainly with the family of the rulers of Pamplona, but also including single cases of intermarriage with the kings of Asturias and the counts of Pallars/Ribagorza.

The Arabic sources record four cases of members of the Banu Qasi family converting back to Christianity in the early 10th century: Fortun ibn Lubb, Fortun ibn Abd Allah, and the brothers Abd Allah and Ismail ibn Mutarif. There is no information on their descendants, but it is likely that some or all of these individuals were ancestors of nobility in the kingdom of Navarre. In this respect, the names "Fortun" and "Lubb" are particularly significant, the former being recorded frequently among Navarrese nobility and the latter presumably being transformed into the equally common "Lope" and its Basque equivalent "Ochoa" (see the document NAVARRE NOBILITY).

Numerous references to the Banu Qasi family are found in the works of 10th to 13th century Muslim Spanish historians, corroborated by passages in Christian sources such as the Chronicle of Alfonso III, the Chronicon Sebastiani, the Chronicon Albeldense, and the Codex de Roda. The main primary source for reconstructing the family is the 11th century historian al-Udri. The family was studied in detail in 1980 by Alberto Cañada Juste, who compares the information extracted from all relevant sources and places the Banu Qasi in their proper historical context[385]. The recent work by Jesús Lorenzo Jiménez includes a useful appendix of Spanish translations of relevant extracts from Arabic language sources, some of which are difficult to obtain elsewhere."...

(http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/MOORISH%20SPAIN.htm#AwriyaMGarcia)

Above text added 26th march 2024

Earlier written text starts from here:

===Auria/Oria de Pamplona===

Auria [or Oria] de Pamplona of the 9th century, was the wife of Fortún Garcés. The ''Codex of Roda'' does not provide data on its origins apart from its name. Antonio Rei and other historians have suggested that she may have been the daughter of Lubb ibn Musa and Ayab Al-Bilatiyya, and granddaughter, on her father's side, of Musa ibn Musa and Assona Íñiguez, while other hypotheses suggest that she was his daughter.
https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Auria_de_Pamplona

Auria u Oria de Pamplona (s. ix), fue la esposa de Fortún Garcés.
El Códice de Roda no aporta datos sobre sus orígenes aparte de su nombre. Antonio Rei y otros historiadores han sugerido que pudo ser hija de Lubb ibn Musa y de Ayab Al-Bilatiyya, y nieta, por parte paterna, de Musa ibn Musa y de Assona Íñiguez, mientras que otras hipótesis apuntan a que fue su hija.
https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Auria_de_Pamplona
_______________________________________

FORTÚN García, son of GARCÍA I Iñíguez King of Pamplona & his first wife Urraca --- ([830]-after 905). The Codex de Roda names "Fortunio Garseanis et Sanzio Garseanis et domna Onneca" as the children of "Garsea Enneconis" and his unnamed wife[92]. He was captured by the Muslims in 860 and taken to Córdoba where he remained captive for twenty years[93]. "Rexo Garsia, filius Eneconis" donated property to the monastery of Leire, with the advice of "filii mei Fortunii", by charter dated 21 Oct 880[94]. He succeeded his father in 882 as FORTÚN [King] of Pamplona. “Rex Fortunio Garcianes” reviewed the territories of the monastery of San Julián de Labasal, at the request of “comite Galindo Asnar”, by charter dated 893, whose dating clause records “... Garcia Sanz in Gallias, Raimundus in Paliares, pagani... Mohomet Ebenlupu in Balleterra et Mohomet Atauel in Osca...”[95].

"Fertunius rex, proles regis Garsie" donated property to the monastery of Leire by charter dated 21 Mar 901[96]. The Libro de Regla of Leire Monastery, compiled in 1076, records that "Fortunius Garseanes" came "de Corduba", succeeded on the death of "Garsea Ennecones", but became "monachus in monasterio Legerensi", while "frater eius Sancius Garseanes cum uxore sua Dna Tota regina" ruled in his place[97]. This suggests that Fortún was deposed by Sancho. Sabaté Curull dates Fortún´s deposition to 905[98].








FORTÚN García, son of GARCÍA I Iñíguez King of Pamplona & his first wife Urraca --- ([830]-after 905). The Codex de Roda names "Fortunio Garseanis et Sanzio Garseanis et domna Onneca" as the children of "Garsea Enneconis" and his unnamed wife[92]. He was captured by the Muslims in 860 and taken to Córdoba where he remained captive for twenty years[93]. "Rexo Garsia, filius Eneconis" donated property to the monastery of Leire, with the advice of "filii mei Fortunii", by charter dated 21 Oct 880[94]. He succeeded his father in 882 as FORTÚN [King] of Pamplona. “Rex Fortunio Garcianes” reviewed the territories of the monastery of San Julián de Labasal, at the request of “comite Galindo Asnar”, by charter dated 893, whose dating clause records “...Garcia Sanz in Gallias, Raimundus in Paliares, pagani...Mohomet Ebenlupu in Balleterra et Mohomet Atauel in Osca...”[95].

"Fertunius rex, proles regis Garsie" donated property to the monastery of Leire by charter dated 21 Mar 901[96]. The Libro de Regla of Leire Monastery, compiled in 1076, records that "Fortunius Garseanes" came "de Corduba", succeeded on the death of "Garsea Ennecones", but became "monachus in monasterio Legerensi", while "frater eius Sancius Garseanes cum uxore sua Dna Tota regina" ruled in his place[97]. This suggests that Fortún was deposed by Sancho. Sabaté Curull dates Fortún´s deposition to 905[98].

'''m ([845]) ORIA, daughter of ---. The Codex de Roda names "domna Oria filia de ---" as wife of "Furtunio Garseanis"[99].'''

'''Oria''' ('''Auria''', '''Awriya'''), the wife of [http://tinyurl.com/zg7dkmb Fortún Garcés], is known only from the ''Códice de Roda'', which names ''domna Oria filia de ---'' (lady Oria, daughter of ---) as the wife of ''Furtunio Garseanis'' (Fortún Garcés). This codex probably dates from the late 10th century with additions for the 11th century, so it is approximately 100 years or more after her lifetime.

There is no contemporary indication of her parentage, but there several theories about her possible ancestry:

*According to the Andalusian historian Ibn Hazm (994-1064), she was married to "[https://www.geni.com/people/Garcia/6000000078390138080 Garcia, King of the Basques], from which [https://www.geni.com/people/Musa-ibn-Garshiya/6000000078390030091 Musa ibn Garcia] was borned" (which would make this Oria the same person as https://www.geni.com/people/Awriya-binti-Musa/6000000001076681241).

* Historian and professor Antonio Rei suggested she might have been a granddaughter of [http://tinyurl.com/z5a3h6g Musa ibn Musa ibn Qasi] (Rei, 44–45) (which would make this Oria a niece of the aforementioned https://www.geni.com/people/Awriya-binti-Musa/6000000001076681241). The Banu Qasi were a Christian family who converted to Islam - see https://www.geni.com/people/%D9%82%D9%8E%D8%B3%D9%90%D9%89%D9%91-%D9%82%D9%8F%D9%88%D9%85%D9%90%D8%B3/6000000002188182767.)

* Historian and genealogist Christian Settipani suggested she might have been a daughter of the aforementioned https://www.geni.com/people/Awriya-binti-Musa/6000000001076681241 and [https://www.geni.com/people/Garcia/6000000078390138080 Garcia, King of the Basques]. The latter would be a son of García Galíndez the Bad and his first wife Matrona, daughter of Aznar I Galíndez, count of Aragon (Settipani, 114)

* Settipani also suggested she might have been a daughter of García Galíndez the Bad and another Aurea (who is usually named Nunila), his second wife, the daughter of Eneko Arista (Íñigo Íñiguez "Arista" of Pamplona) and sister García I of Navarre (Settipani, 114).

* Settipani also suggested she might have been a daughter of Galindo I Aznárez, count of Aragon, and a granddaughter of Aznar I Galíndez and a third Aurea, who could be the daughter of the Duke Lupo II of Gascony and a sister of [https://www.geni.com/people/Oneca-%D8%A8%D9%86-%D9%81%D9%88%D8%B1%D8%AA%D9%88%D9%86/6000000081006086887 Oneca or Iniga], the mother of Eneko Arista (Íñigo Íñiguez "Arista" of Pamplona) and https://www.geni.com/people/Musa-II-ibn-Musa-val%C3%AD-de-Tudela-y-Huesca/6000000012263275369 (Settipani, 115).

* Spanish Wikipedia (citing Rei) supports the theory she was daughter of [https://www.geni.com/people/Lope-Musa/4069362827280123516 Lubb ibn Musa (Lope ibn Musa)] and https://www.geni.com/people/Ayab-al-Billatyya/4069370741990010384, and a granddaughter of Musa ibn Musa and Assona Iniguez but says in a footnote that her parentage is not documented. Unsourced Internet genealogies most often identify her thusly.

==family==
She married [845] King Fortún Garcés of Pamplona, who died in 922. They were the parents of:

# Íñigo Fortúnez
# Aznar Fortúnez
# Velasco Fortúnez
# Lope Fortúnez
# Onneca Fortúnez, who married firstly Abdallah ibn Mohammed, Emir of Córdoba, and secondly her cousin Aznar Sánchez of Larraun, grandson of king García Íñiguez, becoming the mother of the future queens Toda Aznárez, wife of Sancho Garcés, and Sancha Aznárez, wife of king Jimena Garcés.

== Sources ==
* Charles Cawley, [http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/NAVARRE.htm#FortunGarcesdied925B KINGS of PAMPLONA 822-(905) (IÑIGA DYNASTY)] at Medieval Lands, visited May 27, 2018.
* Todd A. Farmerie, "[https://groups.google.com/forum/#!searchin/soc.genealogy.medieval/Aboazar$20Lovesendes%7Csort:relevance/soc.genealogy.medieval/x-U3vtd9BMo/dydPytUwSSoJ Muslim/Christian descents in Early-Medieval Spain"] at soc.genealogy.medieval (June 16, 2001).
* António Rei (2011–2012). "Descendência Hispânica do Profeta do Islão: Exploração de Algumas Linhas Primárias". ''Armas e Troféus'' (in Portuguese). Instituto Português de Heráldica
* Christian Settipani, ''La Noblesse du Midi Carolingien'', Oxford, Linacre College, Unit for Prosopographical Research, coll. Occasional Publications / 5 (2004)
* Leo van de Pas, citing ''Europäische Stammtafeln'', J.A. Stargardt Verlag, Marburg, Schwennicke, Detlev (Ed.)m II 53.
* Wikipedia: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Auria English] [http://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fort%C3%BAn_de_Navarre#Origines_possibles_d.E2.80.99Aurea French] [http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fort%C3%BAn_Garc%C3%A9s German] [http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fort%C3%BAn_Garc%C3%A9s#Matrimonio_y_descendencia Spanish]
--------------------

Era sobrina segunda de su esposo el rey Fortún el Monje

OR "ORIA"

#Générale##Générale#<Auréjac>

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]