== Notes for [[Item:Q87744|Q87744]] ==

'''
=Laodice V=
'''

Laodice V (flourished 2nd century BC, died 150 BC) was a Seleucid princess. Through marriage she was a Queen of the ruling Antigonid dynasty in Macedonia and possibly later of the Seleucid dynasty.

'''Family and Early Life'''

Laodice was a daughter of the Seleucid King Seleucus IV Philopator and his wife, Laodice IV. She had two brothers: Antiochus and Demetrius I Soter. She was born and raised in the Seleucid Empire.

'''First Marriage'''

The Antigonid king of Macedon, Perseus had experienced considerable diplomatic successes in the Seleucid Empire, Greece and on the island of Rhodes. As a result of his diplomatic actions, he married Laodice, either in 178 BC or 177 BC, making Laodice queen of Macedon. Not much is known on her time as queen or her relationship with Perseus. However, Laodice bore Perseus at least four children: Alexander, Philip, Andriscus (?) and a daughter.

After a series of clashes with the Roman Republic, Perseus was finally decisively defeated by the Romans under Lucius Aemilius Paullus at the Battle of Pydna in 168 BC. Subsequently, Macedonia became a Roman province, while Perseus and his children became Roman captives and were taken to Rome, where they were shown as part of the triumph of Lucius Aemilius Paullus. At sometime between 166 and 162 BC, Perseus died, still in captivity. Little is known of the subsequent fate of the children of Perseus and Laodice. Only Alexander, who was still a child when Perseus was defeated by the Romans, is mentioned again. According to Livy, he was kept in custody at Alba Fucens, together with his father. After reaching his majority, Alexander became skillful in Toreutics, learned the Latin language, and became a public notary. The final defeat and captivity of Perseus and their children was the end of the Antigonid rule over Macedonia and its territories.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laodice_V

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]