== Notes for [[Item:Q85109|Q85109]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scribonia_(daughter_of_Lucius_Scribonius_Libo_consul_16)
--------------------
'''
=Scribonia=
'''

Scribonia Magna (flourished 1st century), known in modern historical sources as Scribonia Crassi, was a Roman noblewoman that lived in the Roman Empire. Scribonia was the daughter and only child of Lucius Scribonius Libo consul of 16 and Cornelia Pompeia Magna.

'''Lineage'''

Scribonia was a noblewoman of the highest birth and descended from ancient, distinguished and politically influential blood. Her maternal grandparents were Pompeia Magna and suffect consul Lucius Cornelius Cinna , while her paternal grandparents were consul of 34 BC, Lucius Scribonius Libo and his wife was a member of the gens Sulpicius, the family that the Roman emperor Galba, descended from on his paternal side. Scribonia’s parents were both direct descendants of Pompeia Magna, the daughter of triumvir Pompey from his third marriage to Mucia Tertia. Lucius Scribonius Libo was a descendant of Pompeia Magna, from her first marriage to senator Faustus Cornelius Sulla, while Cornelia Pompeia Magna was the daughter of Pompeia Magna from her second marriage to suffect consul Lucius Cornelius Cinna.

'''Biography'''

Scribonia was born before 16, as in 16 her father was stabbed to death by the Roman emperor Tiberius, who had charged him in planning a revolt against the emperor. Scribonia was born and raised in Rome. Very little is known of her life.

Scribonia married Marcus Licinius Crassus Frugi, a man of consular rank. Frugi’s father, consul and governor Marcus Licinius Crassus, was the adopted son of consul and general Marcus Licinius Crassus the grandson of triumvir Marcus Licinius Crassus. He was the last known direct descendant of the triumvir and was the last known direct descendant of the triumvir who bore his name.

'''Children & Descendants'''

Scribonia bore Frugi the following children:

* Son, Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus.[1] He married Roman princess Claudia Antonia in 43, the daughter and only child of Roman emperor Claudius from his second marriage to Aelia Paetina. Antonia married him as her first husband and they had no children. Magnus was murdered in 47.
* Son, Marcus Licinius Crassus Frugi II. He served as consul in 64 under Roman emperor Nero. Nero had Frugi executed between 66 and 68, because of information brought against him by Marcus Aquilius Regulus. After his death, his widow with their children went to a Roman Senate meeting in 70 early in the reign of Roman emperor Vespasian, seeking vengeance for Frugi’s death. Regulus with his associated political circle was prosecuted by the Roman Senate. The wife of Frugi was Sulpicia Praetextata daughter of the suffect consul in 46, Quintus Sulpicius Camerinus Peticus. With Sulpicia Praetextata, Frugi had a daughter called Licinia Praetextata who served as a Chief Vestal Virgin. With Sulpicia Praetextata, Frugi also had three sons: Lucius Scribonius Libo Rupilius Frugi Bonus who served as a suffect consul in 88, Marcus Licinius Scribonianus Camerinus and Gaius Calpurnius Piso Crassus Frugi Licinianus, who served as a consul in 87. Gaius Calpurnius Piso Crassus Frugi Licinianus and with his wife Agedia Quintina conspired against the Roman emperor Nerva and the couple was banished by Nerva to Taranto. Calpurnius Piso tried for a second time to escape and was banished by the Roman emperor Trajan to a solitary island and on his third attempt to escape he died. Calpurnius Piso was also placed in the tomb of Licinii Calpurnii. Lucius Scribonius Libo Rupilius Frugi Bonus married the niece of Trajan, Salonina Matidia as her third husband, by whom had a daughter called Rupilia Faustina, who became the paternal grandmother of Roman emperor Marcus Aurelius.
* Possible daughter, Licinia.
* Son, Marcus Licinius Crassus Scribonianus. Sometime between 68 and 69 the general Marcus Antonius Primus, had offered Scribonianus the Roman Empire and position of Roman emperor; however Scribonianus refused to accept this.
* Son, Lucius Calpurnius Piso Frugi Licinianus or Lucius Calpurnius Piso Licinianus (38-69). Licinianus was adopted by the brief Roman emperor Galba, who reigned between 68-69. Licinianus became Galba’s son and heir, who was murdered on the orders of Otho, when trying to obtain the Roman throne. Licinianus married a Roman woman called Verania Germina, who came from a family of consular rank.
* Daughter, Licinia Magna. She married the Roman Senator Lucius Calpurnius Piso, who served as one of the consuls in 57. Piso was later killed by Roman emperor Vespasian as an enemy of the emperor. Licinia and Piso had a daughter called Calpurnia who married Calpurnius Piso Galerianus son of Gaius Calpurnius Piso (co-consul in 41 with Claudius). Calpurnius Piso Galerianus was executed in 70 for opposing Vespasian. Licinia died at an unknown date from 70 until 80 as her grave altar is dated from this period, which was found on the grounds of Villa Bonaparte near the Porta Salaria. The land may have been part of the family’s suburban estates and her grave altar is on display at the Vatican Museums.

'''Death'''

In the spring of 47 Scribonia, her husband and Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus were executed on the orders of Roman empress Valeria Messalina. After Scribonia, her husband and her son had died, the three were placed in the tomb of Licinii Calpurnii that is located on the Via Salaria. Also placed in the tomb was their son, Marcus Licinius Crassus Frugi II.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scribonia_(daughter_of_Lucius_Scribonius_Libo_consul_16)

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]