== Notes for [[Item:Q104516|Q104516]] ==

En 1523, Hernan Cortes en agradecimiento a su eterno amigo, le entrego la encomienda de Xilotepeque.

It was said that Cortes and Malintzin were lovers. She obviously had his son whom some claim to be the "first mestizo." There is another "first mestizo" in Peru. But between you and I the real "first mestizo"
was born somewhere in the Caribbean after the Spanish invaded those islands.
There always seems to be somebody in this world who wants to claim being the first something or someone. Perhaps I can someday claim to be the first genealogist not born in Puerto Rico or Spain to have created a comprehensive family tree that includes just about every race that has walked upon this earth in a family tree because of their close familial interconnection with one another.
I know not of another genealogist who has ever attempted mapping out the family trees of Taino ancestors as well as include Aztec and Incan indigenious people who have been inpacted by the Spanish imperial expanionism.
Getting back on tangent. If Cortes really loved Malintzin he would have never even considered her a slave.
Slaves tend to get used in many ways including sexually. In any case, When everything was all told and done insofar as the conquest went, Hernan Cortes Pizarro gave the woman "he loved" to Juan Jaramillo in 1524 or 1526 when they were in the Yucatan. It is said that Malintzin and Juan got married there.
She bore another child, a daughter who bore her first name.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000067392327827

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]