== Notes for [[Item:Q98212|Q98212]] ==

Rav Kahana, a member of the Academy at Sura, later became Rosh Yeshiva of the academy at Pumbedita.

Exilarch Kahana I ben Abba beni David was Exilarch (Exilarch [Hebrew: ראש גלות Rosh Galut, Aramaic: ריש גלותא Reish Galuta lit. "head of the exile", Greek: Æchmalotarcha], referring to the leaders of the Diaspora Jewish community following the deportation of the population of Judah into Babylonian exile after the destruction of the kingdom of Judah) in Babylonia between 400 and 415.

See "My Lines"

( http://homepages.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~cousin/html/p192.htm#i21389 )

from Compiler: R. B. Stewart, Evans, GA

( http://homepages.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~cousin/html/index.htm )

Kahana I ben Abba was our ancestor through two distinct lines of descent: through his son Mar Zutra I or his daughter Šošanduxt of Iraq, each of whom was independently our ancestor. OR, if the tree should be amended, Kahana was the brother, not the father, of Šošanduxt, in which case Kahana's father, Abba ben Ukba, was our ancestor through two distinct lines of descent: through his son Kahana I ben Abba and through his daughter Šošanduxt of Iraq. In either case, you and I are descended through two distinct lines.
--------------------
Mar Kahana,

occupation: Exilarch 400-415,

son of Mar Abba Abra and nn to: nn

Son:

1) Nathan

2) Huna IV

3) Mar Zutra I, birth 370, occupation: Exilarch 441-455 to: nn

He was Exilarch in Baghdad from 400 to 415.

He was Exilarch in Baghdad from 400 to 415.

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per03052.htm#0

RESEARCH NOTES:
Exilarch (lay head) of Jews in Babylon 370-400

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
6702EFB9D044B1EFBBF89829A6488A4DFED0
geni:6000000000802879019

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]