== Notes for [[Item:Q118715|Q118715]] ==

----

'''Teresa Galíndez Aznarez de Aragón''' is a name only seen in online trees. The wife of Sanche Mitarra III is not a known daughter of [https://www.geni.com/people/Galindo-I-Azn%C3%A1rez-conde-de-Arag%C3%B3n/6000000009275527320?through=6000000007069244332 Galindo l Aznarez, conde de Aragon]

----


http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/ARAGON%20&%20CATALONIA.htm#_Toc203441649

* b) '''GALINDO [I] Aznárez''', son of AZNAR Galíndez Conde de Aragón & his wife --- (-[after 867]). … The likely kings named Sancho to whom this could relate are the kings of Navarre, although none is known to have been the son-in-law of a count named '''Galindo Aznar. m ---. The name of Galindo Aznar's wife is not known'''. '''Galindo Aznar & his wife had one child:'''
*** 1. AZNAR Galíndez (-893).


----

Family.

https://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/GASCONY.htm#GarciaGasconydiedafter920A

1. SANCHO "Mitarra/Menditarra" ([825/35]-before 893). The parentage of Sancho is unclear from the primary sources. Although the patronymic of his son Garcia indicates his father's name, Settipani states that there is no proof that Sancho was related to the previous dukes of Gascony who are shown above[82]. … The surprising conclusion appears to be that Sancho, father of Garcia [I], was referred to in contemporary documentation as "king" by way of honorific title. m ---. '''The name of Sancho's wife is not known. Sancho & his wife had two children:'''
*a) GARCIA [I] "le Tors/el Curvo" Sancho ([850/60]-after 920). The Genealogica Comitum Guasconiæ names "Garsiam-Sancium Curvum" as son of "Mitarra-Sancius"[88]. His birth date is estimated consistent with his father’s estimated birth date range. Comte de Gascogne. - see below.
*b) ANEPALAFRED . The Historia Abbatiæ Condomensis records that “Anepalafred frater Comitis Garsia Sancii” donated “ecclesiam sancti Pauli in…Bonos Casales” for having been cured of an illness after two years[89].





----

http://gw.geneanet.org/pierfit?lang=sv;p=tuta+galindez;n=d+urgel

Donna Tuta d'URGEL (Tuta Galindez d'URGEL)

Född omkring 835 Död Föräldrar

Gallindo Ier Aznarez , comte d'Aragon ca 820-ca 867 Guldregut NN Vigslar, barn, barnbarnen och barnbarns barnen

Gift med Sanche IV Mitarra (le Montagnard) , duc de Gascogne, prince des Basques , född omkring 837 , död (Föräldrar : M Sans II Mittara de GASCOGNE , prince des Basques †864 & K Quilo Garcia de BUIL ) barn M Garcie II Le Courbé , duc de Gascogne ca 860-926 gift med Amuna d'ANGOULÊME , comtesse d'Agen ca 865- barn M Sanche IV , duc de Gascogne ca 890-961 gift med demoiselle N*** barn : M Sanche V , duc de Gascogne M Guillaume Ier , duc de Gascogne †997 M Donat de GASCOGNE , vicomte de Lomagne M Gombaud , duc de Gascogne ca 930-/983 M Aner Ier , vicomte d'Oloron M Amanieu de GASCOGNE , vicomte d'Albret (40) M Ezi , vicomte de Marsan M Guillaume , comte de Fézensac ca 895-ca 960 gift med Garsende de TOULOUSE barn : K Gersende de FEZENSAC ca 920-961/ M Othon Falta de FEZENSAC ca 925-960/ M Bernard le Louche d'ARMAGNAC , Comte de Fézensac ca 940-987 M Arnaud Ier Nonnatus (Le Moine) , comte d'Astarac ca 900-960 gift med demoiselle N*** barn : K Faquilène d'ASTARAC , comtesse d'Aure ca 920- M Arnaud II , comte d'Astarac ca 940-975 K Acibella de GASCOGNE gift med GalindoII , comte d'Aragon 893-922 barn : K Toda d'ARAGON K Andregota de GASCOGNE K Garsende de GASCOGNE gift med Raymond III Pons de TOULOUSE , duc d'Aquitaine †942 barn : M Raymond ( IV ) , comte de Toulouse †/961 K Archimberte de TOULOUSE ?930- M Aznar , seigneur de Larron gift 880 med Oneca Iniga de PAMPELUNE 847- barn K Toda de LARRON , régente de Navarre 885-970 gift med Sanche Ier Garcès de PAMPELUNE , roi de Navarre 865-925 barn : K Sancha de NAVARRE 901-959 M Garcie III , roi de Pampelune 919-970 K Urraca de NAVARRE †956 K Oneca de NAVARRE †932 K Velasquita de NAVARRE K Sancha de LARRON gift med Jiméno, régent de PAMPELUNE , roi de Navarre †931 Syskon

K Donna Tuta d'URGEL ca 835- M Aznar II Gallindez , comte d'Aragon 867-893

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]