== Notes for [[Item:Q90840|Q90840]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antiochus_III_of_Commagene

Antiochus III Epiphanes (Greek: Ἀντίοχος ὀ Ἐπιφανής, flourished 1st century BC and 1st century) was a prince and king of the Kingdom of Commagene from 12 BC to 17 AD. He was the son and successor of King Mithridates III of Commagene and Princess of Media and Queen of Commagene, Iotapa, and of mixed Armenian[1], Greek and Median descent. His parents were first cousins.

When Antiochus died in 17, his death became unsettling for the kingdom. At the time of Antiochus’ death, Commagene was in political turmoil. The reasons for this development is unknown, however it appears at that time, his children by his sister-wife Queen Iotapa, prince Antiochus IV of Commagene and daughter, princess Iotapa were too young to succeed their father and there was no authority to prevent civil unrest and unite the citizens of Commagene.

After his death, two fractions had appeared. One fraction led by noblemen wanted Commagene to be placed under the rule of the Roman Empire and the another fraction led by the citizens wanted to retain the rule of the King.

The political fractions from Commagene peacefully had sent embassies to Rome, seeking the advice and assistance of the Roman Emperor Tiberius, to decide the future of Commagene. When the political fractions addressed the Emperor on the future of Commagene, they were aware of the political reality of Roman rule and were prepared to live with the decision that Tiberius made. They were also prepared to live in the rule of the Roman Empire.

Tiberius decided to make Commagene a part of the Roman province of Syria. The decision that Tiberius made was welcomed by many citizens of Commagene, however some, particularly those who were supporters of the royal family were unhappy with this outcome. Commagene was under Roman rule until Roman Emperor Caligula restored the kingdom to Antiochus’ children in 38.

Antiochus III and his son are honored on the Philopappos Monument in Athens, Greece, dedicated to his great-grandson prince Gaius Julius Antiochus Epiphanes Philopappos, who was a prominent and respected citizen in Athens. In the left figure of the monument is a statue of his son King Antiochus IV of Commagene. Below Antiochus IV, is an inscription that states King Antiochus son of King Antiochus.

--------------------
'''
=Antiochus III of Commagene=
'''

Antiochus III Epiphanes (Greek: Ἀντίοχος ὀ Ἐπιφανής, flourished 1st century BC and 1st century AD) was the ruler of the Kingdom of Commagene from 12 BC to 17 AD. He was the son and successor of King Mithridates III of Commagene and Princess of Media and Queen of Commagene, Iotapa, and of mixed Armenian, Greek and Median descent. His parents were first cousins.

When Antiochus died in 17 AD, his death created major issues for the kingdom. At the time of Antiochus’ death, Commagene was in political turmoil. The reasons for this situation are unclear, but it may have been the consequence of his children by his sister-wife Queen Iotapa, Antiochus and Iotapa being too young to succeed their father. This may have meant that there was no effective authority to prevent civil unrest and unite the citizens of Commagene.

Very little is known on his life and his reign as King. After Antiochus' death, two factions appeared. One faction was led by noblemen who wanted Commagene to be placed under the rule of the Roman Empire and the other faction was led by citizens who wanted to Commagene's independence to be retained under the rule of their own king.

Both political factions sent embassies to Rome, seeking the advice and assistance of the Roman Emperor Tiberius to decide the future of Commagene. Tiberius decided to make Commagene a part of the Roman province of Syria. That decision was welcomed by many of the citizens by Commagene. Commagene remained under Roman rule until Roman Emperor Caligula restored the kingdom to Antiochus’ children in 38 AD.

Antiochus III and his son are honoured on the Philopappos Monument in Athens, Greece, dedicated to his great-grandson prince Gaius Julius Antiochus Epiphanes Philopappos, who was a prominent and respected citizen in Athens. In the left figure of the monument is a statue of Antiochus III's son, Antiochus IV. Below Antiochus IV is an inscription that states King Antiochus son of King Antiochus.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antiochus_III_of_Commagene

KING OF COMMAGENE; DETHRONED BY MARC ANTHONY; DIED 29 BC

KING OF COMMAGENE; d. 17 AD

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]