== Notes for [[Item:Q107553|Q107553]] ==

When Imam Reza (as) accepted the obligatory and conditional covenant in Merv, the news of it reached Medina. Sadat, Bani Hashim and the Shiites decided to see Imam Reza (as) up close and renew their vows. They wrote a letter to Ma'mun and asked his permission.

In the letter, they wrote that our goal is to see Ali Ibn Musa al-Reza. When they arrived in Shiraz, they moved in large numbers. Some have written that the number was twelve thousand, and some have written that it was eighteen thousand. The ruler of Shiraz's relationship with the Ahl al-Bayt (as) was not good; That's why he wrote a terrifying letter to Ma'mun. Based on the fact that the Bani Hashim, with the crowd and courage they have, and under the leadership of Ali Ibn Musa al-Reza, they are revolting against the government and destroying the Bani Abbas dynasty. Ma'mun was afraid of this.

In response, he told the ruler of Shiraz to tell all of them to return to their homeland. If they don't agree, fight them. The letter, which reached the ruler of Shiraz, told the population of Sadat and Bani Hashim to return, and the caliph did not allow you to go to Merv. They said we got permission from the caliph. We did not come to fight, but to meet Ali Ibn Musa al-Reza. The ruler of Shiraz did not accept and insisted that they return to their homeland. When they refused, a war broke out between them.

A number of elders of Sadat and Bani Hashem were martyred, and the remaining members consulted to disperse to various cities and then to Khorasan, perhaps to reach Imam Reza (as).

When they dispersed and each went to different cities, Ma'mun's evil agents identified them in the guise of Arab clothing and assassinated them one by one. Imamzadeh Ibrahim, the immediate son of Imam Reza (as) and his brother Aba Mohammad Hassan, were performing ablutions at Quchan when the evil agents of Ma'mun martyred him.

Their elder brother, Aba Muhammad Hassan Ibn Ali Ibn Musa al-Reza, escaped from the hands of the agents and escaped on horseback and with his mule, and they were martyred ten kilometers away.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000014349603572

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]