== Notes for [[Item:Q100831|Q100831]] ==

Astruc of Lunel

Jewish zealot

original name Abba Mari ben Moses ben Joseph, also called Don Astruc, or ha-Yareaḥ (“The Moon”)

born 1250?, Lunel, near Montpellier, Fr.

died after 1306

Main

anti-rationalist Jewish zealot who incited Rabbi Solomon ben Abraham Adret of Barcelona, the most powerful rabbi of his time, to restrict the study of science and philosophy, thereby nearly creating a schism in the Jewish community of Europe.

Although Astruc revered Maimonides, who had attempted to reconcile Aristotle’s philosophy with Judaism, he deplored what he considered the excesses of Maimonides’ followers, who, he believed, undermined the Jewish faith by interpreting the Bible allegorically. They even seemed to take as a religious guide Aristotle himself, whose teachings were often said by the anti-Aristotelians to be “a jar of honey about which a dragon is wrapped.”

In a series of letters, Astruc persuaded Rabbi Adret to issue a ban in 1305 forbidding, on pain of excommunication, the study or teaching of science and philosophy by those under the age of 25. This ban provoked a counterban by other Jewish leaders against those who followed Adret’s proscription. A threatened schism among the Jewish communities of France and Spain was averted only in 1306, when Philip IV expelled the Jews from France. Astruc then settled in Perpignan, the mainland capital of the kingdom of Majorca, and vanished from view. But he published his correspondence with Rabbi Adret, which primarily concerned the restrictions on studies. Minḥat qenaot (“Meal Offering of Jealousy”), as the collected correspondence is entitled, reveals much of the religious and philosophical conflicts of Judaism in that era. The epithet ha-Yareaḥ is derived from his polemical work Sefer ha-yareaḥ (“The Book of the Moon”), the title of which refers to the town of Lunel (French lune, meaning “moon”).
--------------------
https://www.geni.com/family-tree/index/6000000017178028146

My 19 great grandfather

The descendant of men learned in rabbinic lore, Abba Mari devoted himself to the study of theology and philosophy, and made himself acquainted with the writing of Moses Maimonides and Nachmanides as well as with the Talmud.

In Montpellier, where he lived from 1303 to 1306, he was much distressed by the prevalence of Aristotelian rationalism, which in his opinion, through the medium of the works of Maimonides, threatened the authority of the Old Testament, obedience to the law, and the belief in miracles and revelation. He therefore in a series of letters (afterwards collected under the title Minhat Kenaot, i.e. "Jealousy Offering") called upon the famous rabbi Solomon ben Adret of Barcelona to come to the aid of orthodoxy.

Ben Adret, with the approval of other prominent Spanish rabbis, sent a letter to the community at Montpellier proposing to forbid the study of philosophy to those who were less than thirty years of age, and, in spite of keen opposition from the liberal section, a decree in this sense was issued by ben Adret in 1305. The result was a great schism among the Jews of Spain and southern France, and a new impulse was given to the study of philosophy by the unauthorized interference of the Spanish rabbis.

On the expulsion of the Jews from France by Philip IV in 1306, Abba Mari settled at Perpignan, where he published the letters connected with the controversy. His subsequent history is unknown. Beside the letters, he was the author of liturgical poetry and works on civil law.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
67051AD83E67E1EFBBFA9822EF79916CA742
geni:6000000017178028146

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]