== Notes for [[Item:Q114565|Q114565]] ==

Fernando I de León, llamado «el Magno» o «el Grande» (c. 1016-León, 27 de diciembre de 1065), fue conde de Castilla desde 1029 y rey de León desde el año 1037 hasta su muerte, siendo ungido como tal el 22 de junio de 1038.

Era hijo de Sancho Garcés III de Pamplona, llamado «el Mayor», rey de Pamplona, y de Muniadona, hermana de García Sánchez de Castilla. Fue designado conde de Castilla en 1029, si bien no ejerció el gobierno efectivo hasta la muerte de su padre en 1035. Se convirtió en rey de León por su matrimonio con Sancha, hermana de su rey y señor, Bermudo III, contra el que se levantó en armas, el cual murió sin dejar descendencia luchando contra Fernando en la batalla de Tamarón.

Sus primeros dieciséis años de reinado los pasó resolviendo conflictos internos y reorganizando su reino. En 1054, las disputas fronterizas con su hermano García III de Pamplona se tornaron en guerra abierta. Las tropas leonesas dieron muerte al monarca navarro en la batalla de Atapuerca.

Llevó a cabo una enérgica actividad de Reconquista, tomando las plazas de Lamego (1057), Viseo (1058) y Coímbra (1064). Además sometió a varios de los reinos de taifas al pago de parias al reino leonés. Al morir dividió sus reinos entre sus hijos: al primogénito, Sancho, le correspondió el estado patrimonial de su padre, el condado de Castilla, elevado a categoría de reino, y las parias sobre el reino taifa de Zaragoza; a Alfonso, el favorito, le correspondió el Reino de León y el título imperial, así como los derechos sobre el reino taifa de Toledo; García recibió el Reino de Galicia, creado a tal efecto, y los derechos sobre los reinos taifas de Sevilla y Badajoz; a Urraca y a Elvira les correspondieron las ciudades de Zamora y Toro, respectivamente, también con título real, y unas rentas adecuadas.

Tradicionalmente se le ha considerado el primer rey de Castilla y fundador de la monarquía castellana, y muchos historiadores siguen manteniendo esta tesis. No obstante, parte de la historiografía más actual considera que Fernando no fue rey de Castilla y que el origen de este reino se sitúa a la muerte de este monarca, con la división de sus estados entre sus hijos y el legado de Castilla al primogénito Sancho con título real. En palabras de Gonzalo Martínez Diez:

Podemos y debemos afirmar con absoluta certeza el hecho de que Fernando nunca fue rey de Castilla, y que ésta nunca cambió su naturaleza de condado, subordinado al rey de León, para convertirse en un reino, hasta la muerte de Fernando I el año 1065.

Vida El futuro Fernando I de León tuvo que nacer después de 1015, y no hay ninguna seguridad de que fue el segundo vástago de Sancho III el Mayor, como tradicionalmente se había creído. La mayor parte de los documentos auténticos de la época lo sitúan como el cuarto de los hijos del rey de Pamplona, tras Ramiro I de Aragón, García Sánchez III el de Nájera y Gonzalo I de Ribagorza. En 1029, al acceder al condado castellano, Fernando no pasaba de los trece años.

Conde de Castilla

Cuando el conde Sancho García de Castilla falleció en 1017, dejó por heredero a García Sánchez, un niño de siete años, lo que dio inicio a un período turbulento para el condado castellano. Alfonso V de León recobró las tierras comprendidas entre el Cea y el Pisuerga, conquistadas años atrás por Sancho, en tanto que Sancho el Mayor intervino para proteger a su joven cuñado, aprovechando para apoderarse de varias plazas fronterizas.

El 1027 García Sánchez de Castilla llegó a la mayoría de edad y pretendió estrechar lazos casándose con Sancha, hermana del joven rey de León, Bermudo III. Sin embargo, fue asesinado por los hijos del conde de Vela, huidos de Castilla, se supone que como mucho en el año de 1028, ya que en ese año deja de mencionarse en la documentación.5 Los leoneses vieron en esta muerte la mano del rey de Pamplona, y los castellanos una conjura leonesa. En todo caso, Sancho el Mayor, salió favorecido del magnicidio: al no tener hijos el difunto conde García, Sancho invocó los derechos de su esposa Muniadona para gobernar en Castilla, de esta forma la documentación lo sitúa como el único gobernante del condado de Castilla. Sin embargo, el rey Sancho designó a su hijo Fernando como conde de Castilla, pero no se sabe exactamente cuándo fue el nombramiento, la primera documentación de este hecho es de julio de 1029, de esta manera mostraba a los castellanos que no iba a anexionarse el condado, y que este iba a conservar su entidad propia. No obstante, el rey de Pamplona se mostró como el verdadero poder en Castilla, y el hecho de haber designado a su hijo como conde le procuró que su autoridad fuera «plenamente reconocida y legitimada». Este hecho provocó que el condado de Castilla, que no era independiente, negara la soberanía del rey de León sobre el mismo, rompiendo el vínculo de subordinación con el reino de León y poniéndolo bajo la subordinación del rey de Pamplona, de este modo, a partir de 1028, ningún diploma castellano alude al rey de León.

Fernando se casó en 1032 con Sancha, la prometida de su difunto tío, que aportó como dote las tierras comprendidas entre los ríos Cea y Pisuerga.

En 1037 Bermudo III tomó por mujer a Jimena Sanchez, hija de Sancho Garcés III de Pamplona, y de su esposa, la reina Muniadona de Castilla, con lo cual pasaron a ser cuñados por partida doble los tres reyes: Bermudo, Fernando y García el de Nájera, y reclamó esas tierras, lo que condujo a la guerra entre los tres reyes cuñados. Algunos autores consideran que este momento es cuando el conde Fernando cambió su título por el de rey de Castilla, si bien no hay constancia documental de ello.

El trono leonés:

El conflicto entre cuñados se dilucidó en la batalla de Tamarón, el 4 de septiembre de 1037. Las tropas castellanas venían reforzadas por el ejército del rey García de Pamplona. Bermudo, con el ímpetu propio de su edad, picó espuelas a su caballo Pelagiolo y se introdujo en las filas enemigas, donde fue muerto atravesado por una lanza castellana. Los leoneses trasladaron su cuerpo a León y lo depositaron, junto a los de sus padres, en el panteón de la iglesia de San Juan.

Al morir Bermudo sin descendencia, era su hermana Sancha, esposa de Fernando, su sucesora en el trono. Sin embargo, los leoneses tardaron algún tiempo en aceptar a los nuevos monarcas. Durante meses el conde Fernando Flaínez (tío de Rodrigo Díaz de Vivar y abuelo de Jimena Díaz), se negó a entregar la ciudad a quien consideraba un usurpador, si no un asesino. Según la Crónica Silense, Fernando llegó desde Sahagún (desde «los confines de la Galaecia»). Finalmente, tras asegurar su posición en la Curia Regia, Fernando y su esposa entraron pacíficamente en León, y «en la era de M.LXX. VI a X de las kalendas de julio (22 de junio de 1038) fue consagrado don Fernando en la iglesia de Santa María de León y ungido rey por Servando, obispo de feliz recordación de dicha iglesia».

La misma crónica asegura que en los dieciséis primeros años de su reinado no pudo hacer incursiones contra los mahometanos, ocupado en someter a la nobleza del reino. Ello es confirmado por la Crónica najerense:

Ocupado durante dieciséis años en resolver los conflictos internos de su reino y en domar el feroz talante de algunos de los magnates, ninguna incursión fuera de sus fronteras pudo emprender contra los enemigos exteriores.

Confirmó el Fuero de León, otorgado por su difunto suegro, Alfonso V, mandó seguir observando el código visigótico como ley fundamental del reino leonés, y se adaptó a los usos y costumbres de su nuevo reino, seguramente influido por su esposa la reina Sancha.

La guerra de Navarra:

A los dieciséis años de reinado, Fernando hubo de hacer frente a la guerra contra su hermano mayor, García III de Pamplona. Ambos hermanos llevaban años disputándose los territorios que su padre había segregado de Castilla y anexionado al reino de Pamplona (La Bureba, Castilla la Vieja, Trasmiera, Encartaciones, y los Montes de Oca), realizando constantes incursiones. Las crónicas, claramente partidistas, hacen caer exclusivamente sobre el pamplonés la responsabilidad del conflicto: estando García enfermo en Nájera, fue a consolarle el rey leonés, que, sospechando de su hermano, evitó ser apresado y se puso a salvo. Andando el tiempo, fue el leonés quien enfermó, y su hermano mayor el que le devolvió la visita, al parecer inocente de toda acusación, y a mostrar su buena disposición, pero con el deseo de ver desaparecer al enfermo para ocupar su trono. Fernando aprovechó la ocasión para encerrarle en el castillo de Cea, de donde escapó gracias a su astucia y a la ayuda de varios cómplices.

García se preparó entonces para la guerra, y con algunos musulmanes aliados invadió las tierras de Castilla, rechazando a los emisarios que le propusieron la paz en nombre de su hermano, «proponiéndole que cada uno viviera en paz dentro de su reino y desistiese de decidir la cuestión por las armas pues ambos eran hermanos y cada uno debía morar pacíficamente en su casa». Así pues, Fernando le salió al encuentro con un fuerte contingente, y ambos ejércitos se encontraron en la Batalla de Atapuerca librada en 1054.

García se había establecido a mitad del valle de Atapuerca, tres leguas al este de Burgos, pero los leoneses ocuparon de noche un altozano cercano y desde él cayeron al amanecer contra los navarros y sus aliados. Fernando dio orden de capturar vivo a su hermano, porque así se lo había pedido su esposa Sancha. Pero los nobles de León, que no habían olvidado la muerte su rey Vermudo, acabaron con García. Otra versión atribuye su muerte a un grupo de sus propios súbditos, obligados a huir a Castilla ante las humillaciones y exigencias tributarias de García.

En todo caso, el ejército de García huyó en desbandada, cayendo numerosos prisioneros en manos leonesas, entre ellos buena parte de sus contingentes moros. Fernando recuperó el cuerpo de su hermano y ordenó enterrarlo en la iglesia que éste había fundado, Santa María de Nájera. La victoria de Fernando tuvo como consecuencia la reincorporación a Castilla de las tierras reclamadas, estableciéndose la frontera en el río Ebro e imponiéndose vasallaje a su joven sobrino Sancho Garcés IV, el nuevo rey de Pamplona.

Reorganización del reino:

Sometidos los condes leoneses y seguras las fronteras, Fernando I se aplicó a consolidar las estructuras e instituciones de su reino, ya pacificado. Jugó un papel fundamental en la política peninsular y en la configuración del mapa político del siglo XI. Asimismo, en cuanto a política legislativa, su labor fue muy importante, reformando algunos aspectos de la Curia Regia leonesa, o restableciendo el derecho canónico visigodo mediante diferentes normas recogidas en el Concilio de Coyanza (1050 ó 1055), que fue presidido por el mismo monarca.

Durante su reinado se introdujeron en la monarquía leonesa las nuevas corrientes europeístas llegadas a la península ibérica a través de Navarra. Entre ellas destacan su relación con la Cluny y algunas de las primeras manifestaciones artísticas del nuevo arte románico en la península: la cripta de San Antolín de la catedral de Palencia y el pórtico real de la Colegiata de San Isidoro de León (1063), convertida después en panteón real.

Política exterior: A partir de ese momento, se inició la política expansiva leonesa, sobre todo hacia los territorios musulmanes meridionales, muy debilitados por la división de al-Ándalus, tras la caída del Califato Cordobés y el surgimiento de numerosos reinos de taifas. Se reanudó así, y ya de forma definitiva y decidida, la Reconquista.

Uno de los principales resultados de la política de Fernando I fue el sometimiento de varios de los reinos de taifas y el cobro de las parias (impuesto por la protección y por no ser atacados) a las taifas más ricas, como Toledo, Sevilla, Zaragoza o Badajoz. A la vez, se produjeron varios ataques y conquistas. Destacan la conquista de las plazas portuguesas de Lamego (1057) y Viseo (1058) y la toma definitiva (1060) de las de San Esteban de Gormaz, Berlanga de Duero y demás castillos y plazas del río Bordecorex, en territorio del alto Duero. Asimismo, las tomas temporales de Toledo (1062) y Zaragoza (1063), y la definitiva de la estratégica Coímbra (1064), junto al río Mondego, que puso bajo el mando del conde mozárabe Sisnando Davídiz.

Respondiendo a los pactos acordados, Fernando I envió a su hijo, el infante Sancho, en ayuda de al-Muqtadir, rey taifa de Zaragoza, cuando la plaza de Graus se vio atacada (1063) por Ramiro I de Aragón, su hermanastro, que fue derrotado y muerto. Posteriormente, condujo una expedición de castigo al valle del Ebro (1065) con el fin de vengar una matanza de cristianos acaecida en Zaragoza y reclamar a al-Muqtadir el vasallaje y el pago de las parias, que no habían sido dadas. Tras este castigo, la expedición continuó hacia Valencia, donde su rey Abd al-Malik ben Abd al-Aziz al-Muzaffar Nizam al-Dawla, tras resistir el asedio de la ciudad, plantó lucha en la batalla de Paterna, donde acabó derrotado. Al poco, Fernando I se sintió enfermo y ordenó la vuelta a León.

Muerte y sepultura: Fernando I llegó a León el día de Nochebuena de 1065 y su primera visita fue para la iglesia de San Isidoro, encomendándose a los santos para que le auxiliaran en su tránsito a la otra vida. Aquella noche acompañó en el coro a los clérigos, salmodiando los maitines en rito mozárabe, y al clarear el día de Navidad vio que la vida se le acababa. Comulgó en la Santa Misa, siguiendo el rito, bajo las dos especies, y a continuación fue llevado en brazos al lecho. Al amanecer del día 26, viendo aproximarse su final, hizo venir a obispos, abades y clérigos, mandó que le vistieran el manto regio, le colocasen la corona y le trasladasen a la iglesia. Hincó las rodillas ante el altar con las reliquias de san Isidoro y san Vicente, y oró y suplicó a Dios que acogiese su alma en paz:

Tuyo es el poder, tuyo es el reino, Señor. Encima estás de todos los reyes y a ti se entregan todos los reinos del cielo y la tierra. Y de ese modo el reino que de ti recibí y goberné por el tiempo que Tú, por tu libre voluntad quisiste, te lo reintegro ahora. Te pido que acojas mi alma, que sale de la vorágine de este mundo, y la acojas con paz.
Crónica Silense

Después se despojó de manto y corona, se tendió en el suelo y se sometió a la ceremonia de la penitencia pública, vistiendo un sayal y recibiendo la ceniza sobre su cabeza. Al mediodía del día siguiente, 27 de diciembre de 1065, festividad de san Juan Evangelista, el rey falleció rodeado de obispos, tras un reinado de veintisiete años, seis meses y doce días, a unos 55 años de edad, que pocos rebasaban en aquel tiempo y que el cronista juzgó «buena vejez y plenitud de días».

Fue enterrado en el Panteón de Reyes de San Isidoro de León que él había construido, junto a la supuesta tumba de su padre, Sancho el Mayor, Rex Pirinaeorum montium et Tolosaeb Sobre la tapa de su sepulcro esculpieron el siguiente epitafio latino:

H. E. TUMULATUS FERNANDUS MAGNUS REX TOTIUS HISPANIAE. FILIUS SANCTII REGIS PIRENAEORUM ET TOLOSAE. ISTA TRANSTULIT CORPORA. SANCTORUM IN LEGIONE BEATI ISIDORI ARCHIEPISCOPI AB HISPALI VICENTIIMARTYRIS AB ABELA. ET FECIT ECCLESIAM HANC LAPIDEAM. QUAE OLIM FUERAT LUTEA, HIC PRAELIANDO FECIT SIBI TRIBUTARIOS OMNES SARRACENOS HISPANIAE ET CEPIT COLIMBRIAM, LAMEGO, VESEO, ET ALIAS. ISTE VI CEPIT REGNA GARSIAE ET VEREMUDI. OBIIT VI K. JANUARII. ERA MCIII.

Que traducido al castellano viene a decir:

Aquí está enterrado Fernando Magno, rey de toda España, hijo de Sancho rey de los Pirineos y Tolosa. Trasladó a León los cuerpos santos de san Isidoro arzobispo, desde Sevilla, y de Vicente mártir, desde Ávila, y construyó esta iglesia de piedra, la que en otro tiempo era de barro. Hizo tributarios suyos, con las armas, a todos los sarracenos de España. Se apoderó de Coímbra, Lamego, Viseo y otras plazas. Se adueñó por la fuerza de los reinos de García y Vermudo. Falleció el 27 de diciembre de (la era) 1103.

A su muerte, en vez de respetar el derecho visigodo y leonés que impedía dividir las posesiones reales entre los herederos, siguió los principios jurídicos navarros de considerar al reino como un patrimonio familiar. Así, de forma similar a cómo hiciera su padre con él y el resto de hermanos y hermanastros, repartió en su testamento sus territorios entre todos sus hijos: su primogénito Sancho heredó Castilla, que se convirtió así en reino, y las parias de Zaragoza; su favorito, Alfonso, recibió el reino principal y predominante, León, y las parias de Toledo; García, Galicia y Portugal con título real y las parias de Badajoz y Sevilla; a su hija Elvira le correspondió el señorío de la ciudad de Toro y a Urraca el de Zamora, obteniendo ambas el título real y un importante patrimonio económico: el señoraje de todos los monasterios del reino.

Matrimonio y descendencia

En 1032 contrajo matrimonio con Sancha de León, hija de Alfonso V de León y hermana de Bermudo III de León. De esta unión nacieron:13

Urraca de Zamora (c. 1033–1101), señora de Zamora.
Sancho (1038–1072), rey de Castilla como Sancho I, y de León como Sancho II (1065–1072).
Elvira, (m. 1101), señora de Toro.
García (1042–1090), rey de Galicia (1066–1071 y 1072–1073), como García II.
Alfonso (1047–1109), rey de León (1065–1072), Castilla y Galicia (1072–1109), como Alfonso VI.

Según la Crónica silense:

El rey Fernando educó a sus hijos e hijas instruyéndolos en primer lugar en las disciplinas liberales, que él mismo había estudiado eruditamente, y luego dispuso que sus hijos, a la edad oportuna, aprendiesen las artes ecuestres y los ejercicios militares y venatorios al estilo español, ya las hijas, lejos de toda ociosidad, las formó en las virtudes femeninas honestas.

Fernando I de León. (2016, 7 de octubre). Wikipedia, La enciclopedia libre. Fecha de consulta: 20:36, noviembre 20, 2016 desde https://es.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fernando_I_de_Le%C3%B3n&oldid=94170368.

-----

--------------------
1º REI DE CASTELA
--------------------
=Fernando I de Leão=

Fernando I de Castela (1016 — 27 de Dezembro de 1065), cognominado o Grande ou o Magno, foi conde de Castela (1035-1065) e também rei de Leão (1037-1065), conquistou Viseu e Coimbra em 1064.

Era filho de Sancho III de Navarra (Sancho I de Castela), e da infanta Maior de Castela. De seu pai herdou o condado de Castela, e conquistou pela força das armas o reino de Leão, coroa da qual se tornou rei consorte pelo casamento com a irmã do rei Bermudo III de Leão, a rainha Sancha I de Leão.

Tal como fez seu pai, também dividiu o seu reino à hora da morte; assim, o seu primogénito, Sancho, herdou o reino principal, Castela; o resto dos seus domínios foi repartido por Afonso (Leão), Garcia (Galiza), e ainda Elvira e Urraca (a quem deixou a posse de dois mosteiros).

Fernando acabou por falecer na Festa de São João Evangelista, a 24 de Junho de 1065.

==Filhos==

# Urraca de Zamora, infanta de Leão (1033-1101), também conhecida por Urraca de Leão. foi senhora de Zamora e casada com Garcia Ordoñes, de quem teve: Osório Garcia, conde de Cabrera casado com Sancha Moniz e Garcia Ordoñez que foi conde de Nájera.
# Sancho II de Leão e Castela (1038-1072)
# Afonso VI de Leão e Castela (1040-1109)
# Elvira
# Garcia II da Galiza (1042-1090)

Fora do casamento teve:

# Múnio Fernandez (1030 -?)

''in: Wikipédia, a enciclopédia livre <http://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fernando_I_de_Le%C3%A3o_e_Castela>'' _____________________________________________________________________________

Veja também:
* Selected Families and Individuals <http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.com/~hwbradley/aqwg880.htm#14056>

-----

http://www.friesian.com/perifran.htm#castile

http://genealogics.org/getperson.php?personID=I00093524&tree=LEO

'''Ferdinand Ier dit le Grand''', (né v. 1016 - mort en 1065), fut roi de Castille (1035-1065), territoire auquel s'ajoutèrent, en 1037, la province de León et, en 1054, celle de Navarre. Fils du roi Sanche iii de Navarre et de Munia Mayor de Castille, Ferdinand épousa la sœur de Bermude iii, roi de León. En 1037, il battit l'armée de Bermude et revendiqua le trône, invoquant le droit de succession de son épouse. En 1054, il remporta la victoire sur les Navarrais près de Burgos, tuant son frère, García iv, roi de Navarre, au cours de la bataille. Ce succès lui permit d'agrandir encore son royaume.

Ferdinand s'illustra également par ses victoires contre les Maures, auxquels il enleva Coimbra en 1064. Avant de mourir, il partagea ses possessions entre ses trois fils, ouvrant une lutte fratricide.

Abbad ii respectueux de la foi chrétienne, autorisa à Ferdinand Ier le Grand, en 1063, le transfert de Séville à León des restes de saint Isidore, le grand docteur de l’Église wisigothique des vie et viie siècles.

Sur mandat de Ferdinand Ier, les évêques leonais et asturiens, Alvito et Ordoño, venaient chercher à Séville les reliques du saint docteur qui furent transférées dans l'église San Juan de León, désormais appelée San Isidoro.

http://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ferdinand_Ier_de_Castille

http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fernando_I_de_Le%C3%B3n_y_Castilla

Fernando I de León, llamado el Magno o el Grande, (c. 1010/1012 – León, 27 de diciembre de 1065), fue conde de Castilla desde 1028 y rey de León desde el año 1037 hasta su muerte, siendo ungido como tal el 22 de junio de 1038.

Era hijo de Sancho Garcés III, llamado «el Mayor», rey de Pamplona, y de Doña Muniadona, hermana de García Sánchez de Castilla, del cual heredó Fernando el Condado de Castilla en 1028, si bien no ejercería el gobierno efectivo hasta la muerte de su padre. Se convirtió en Rey de León por su matrimonio con Doña Sancha, hermana de su rey y señor, Bermudo III, contra el que se levantó en armas, el cual falleció sin dejar descendencia luchando con Fernando en la batalla de Tamarón.

Casó con Sancha de León, hija de Alfonso V de León y hermana de Bermudo III de León. De esta unión nacieron:

* Urraca (c. 1033–1101), señora de Zamora.
* Sancho (1038–1072), rey de Castilla como Sancho I, y de León como Sancho II (1065–1072).
* Elvira, (¿?–1101), señora de Toro.
* Alfonso (1040–1109), rey de León (1065–1072) y de León, Castilla y Galicia (1072–1109), como Alfonso VI.
* García (1042–1090), rey de Galicia (1066–1071 y 1072–1073).

-----


'''''Ferdinand I (c. 1015 – 24 December 1065), called the Great (el Magno), was the Count of Castile from his uncle's death in 1029 and the King of León after defeating his brother-in-law in 1037. According to tradition, he was the first to have himself crowned Emperor of Spain (1056), and his heirs carried on the tradition. He was a younger son of Sancho III of Navarre and Mayor of Castile, and by his father's will recognised the supremacy of his eldest brother, García Sánchez III of Navarre. While Ferdinand inaugurated the rule of the Navarrese Jiménez dynasty over western Spain, his rise to preeminence among the Christian rulers of the peninsula shifted the locus of power and culture westward after more than a century of Leonese decline. Nevertheless, "[t]he internal consolidation of the realm of León–Castilla under Fernando el Magno and [his queen] Sancha (1037–1065) is a history that remains to be researched and written."'''''

'''''Date and order of birth'''''

'''''There is some disagreement concerning the order of birth of Sancho III's sons, and of Ferdinand's place among them. He was certainly a younger son, and he was probably born later than 1011, when his parents' marriage is first recorded. Most, and the most reliable, charters name Sancho's sons in the order Ramiro, García, Gonzalo, then Ferdinand. Three documents from the Cathedral of Pamplona list them in this way, as well as four from the monastery of San Juan de la Peña. One charter from Pamplona, dated 29 September 1023, is witnessed by Sancho's mother, Jimena Fernández, his wife Mayor, her children, listed García, Ferdinand then Gonzalo, and their brother, the illegitimate Ramiro.'''''

'''''In five documents of the monastery of San Salvador de Leire, Ferdinand is listed after Gonzalo. Two of these are dated to 17 April 1014. If authentic, they place Ferdinand's birth before that date. Three further documents from Leire are among the only ones to place Ferdinand second among the legitimate sons, but they suffer from various anachronisms and interpolations. Two preserved diplomas of Santa María la Real de Irache also put Gonzalo ahead of him. On the basis of these documents, Gonzalo Martínez Díez places Ferdinand third of the known legitimate sons of Sancho III (Ramiro being a bastard born before his marriage to Mayor), and his birth no earlier than 1015. The Crónica de Alaón renovada, which Martínez Díez dates to 1154, but which other scholars dismiss as a late medieval concoction, lists García, Ferdinand and Gonzalo as Sancho III's sons by Mayor in that order, but in the same passage mistakenly places Gonzalo's death before his father's.'''''

'''''Count of Castile (1029–37)'''''

'''''Ferdinand was barely in his teens when García Sánchez, Count of Castile, was assassinated by a party of exiled Castilian noblemen as he was entering the church of John the Baptist in León, where he had gone to marry Sancha, sister of Bermudo III, King of León. In his role as feudal overlord, Sancho III of Navarre nominated his younger son Ferdinand, born to the deceased count's sister Mayor, as count of Castile. Although Sancho was recognised as the ruler of Castile until his death, Ferdinand was granted the title "count" (comes) and was prepared to succeed in Castile. On 7 July 1029, before a council in Burgos, the capital of Castile, Óneca, aunt of the late García and queen Mayor, formally adopted Sancho and Mayor, making them her heirs. The record of the council is the first recorded instance of Ferdinand bearing the title of count. A later charter from the monastery of San Pedro de Cardeña, dated 1 January 1030, explicits lists Sancho as king in León (the overlord of Castile) and Ferdinand as count in Castile. The first indication that Ferdinand was independently reigning de facto over Castile, or was at least recognised as count in his own right, is a charter of 1 November 1032 from the monastery of San Pedro de Arlanza, which does not mention his father, but dates it to the time of "Fernando Sánchez bearing the county". Sancho's decision to name his son as count in Castile preserved its high degree of autonomy, although no Castilian document after 1028 is dated by the reign of Bermudo III nor is he ever named as king of León. The only sovereign whose regnal year was used was Sancho III, making Ferdinand the first count of Castile not to recognise the suzerainty of the king of León.'''''

''''Sancho III arranged for Ferdinand to marry García of Castile's intended bride, Sancha of León, in 1032. The lands between the Cea and Pisuerga rivers went to Castile as her dowry. After his father's death on 18 October 1035, Ferdinand continued to rule in Castile, but he was not, as many later authors have it, king of Castile. Contemporary documents stress his status as count and his relationship of vassalage to the king of León. A document issued by his brother Ramiro on 22 August 1036 at San Juan de la Peña was drawn while "emperor Bermudo [was] reigning in León and count Ferdinand in Castile, king García in Pamplona, king Ramiro in Aragon, and king Gonzalo in Ribagorza." Two private Castilian documents dated 1 January 1037 both express Ferdinand's continuing vassalage to the Leonese monarch explicitly, dating themselves by the reign of "king Bermudo and Ferdinand, count in his realms"."'''

''''In a dispute over the territory between the Cea and Pisuerga, Ferdinand, nominally a vassal of Bermudo III, defeated and killed his suzerain at the Battle of Tamarón on 4 September 1037. Ferdinand took possession of León by right of his wife, who was the heiress presumptive, and on 22 June 1038 had himself formally crowned and anointed king in León (1037–65)."'''

''''Relations with Navarre"'''

''''On 15 September 1054, Ferdinand defeated his elder brother García at the Battle of Atapuerca and reduced Navarre to a vassal state under his late brother's young son, Sancho García IV. Although Navarre at that time included the traditionally Castilian lands of Álava and La Rioja, Ferdinand demanded the cession only of Bureba. Over the next decade, he gradually extended his control over more of the western territory of Navarre at the expense of Sancho IV, although this was accomplished peacefully and is only detectable in the documentary record."'''

"'''War with Zaragoza"'''

"'''In 1060, according to the Historia silense, Ferdinand invaded the taifa of Zaragoza through the upland valley of the eastern Duero in the highlands around Soria. He captured the fortresses of San Esteban de Gormaz, Berlanga and Vadorrey, and afterwards proceeded through Santiuste, Huermeces and Santamara as far as the Roman road that lay between Toledo and Zaragoza. The success of the campaign was made possible by the preoccupation of the Zaragozan emir, Ahmad al-Muqtadir, with attacking the neighboring taifa of Tortosa and defending his northeastern frontier from Ramiro I of Aragon and Raymond Berengar I of Barcelona. The emir, up until then paying tribute to Sancho IV of Navarre, submitted to Ferdinand and agreed to pay parias. Although probably originally meant to be temporary, Ferdinand managed to enforce the tribute until his death."'''

"'''War with Toledo"'''

"'''With al-Muqtadir sidelined as a threat, Ferdinand turned his attention to Yahya ibn Ismail al-Mamun, emir of Toledo. It is probable that Ferdinand already maintained close relations with the Toledan court, and was perhaps protector of the Mozarabic Christian community in Toledo. In 1058, the last known Mozarabic bishop of Toledo, Pascual, was consecrated in León. In 1062, Ferdinand invaded the east of al-Mamun's taifa, taking Talamanca and besieging Alcalá de Henares. After seeing his country plundered, al-Mamun agreed to pay parias and Ferdinand left."'''

"'''Great raid on Badajoz and Seville"'''

"'''In 1063, using the new income from his parias, Ferdinand organised a "great raid, or razzia" into the taifas of Seville and Badajoz. Seville, and probably Badajoz also, paid a ransom for his withdrawal. This attack was probably also designed to remove Badajoz as a threat during his siege of Coimbra the next year."'''

"'''Reconquests in Portugal"'''

"'''Although the sources are unclear, it is possible that as early as 1055 Ferdinand attacked the taifa of Badajoz. His first serious campaign of Reconquista was an invasion of the lower basin of the Duero between the coast, which had long been held by León, and the mountains. On 29 November 1057 his army conquered Lamego and its valleys.[ Having secured the Duero, Ferdinand began to bring the valley of the Mondego under his control, first taking Viseu in its middle stretch on 25 July 1058 and then moving down towards the sea. It was "a long and grueling battle" before Coimbra, at the mouth of the Mondego, was taken on 25 July 1064 after a six-month siege."'''

"'''War with Valencia"'''

"'''In 1065, Ferdinand embarked on his last military campaign. He invaded the taifa of Valencia and got as far as the vicinity of the city itself, where he defeated the emir Abd al-Malik al-Muzaffar late in the autumn. The emir's father-in-law, al-Mamun of Toledo, seized control of Valencia, and the frightened emir of Zaragoza renewed his tribute payments to León. Ferdinand fell ill in November and returned to his kingdom."'''

"'''Emperor of Spain"'''

"'''Ferdinand was first titled "emperor" not by himself or his own scribes, but by the notaries of his half-brother, the petty king Ramiro I of Aragon, whose notaries were also calling Ferdinand's predecessor as king of León by the same title. In a royal Aragonese charter of 1036, before the Battle of Tamarón, Ramiro refers to his brother as "emperor in Castile and in León and in Astorga". A similarly-worded charter was issued in 1041 and again in 1061, where the order of kingdoms is reversed and Astorga ignored: "emperor in León and in Castile". The first use of the imperial style in a charter of his own, preserved in the cartulary of Arlanza, dates to the year 1056: "under the rule of the emperor King Ferdinand and the empress Queen Sancha ruling the kingdom in León and in Galicia as well as in Castile". On this basis, Ferdinand is sometimes said to have had himself crowned emperor in 1056."'''

"'''The imperial title was only used on one other occasion during his reign. A document of 1058 dates itself "in the time of the most serene prince Lord Ferdinand and his consort Queen Sancha" and later qualifies him as "this emperor, the aforesaid Ferdinand"."'''

"'''Death and succession"'''

"'''After becoming ill during the Siege of Valencia and the Battle of Paterna, Ferdinand died on 24 December 1065, in León, with many manifestations of ardent piety, having laid aside his crown and royal mantle, dressed in the robe of a monk and lying on a bier covered with ashes, which was placed before the altar of the Basilica of San Isidoro. By his will, Ferdinand divided his kingdom among his three sons: the eldest, Sancho, received Castile; the second, Alfonso, León; and from the latter the region of Galicia was carved off to create a separate state for García. Ferdinand's two daughters each received cities: Elvira that of Toro and Urraca that of Zamora. In giving them these territories, he expressed his desire that they respect his wishes and abide by the split. However, soon after Fernando's death, Sancho and Alfonso turned on García and defeated him. They then fought each other, the victorious Sancho reuniting their father's possessions under his control in 1072. However, Sancho was killed that same year and the territories passed to Alfonso."'''

"'''Posthumous reputation"'''

"'''See also: Crucifix of Ferdinand and Sancha"'''

"'''The Chronicon complutense, probably written shortly after Ferdinand's death, extols him as the "exceedingly strong emperor" (imperator fortissimus) when mentioning the siege of Coimbra. After his death, Ferdinand's children took to calling him "emperor" and "the great" (magnus). In 1072, Alfonso, Fedinand's second son, referred to himself as "offspring of the Emperor Ferdinand". Two years later (1074), Urraca and Elvira referred to themselves as "daughters of the Emperor Ferdinand the Great [or, the great emperor Ferdinand]". In a later charter of 1087, Ferdinand is referred to first as "king", then as "great emperor", and finally just as "emperor" alongside his consort, who is first called "queen" then "empress"."'''

"'''In the fourteenth century a legend appeared in various chronicles according to which the Pope, the Holy Roman Emperor, and the King of France demanded a tribute from Ferdinand. In certain versions the Pope is named Urban (although it could not have been either Urban I or Urban II) and in other versions Victor (which is plausibly identifiable with Victor II). Ferdinand was prepared to pay, but one of his vassals, later known as El Cid, who in reality was a youth during Ferdinand's reign, declared a war on the Pope, the Emperor and the Frank, and the latter rescinded their demand. For this reason "Don Fernando was afterwards called ‘the Great’: the peer of an emperor". In the sixteenth century this account re-appeared, extended and elaborated, in Juan de Mariana, who wrote that in 1055, at a synod in Florence, the Emperor Henry III urged Victor II to prohibit under severe penalties the use of the imperial title by Ferdinand of León."'''

"'''This story is generally regarded as apocryphal, although some modern authors have accepted it uncritically or seen a kernel of historical truth in it. Spanish historian A. Ballesteros argued that Ferdinand adopted the title in opposition to Henry III's imperial pretensions. German historian E. E. Stengel believed the version found in Mariana on the grounds that the latter probably used the now lost acts of the Council of Florence. Juan Beneyto Pérez was willing to accept it as based on tradition and Ernst Steindorff, the nineteenth-century student of the reign of Henry III, as being authentically transmitted via the romancero. Menéndez Pidal accepted the account of Mariana, but placed it in the year 1065."'''

"'''http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ferdinand_I_of_Le%C3%B3n_and_Castile"'''

--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ferdinand_I_of_Castile
--------------------
Ferdinand I (1017 – 24 June 1065), called the Great (El Magno), was the Count of Castile from his uncle's death 1029 and the King of León, through his wife, after defeating his brother-in-law in 1037. He was the son of Sancho III of Navarre and Mayor of Castile, and is usually recognised as the first King of Castile. He had himself crowned Emperor of Spain in 1056.

[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ferdinand_I_of_León Source]


--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ferdinand_I_of_Le%C3%B3n_and_Castile
--------------------
Ferdinand I (1017 – 24 June 1065), called the Great (El Magno), was the son of Sancho III of Navarre and Mayor of Castile, and became Count of Castile from his uncle's death in 1029. Having acquired the Kingdom of León after defeating his brother-in-law in 1037, he became King of León and Castile. He had himself crowned Emperor of Spain in 1056.

Ferdinand was barely in his teens when García Sánchez, Count of Castile, was assassinated by a party of exiled Castilian noblemen as he was entering the church of John the Baptist in León, where he had gone to marry Sancha, sister of Bermudo III King of Leon. In his role as feudal overlord, Sancho III of Navarre nominated his younger son Ferdinand, born to the deceased count's sister Mayor, as successor, and further arranged for Ferdinand to marry García's intended bride, Sancha of León.

On his father's death, Ferdinand continued as count of Castile, now recognizing the suzerainty of his brother-in-law Bermudo III, but they fell out and on 4 September 1037 Bermudo was killed in battle with Fernando at Tamarón. Ferdinand took possession of León by right of his wife, who was the heiress presumptive, and the next year had himself formally crowned king of León and Castile. He overran the Moorish section of Galicia, and set up his vassal as count in what is now northern Portugal. With northern Iberia consolidated, Ferdinand, in 1039, proclaimed himself emperor of Hispania. The use of the title was resented by the Emperor Henry III and Pope Victor II in 1055 as implying a claim to the headship of Christendom and as a usurpation of the Roman Empire. It did not, however, mean more than that the sovereign of León was the chief of the princes of the Iberian peninsula. Ferdinand's brothers García Sánchez III of Navarre and Ramiro I of Aragón opposed his power, but were both killed in ensuing battles, leaving Ferdinand preeminent.

Ferdinand died on the feast of Saint John the Baptist, 24 June 1065, in León, with many manifestations of ardent piety, having laid aside his crown and royal mantle, dressed in the robe of a monk and lying on a bier covered with ashes, which was placed before the altar of the Basilica of San Isidoro. At his death, Ferdinand divided up his kingdom between his three sons, the eldest, Sancho, receiving Castile and Alfonso being given León, while from the latter the region of Galicia was carved off to create a separate state for Garcia. Ferdinand's two daughters each received cities: Elvira, Toro and Urraca, Zamora. In giving them these territories, he expressed his desire that they respect his wishes and abide by the split. However, soon after Fernando's death, Sancho and Alfonso turned on García, and defeating him they then fought each other, the victorious Sancho reuniting their father's possessions under his control in 1072.

[edit] References This article incorporates text from the Encyclopædia Britannica, Eleventh Edition, a publication now in the public domain. Preceded by García Sánchez Count of Castile 1029-1037 Succeeded by Title Extinct Preceded by Bermudo III (in León) King of León and Castile 1037-1065 Succeeded by Alfonso VI (in León) Sancho II (in Castile) Garcia (in Galicia) Vacant Title last held by Bermudo III Emperor of Spain 1056 – 1065 Vacant Title next held by Alfonso VI of León Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ferdinand_I_of_Le%C3%B3n_and_Castile"

--------------------
Ferdinand I of León From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Ferdinand I, called the Great (in his time, El Magno) (1017–León, 1065), was the count of Castile from his uncle's death in 1029 and the king of León—through his wife—after defeating his brother-in-law in 1037 until his death in 1065. He was crowned Emperor of All Hispania in 1056. Ferdinand was barely in his teens when García Sánchez, Count of Castile, was assassinated by a party of exiled Castilian noblemen as he was entering the church of St John the Baptist in León, where he had gone to marry Sancha, sister of Bermudo III. In his role as feudal overlord, Sancho III of Navarre nominated his second legitimate son Ferdinand, born to the deceased count's sister Munia, as successor, and further arranged for Ferdinand to marry García'a intended bride, Sancha of León. On his father's death, Ferdinand continued as count of Castile, now recognizing the suzerainty of his brother-in-law Bermudo III, but they fell out and on 4 September 1037 Bermudo was killed in battle with Fernando at Tamarón. Ferdinand took possession of León by right of his wife, who was the heiress presumptive, and the next year had himself formally crowned king of León and Castile. He overran the Moorish section of Galicia, and set up his vassal as count in what is now northern Portugal. With northern Iberia consolidated, Ferdinand, in 1039, proclaimed himself emperor of Hispania. The use of the title was resented by the Emperor Henry III and Pope Victor II in 1055 as implying a claim to the headship of Christendom and as a usurpation of the Roman Empire. It did not, however, mean more than that the sovereign of León was the chief of the princes of the Iberian peninsula, and that Iberia was independent of the Holy Roman Empire. Ferdinand's brothers García V of Navarre and Ramiro I of Aragón opposed his power, but were both killed in ensuing battles, leaving Ferdinand preeminent. Ferdinand died on the feast of Saint John the Baptist, 24 June 1065, in León, with many manifestations of ardent piety, having laid aside his crown and royal mantle, dressed in the robe of a monk and lying on a bier covered with ashes, which was placed before the altar of the church of Saint Isidore. At his death, Ferdinand divided up his kingdom between his three sons: Sancho, who received Castile; Alfonso, who received León; and Garcia, who received Galicia. His two daughters each received cities: Elvira received Toro and Urraca received Zamora. By giving them his dominion, he wanted them to abide by the split in the kingdom and respect his wishes. However, Sancho (born 1032), being the oldest, believed that he deserved more of the kingdom, and therefore sought to gain possession of the divided parts of the kingdom that had been given to his siblings. (note: the Dutch version of Wikipedia says that Ferdinand died on 27 December 1065 ?)

--------------------
Ferdinand I, called the Great (in his time, El Magno) (1017–León, 1065), son of Sancho III of Navarre and Mayor of Castile, was the count of Castile from his uncle's death in 1029 and the king of León—through his wife—after defeating his brother-in-law in 1037 until his death in 1065. He was crowned Emperor of All Hispania in 1056.

Ferdinand was barely in his teens when García Sánchez, Count of Castile, was assassinated by a party of exiled Castilian noblemen as he was entering the church of St John the Baptist in León, where he had gone to marry Sancha, sister of Bermudo III. In his role as feudal overlord, Sancho III of Navarre nominated his younger son Ferdinand, born to the deceased count's sister Mayor, as successor, and further arranged for Ferdinand to marry García'a intended bride, Sancha of León.

On his father's death, Ferdinand continued as count of Castile, now recognizing the suzerainty of his brother-in-law Bermudo III, but they fell out and on 4 September 1037 Bermudo was killed in battle with Fernando at Tamarón. Ferdinand took possession of León by right of his wife, who was the heiress presumptive, and the next year had himself formally crowned king of León and Castile. He overran the Moorish section of Galicia, and set up his vassal as count in what is now northern Portugal. With northern Iberia consolidated, Ferdinand, in 1039, proclaimed himself emperor of Hispania. The use of the title was resented by the Emperor Henry III and Pope Victor II in 1055 as implying a claim to the headship of Christendom and as a usurpation of the Roman Empire. It did not, however, mean more than that the sovereign of León was the chief of the princes of the Iberian peninsula, and that Iberia was independent of the Holy Roman Empire. Ferdinand's brothers García V of Navarre and Ramiro I of Aragón opposed his power, but were both killed in ensuing battles, leaving Ferdinand preeminent.

Ferdinand died on the feast of Saint John the Baptist, 24 June 1065, in León, with many manifestations of ardent piety, having laid aside his crown and royal mantle, dressed in the robe of a monk and lying on a bier covered with ashes, which was placed before the altar of the church of Saint Isidore. At his death, Ferdinand divided up his kingdom between his three sons: Sancho, who received Castile; Alfonso, who received León; and Garcia, who received Galicia. His two daughters each received cities: Elvira received Toro and Urraca received Zamora. By giving them his dominion, he wanted them to abide by the split in the kingdom and respect his wishes. However, Sancho (born 1032), being the oldest, believed that he deserved more of the kingdom, and therefore sought to gain possession of the divided parts of the kingdom that had been given to his siblings.
--------------------
Ferdinand I, called the Great (in his time, El Magno) (1017–León, 1065), was the king of Castile from his father's death in 1035 and the king of León—through his wife—after defeating his brother-in-law in 1037 until his death in 1065. He was crowned Emperor of All Hispania in 1056.

Ferdinand was the second eldest legitimate son of Sancho III of Navarre. He was barely in his teens when he was put in possession of Castile in 1028 or 1029 with his father's backing, on the murder of the last count, as the heir of his mother Munia, daughter of a previous count of Castile and sister of the deceased count. That count, Don García, was about to be married to Doña Sancha, sister of Bermudo III, king of León, but was assassinated as he was entering the church of St John the Baptist in León by a party of Castilian nobles, exiles from their own land, who had taken refuge in León.

Ferdinand now married Sancha of León instead. He reigned in Castile with the title of king from 1033, though his father, King Sancho, did not die until 1035. On 4 September 1037, when his brother-in-law Bermudo was killed in battle with him at Tamarón, Ferdinand took possession of León as well, by right of his wife who was the heiress presumptive. He overran the Moorish section of Galicia, and set up his vassal as count in what is now northern Portugal. With northern Iberia consolidated, Ferdinand, in 1039, proclaimed himself emperor of Hispania. The use of the title was resented by the Emperor Henry III and Pope Victor II in 1055 as implying a claim to the headship of Christendom and as a usurpation of the Roman Empire. It did not, however, mean more than that the sovereign of León was the chief of the princes of the Iberian peninsula, and that Iberia was independent of the Holy Roman Empire. Ferdinand's brothers García V of Navarre and Ramiro I of Aragón opposed his power, but were both killed in ensuing battles, leaving Ferdinand preeminent.

Ferdinand died on the feast of Saint John the Baptist, 24 June 1065, in León, with many manifestations of ardent piety, having laid aside his crown and royal mantle, dressed in the robe of a monk and lying on a bier covered with ashes, which was placed before the altar of the church of Saint Isidore. At his death, Ferdinand divided up his kingdom between his three sons: Sancho, who received Castile; Alfonso, who received León; and Garcia, who received Galicia. His two daughters each received cities: Elvira received Toro and Urraca received Zamora. By giving them his dominion, he wanted them to abide by the split in the kingdom and respect his wishes. However, Sancho (born 1032), being the oldest, believed that he deserved more of the kingdom, and therefore sought to gain possession of the divided parts of the kingdom that had been given to his siblings.
--------------------
BIOGRAPHY: King of Castile (1033-65) and of Leon (1037-65); he was the scond son of King Sancho III of Navarre. In 1037 Ferdinand defeated Burmudo in a battle at Tamaron, acquiring Leon through Sancha's right of succession. Ferdinand won the Battle of Atapuerca over his brother in 1054 and was recognized as the emperor of Spain in 1056. By his territorial acquistions from the Moors between 1058 and 1065, Ferdinand inaugurated the period of Christian reconquest of Spanish land from the Muslims. Before his death, Ferdinand provided that his estates be divided among his three sons, thus bequeathing a legacy of fratricidal strife that did not end until the accession of Alfonso I to the throne of Castile in 1072.

!Royal Ancestors of some LDS Families by Michel L. Call.

b. 1016/18

d. Dec. 27, 1065, León, Leon

byname FERDINAND THE GREAT, Spanish FERNANDO EL MAGNO, the first ruler of Castile to take the title of king; he was also crowned emperor of Leon.

Ferdinand's father, Sancho III of Navarre, had acquired Castile and established hegemony over the Christian states. On his death in 1035 he left Navarre to his eldest son (García III) and Castile to his second son, Ferdinand, who had married Sancha, sister and heiress of Bermudo III of Leon. Ferdinand's Castilians defeated and killed Bermudo at Tamarón in 1037, and he had himself crowned emperor in the city of León in 1039. In 1054 his Castilian troops defeated and killed his elder brother, García III, at Atapuerca, and he added Navarre to his possessions. In 1062 he forced the Muslim ruler of Toledo to pay him tribute and imposed vassalage on Saragossa and Seville. He conquered Coimbra in central Portugal and laid siege to Valencia, but he failed to capture it.

He followed the custom of dividing his estates, leaving Castile to the eldest, Sancho II; Leon to the second, Alfonso VI; and Galicia to the third. The first two dispossessed the third; and, on the murder of Sancho, Alfonso VI recovered the whole, becoming emperor.

Copyright © 1994-2001 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.

History: Ferdinand I (of Castile and León), called The Great (1005?-65), king of Castile (1035-65) and of León (1037-65); he was the second son of King Sancho III of Navarre. Ferdinand married Sancha, the sister of Bermudo III, king of León, and heiress to the throne of León. In 1037 Ferdinand defeated Bermudo in a battle at Tamaron, acquiring León through Sancha's right of succession. Ferdinand won the Battle of Atapuerca over his brother in 1054 and was recognized as the emperor of Spain in 1056. By his territorial acquisitions from the Moors between 1058 and 1065, Ferdinand inaugurated the period of Christian reconquest of Spanish land from the Muslims. Before his death Ferdinand provided that his estates be divided among his three sons, thus bequeathing a legacy of fratricidal strife that did not end until the accession of Alfonso I to the throne of Castile in 1072.

Microsoft® Encarta® Encyclopedia 2002. © 1993-2001 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.
--------------------
Ferdinand I, called the Great (in his time, El Magno) (1017–León, 1065), son of Sancho III of Navarre and Mayor of Castile, was the count of Castile from his uncle's death in 1029 and the king of León—through his wife—after defeating his brother-in-law in 1037 until his death in 1065. He was crowned Emperor of All Hispania in 1056.

Ferdinand was barely in his teens when García Sánchez, Count of Castile, was assassinated by a party of exiled Castilian noblemen as he was entering the church of St John the Baptist in León, where he had gone to marry Sancha, sister of Bermudo III. In his role as feudal overlord, Sancho III of Navarre nominated his younger son Ferdinand, born to the deceased count's sister Mayor, as successor, and further arranged for Ferdinand to marry García'a intended bride, Sancha of León.

On his father's death, Ferdinand continued as count of Castile, now recognizing the suzerainty of his brother-in-law Bermudo III, but they fell out and on 4 September 1037 Bermudo was killed in battle with Fernando at Tamarón. Ferdinand took possession of León by right of his wife, who was the heiress presumptive, and the next year had himself formally crowned king of León and Castile. He overran the Moorish section of Galicia, and set up his vassal as count in what is now northern Portugal. With northern Iberia consolidated, Ferdinand, in 1039, proclaimed himself emperor of Hispania. The use of the title was resented by the Emperor Henry III and Pope Victor II in 1055 as implying a claim to the headship of Christendom and as a usurpation of the Roman Empire. It did not, however, mean more than that the sovereign of León was the chief of the princes of the Iberian peninsula, and that Iberia was independent of the Holy Roman Empire. Ferdinand's brothers García V of Navarre and Ramiro I of Aragón opposed his power, but were both killed in ensuing battles, leaving Ferdinand preeminent.

Ferdinand died on the feast of Saint John the Baptist, 24 June 1065, in León, with many manifestations of ardent piety, having laid aside his crown and royal mantle, dressed in the robe of a monk and lying on a bier covered with ashes, which was placed before the altar of the church of Saint Isidore. At his death, Ferdinand divided up his kingdom between his three sons: Sancho, who received Castile; Alfonso, who received León; and Garcia, who received Galicia. His two daughters each received cities: Elvira received Toro and Urraca received Zamora. By giving them his dominion, he wanted them to abide by the split in the kingdom and respect his wishes. However, Sancho (born 1032), being the oldest, believed that he deserved more of the kingdom, and therefore sought to gain possession of the divided parts of the kingdom that had been given to his siblings.
--------------------
b. 1016/18

d. Jun. 24, 1065, León, Leon

byname FERDINAND THE GREAT, Spanish FERNANDO EL MAGNO, the first ruler of Castile to take the title of king; he was also crowned emperor of Leon.

Ferdinand's father, Sancho III of Navarre, had acquired Castile and established hegemony over the Christian states. On his death in 1035 he left Navarre to his eldest son (García III) and Castile to his second son, Ferdinand, who had married Sancha, sister and heiress of Bermudo III of Leon. Ferdinand's Castilians defeated and killed Bermudo at Tamarón in 1037, and he had himself crowned emperor in the city of León in 1039. In 1054 his Castilian troops defeated and killed his elder brother, García III, at Atapuerca, and he added Navarre to his possessions. In 1062 he forced the Muslim ruler of Toledo to pay him tribute and imposed vassalage on Saragossa and Seville. He conquered Coimbra in central Portugal and laid siege to Valencia, but he failed to capture it.

He followed the custom of dividing his estates, leaving Castile to the eldest, Sancho II; Leon to the second, Alfonso VI; and Galicia to the third. The first two dispossessed the third; and, on the murder of Sancho, Alfonso VI recovered the whole, becoming emperor.

Copyright © 1994-2001 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.

--------------------
Died on the day of the feast of St. John the Baptist with many manifestations of ardent piety, having laid aside his crown & royal mantle, dressed in the robe of a monk & lying on a bier covered with ashes, which was placed before the altar of the Basilica of San Isidoro.
--------------------
Ferdinand I (1017 – 24 June 1065), called the Great (El Magno), was the Count of Castile from his uncle's death 1029 and the King of León and King of Galicia, through his wife, after defeating his brother-in-law in 1037. He was the son of Sancho III of Navarre and Mayor of Castile, and is usually recognised as the first King of Castile. He had himself crowned Emperor of Spain in 1056.

--------------------
Leo: Europäische Stammtafeln, J.A. Stargardt Verlag, Marburg, Schwennicke, Detlev (Ed.), Reference: II 57.

Leo: Debrett's Kings and Queens of Europe, London, 1988 , Williamson, David, Reference: biographical details.
--------------------

--------------------

--------------------
Jimenez Dynasty

Birth: 1017 Castilla y León, Spain Death: Jun. 24, 1065 León Provincia de León Castilla y León, Spain

Ferdinand I (1017 – 24 June 1065), called the Great (El Magno), was the son of Sancho III of Navarre and Mayor of Castile, and became Count of Castile from his uncle's death in 1029. Having acquired the Kingdom of Leon after defeating his brother-in-law in 1037, he became King of Leon and Castile. He had himself crowned Emperor of Spain in 1056.

Ferdinand was barely in his teens when García Sanchez, Count of Castile, was assassinated by a party of exiled Castilian noblemen as he was entering the church of John the Baptist in Leon, where he had gone to marry Sancha, sister of Bermudo III King of Leon. In his role as feudal overlord, Sancho III of Navarre nominated his younger son Ferdinand, born to the deceased count's sister Mayor, as successor, and further arranged for Ferdinand to marry García's intended bride, Sancha of Leon.

On his father's death, Ferdinand continued as count of Castile, now recognizing the suzerainty of his brother-in-law Bermudo III, but they fell out and on 4 September 1037 Bermudo was killed in battle with Fernando at Tamaron. Ferdinand took possession of Leon by right of his wife, who was the heiress presumptive, and the next year had himself formally crowned king of Leon and Castile. He overran the Moorish section of Galicia, and set up his vassal as count in what is now northern Portugal. With northern Iberia consolidated, Ferdinand, in 1039, proclaimed himself emperor of Hispania. The use of the title was resented by the Emperor Henry III and Pope Victor II in 1055 as implying a claim to the headship of Christendom and as a usurpation of the Roman Empire. It did not, however, mean more than that the sovereign of Leon was the chief of the princes of the Iberian peninsula. Ferdinand's brothers García Sanchez III of Navarre and Ramiro I of Aragon opposed his power, but were both killed in ensuing battles, leaving Ferdinand preeminent.

Ferdinand died on the feast of Saint John the Baptist, 24 June 1065, in Leon, with many manifestations of ardent piety, having laid aside his crown and royal mantle, dressed in the robe of a monk and lying on a bier covered with ashes, which was placed before the altar of the Basilica of San Isidoro. At his death, Ferdinand divided up his kingdom between his three sons, the eldest, Sancho, receiving Castile and Alfonso being given Leon, while from the latter the region of Galicia was carved off to create a separate state for Garcia. Ferdinand's two daughters each received cities: Elvira, Toro and Urraca, Zamora. In giving them these territories, he expressed his desire that they respect his wishes and abide by the split. However, soon after Fernando's death, Sancho and Alfonso turned on García, and defeating him they then fought each other, the victorious Sancho reuniting their father's possessions under his control in 1072. However, Sancho was killed that same year and the territories passed to Alfonso.

Family links:
Parents:
Sancho of Navarre (____ - 1035)
Munia Mayor of Castile (____ - 1066)

Spouse:
Sancha de León (1013 - 1067)*

Children:
Urraca Of Zamora (1034 - 1101)*
Sancho II King Of Castile (1036 - 1072)*
Elvira De Toro (1039 - 1101)*
Alfonso VI King Of Castile And Leon (1039 - 1109)*
Garcia De Galicia (1042 - 1090)*

Siblings:
Ramiro I of Aragon (1000 - 1063)**
García III Sánchez (1010 - 1054)*
Fernando I King Of Castile And Leon (1017 - 1065)

*Calculated relationship
**Half-sibling

Burial: Basilica Of San Isidoro León Provincia de León Castilla y León, Spain

Maintained by: Anne Shurtleff Stevens Originally Created by: Jerry Ferren Record added: Feb 20, 2011 Find A Grave Memorial# 65901533
--------------------
Rey desde Feb 1035 hasta 27 Dic 1065 I Rey de Castilla y XIV Rey de León

Tras derrotar a las tropas leonesas y la muerte de su rey, Fernando I accedió al trono de León por los derechos de su esposa Sancha, hermana de Bermudo III. Se produce la primera unión de León con el nuevo reino de Castilla .

Fernando I de Castilla y de León, apodado "El Grande" (1016 - 27 de diciembre de 1065), primer rey de Castilla coronándose en febrero de 1035, también fue rey de León desde el año 1037 hasta su muerte en la capital del reino leonés en 1065.

Era hijo de Sancho Garcés III de Navarra, llamado Sancho "El Mayor", rey de Navarra, y de Doña Muniadona. De su padre heredó el condado de Castilla, convertido en reino (al igual que ocurrió con su hermano Ramiro, que heredó Aragón, hasta entonces condado)

Inició su reinado atacando la frontera leonesa con la intención de recuperar las tierras perdidas por Castilla en los últimos años del reinado de su padre. Como resultado de esta política fue la muerte de Bermudo III de León en la batalla de Tamarón (en la actual provincia de Burgos). La corona leonesa recayó en Fernando por medio de su esposa Sancha, hermana de Bermudo. Sin embargo le costó mucho lograr imponer su autoridad a los nobles leoneses, recelosos de su nuevo soberano.

A partir de ese momento sus miradas se dirigieron hacia los territorios musulmanes. Pero Fernando no supo ni aprovechar su poderío militar ni la debilidad de los recién creados reinos de taifas. La codicia le pudo y prefirió cobrar las parias, impuestos que pagaban los soberanos musulmanes, a conquistar sus ricos reinos.

Hacia 1054 decidió que debía recuperar los territorios que su padre había quitado a Castilla y entregado a Navarra, por lo que el enfrentamiento con su hermano García IV (o García Sánchez III). El enfrentamiento definitivo se produjo ese mismo año en Atapuerca, donde García, traicionado por sus propios caballeros perdió la vida. Castilla había diezmado a los navarros, su objetivo se encontraba al sur.

A partir de ahí se limitó a realizar pequeñas labores de reconquista. Cabe destacar la toma de Coimbra (1063), la ayuda al rey taifa de Zaragoza contra su otro hermano, Ramiro I de Aragón, y un intento de tomar Valencia. En esta última campaña se sintió enfermo, ordenó la vuelta a León y murió pocos días después de llegar a la ciudad.

De forma similar a cómo hiciera su padre con él y el resto de hermanos y hermanastros, según su testamento, su primogénito Sancho II de Castilla heredó el reino principal y patrimonial de Castilla.

El resto de sus dominios los repartió entre el resto de sus hijos: Alfonso recibió el reino de León, García el de Galicia, Elvira ingresó en un monasterio y Urraca, la plaza de Zamora.

http://www.sologenealogia.com/gen/getperson.php?personID=I2588&tree=001

----

Fernando I de Leão (1016 — 27 de dezembro de 1065), cognominado o Grande ou o Magno, Rei de Leão (1037-1065), Conde de Castela (1035-1065), conquistou Viseu e Coimbra em 1064.

Era filho de Sancho Garcês III de Pamplona e da Rainha Munia Mayor de Castela. De sua mãe herdou o condado de Castela, e conquistou pela força das armas o reino de Leão, coroa da qual se tornou rei consorte pelo casamento com a irmã do rei Bermudo III de Leão, a rainha Sancha I de Leão.

Em 20 de janeiro de 1064 parte para Santiago de Compostela, em peregrinação para pedir a intercessão de Santiago, para o cerco que iria a efectuar em Coimbra. Nesta viagem, parte com a sua esposa Sancha, os bispos de Santiago, Lugo, Mondonhedo e Sesnando, este último do Porto, para além dos abades de Celanova e Guimarães, para além de outras personagens notáveis.

Depois de um cerco de seis meses, rendidos pela fome, as tropas de Almançor rendem-se a 9 de julho de 1064. Depois desta vitória, Fernando Magno parte juntamente com Sesnando para Santiago de Compostela, para agradecer o feito, tornando-se na primeira peregrinação a partir de terras portuguesas de que se tenha conhecimento por documentação histórica.

Tal como fez seu pai, também dividiu o seu reino à hora da morte; assim, o seu primogénito, Sancho, herdou o reino principal, Castela; o resto dos seus domínios foi repartido por Afonso (Leão), Garcia (Galiza), e ainda Elvira e Urraca (a quem deixou a posse de dois mosteiros).

Fernando acabou por falecer na Festa de São João Batista, a 27 de dezembro de 1065.

Nestas andanças pelo Condado Portucalense, deve de N. D. Sancho Fernandes. s.m.n.

----

Conde de Castilla (1029-1035)
I Rey de Castilla (1035-1065)
Rey de León (1037-1065)
A la muerte de su cuñado Bermudo (o Vermudo) III de León, quedaron reunida lascoronas de León y Castilla, a las que se agregó Asturias.
Una vez rey de Castilla, introdujo notables modificaciones en la legislación goda, que culminaron en el Concilio de Coyanza (1050), donde se reguló también la administración judicial y la vida de los eclesiásticos. Realizó también fructíferas campañas para extender sus dominios. Conquistó las tierras del sur del Ebro pertenecientes a su hermano García IV, de Navarra; aprovechando las disensiones que minaba el califato de Córdoba, combatió a os moros y conquistó Badajoz y otras comarcas vecinas y sometió a su vasallaje a los emires de Zaragoza y de Toledo en 1057. En 1064 se rindió Coimbra, llegando su dominio hasta el Mondego, y poco después marchó con sus ejércitos hasta Valencia, siendo ésta la primera vez que los castellanos pudieron llegar hasta el Mediterráneo. Sintiendo seriamente lesionada su salud, decidió regresa a León, donde murió crisitanamente, en medio de la consideración de sus súbditos, que le dieron elcalificativo de Magno. Sus estados fueron repartidos entre sus hijos Sancho, Alfonso y García.

SOURCE NOTES:
LUH6/1823 www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal07768

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Leon (1038-1065), Count of Castile (1029-). United Leon w/Castile
1037.

KING OF CASTILE 1035-1065; KING OF LEON 1037-1065

Fernando I de León y Castilla, (Fernando Sánchez) llamado "El Magno" o "El Grande" (c. 1010 - León, 27 de diciembre de 1065) fue rey de León desde el año 1037, tras la derrota de Bermudo III en la batalla de Tamarón, hasta su muerte. Fue ungido c
omo tal el 22 de junio de 1038.

Era hijo de Sancho Garcés III, llamado "El Mayor", rey de Pamplona, y de Doña Muniadona, hermana de García Sánchez de Castilla, del cual heredó Fernando el Condado de Castilla en 1029. Tradicionalmente se le ha considerado el primer Rey de Castil
la y fundador de la monarquía castellana, y muchos historiadores siguen manteniendo esta tesis. No obstante, parte de la historiografía más actual considera que Fernando no fue rey de Castilla.1
Tabla de contenidos
ocultar

* 1 Vida
o 1.1 Conde de Castilla
o 1.2 El trono leonés
o 1.3 La guerra con Navarra
o 1.4 Reorganización del reino
o 1.5 Política exterior
* 2 Muerte
* 3 Matrimonio y descendencia
* 4 Referencias
o 4.1 Bibliografía
o 4.2 Notas

Vida editar

Conde de Castilla editar

El futuro Fernando I de León nació hacia 1010 ó 1012, como segundo vástago de Sancho III el Mayor, rey de Pamplona, por entonces entregado a aumentar sus estados a expensas de sus vecinos. Cuando el conde Sancho de Castilla falleció en 1017, dejó
por heredero a García, un niño de siete años, lo que dio inicio a un período turbulento para el condado castellano. Alfonso V de León recobró las tierras comprendidas entre el Cea y el Pisuerga, conquistadas años atrás por Sancho, en tanto que S
ancho el Mayor intervino para proteger a su joven cuñado, aprovechando para apoderarse de varias plazas fronterizas.

Llegado a la mayoría de edad, en 1027, García pretendió estrechar lazos casándose con Doña Sancha, hermana del joven rey de León, Bermudo III. Sin embargo, fue asesinado en 1029 por los hijos del conde de Vela, huidos de Castilla. Los leoneses vi
eron en esta muerte la mano del rey de Pamplona, y los castellanos una conjura leonesa. En todo caso, Sancho Garcés salió favorecido del magnicidio: al no tener hijos el difunto García, la esposa de Sancho legó el condado de Castilla a su segundo
génito Fernando, reservando Pamplona para el primogénito García.

Fernando casó en 1032 con Sancha, la prometida de su difunto tío, obteniendo como dote las tierras comprendidas entre los ríos Cea y Pisuerga. En 1037, Bermudo III tomó por mujer a Jimena, hermana del difunto conde García, y reclamó las dichas ti
erras, lo que condujo a la guerra entre ambos cuñados. Un año después de la batalla de Tamarón (1037), en la que encontró la muerte Bermudo III, Fernando se corona rey de León (1038) Algunos autores consideran que fue entonces cuando el conde Fer
nando cambió su título por el de "rey de Castilla", aunque sólo aparezca así intitulado en uno de los 24 diplomas que se conservan de su reinado y la historiografía medievalista española actual considere que el primer rey de Castilla fue su hijo
mayor, Sancho.

El trono leonés editar

El conflicto se dilucidó en la batalla de Tamarón, el 4 de septiembre de 1037. Las tropas castellanas venían reforzadas por el ejército del rey García de Pamplona. Bermudo, con el ímpetu propio de su edad, picó espuelas a su caballo Pelagiolo y s
e introdujo en las filas enemigas, donde fue muerto atravesado por una lanza castellana. Los leoneses trasladaron su cuerpo a León y lo depositaron, junto a los de sus padres, en el panteón de la iglesia de San Juan.

Al morir Bermudo sin descendencia, era su hermana Sancha, esposa de Fernando, su sucesora en el trono. Sin embargo, los leoneses tardaron algún tiempo en aceptar a los nuevos monarcas. Durante meses el conde Fernando Flaínez (tío de Rodrigo Díaz
de Vivar según la teoría de Margarita Torres2 ), se negó a entregar la ciudad a quien consideraba un usurpador, si no un asesino. Según la Crónica Silense, Fernando llegó desde Galicia, posiblemente después de someter a los magnates gallegos. Fi
nalmente, tras segurar su posición en la Curia Regia, Fernando y su esposa entraron pacíficamente en León, y "en la era de M.LXX.VI a X de las kalendas de julio (22 de junio de 1038) fue consagrado don Fernando en la iglesia de Santa María de Leó
n y ungido rey por Servando, obispo de feliz recordación de dicha iglesia".

La misma crónica asegura que en los dieciséis primeros años de su reinado no pudo hacer incursiones contra los mahometanos, ocupado en someter a la nobleza del reino. Ello es confirmado por la Crónica najerense:

"Ocupado durante dieciséis años en resolver los conflictos internos de su reino y en domar el feroz talante de algunos de los magnates, ninguna incursión fuera de sus fronteras pudo emprender contra los enemigos exteriores".

Confirmó los nuevos fueros de León, otorgados por su suegro, Alfonso V, mandó seguir observando el código visigótico como ley fundamental del Reino leonés, y se adaptó a los usos y costumbres de su nuevo reino, seguramente influido por su esposa
la reina Sancha.

La guerra con Navarra editar
Artículo principal: Batalla de Atapuerca
La ruptura entre Fernando I y García III:

La buena administración del reino del rey Fernando, con la educación de sus hijos y su legislación y ejército, lo hizo próspero y poderoso. Entonces fue cuando surgió la envidia de su hermano García, nacida por codiciar esa opulencia.
Fernando, que era en todo tranquilo y sosegado, con un natural benigno y piedad sólida, parecía dispuesto en su interior a tolerar los disimulas de la envidia de su hermano. Por eso, cuando aquél enferma en Nájera, corre a visitarlo con su frater
no corazón conmovido, y cuando estaba a su lado, se entera de una conjura para aprisionarle usando de concertadas insidias, lo que impidió el temor a llevarlas a cabo. Fernando puede volver rápidamente a su patria.
En caso contrario, pasó después que, enfermo Fernando, el rey García fue a verle con humildad, ya buscando perdón por su gran crimen o bien por urdir otro mal hecho. Yo estimo que fue máspara fraguar otro atentado que para atender al hermano enf
ermo por lo que fue a verle García, con el fin de adueñarse él solo del reino, y que realmente deseaba a Fernando una dolencia que le alejase para siempre de este mundo, que así discurrenen ocasiones las ansiosas mentes de los reyes. Cuando se p
ercató de todo esto el rey Fernando, movido por la ira, dispuso que arrestasen a García en Cea. Logró éste evadirse con algunos de sus hombres de guerra y desde entonces y con gran furia buscó ya abiertamente la guerra, ansioso de sangre de su he
rmano, y comenzó a devastar todas las fronteras que están a su alcance.
Crónica silense


A los dieciséis años de reinado, Fernando hubo de hacer frente a la guerra contra su hermano mayor, García III de Pamplona. Fernando y García llevaban años disputándose los territorios que su padre había segregado de Castilla y anexionado a Navar
ra (La Bureba, Castilla Vieja, Trasmiera, Encartaciones y los Montes de Oca), realizando constantes incursiones. Las crónicas, claramente partidistas, hacen caer exclusivamente sobre el navarro la responsabilidad del conflicto: estando García enf
ermo en Nájera, fue a consolarle el rey leonés, que, sospechando de su hermano, evitó ser apresado y se puso a salvo. Andando el tiempo, fue el leonés quien enfermó, y su hermano mayor elque le devolvió la visita parecer inocente de toda acusaci
ón y mostrar su buena disposición, pero con el deseo de ver desaparecer al enfermo para ocupar su trono. Fernando aprovechó la ocasión para encerrarle en el castillo de Cea, de donde escapó gracias a su astucia y a la ayuda de varios cómplices.

García se preparó entonces para la guerra, y con algunos moros aliados invadió las tierras de Castilla, rechazando a los emisarios que le propusieron la paz en nombre de su hermano, "proponiéndole que cada uno viviera en paz dentro de su reino y
desistiese de decidir la cuestión por las armas pues ambos eran hermanos y cada uno debía morar pacíficamente en su casa." Así pues, Fernando le salió al encuentro con un fuerte contingente, y ambos ejércitos se encontraron en Atapuerca en 1054.


García se había establecido a mitad del valle de Atapuerca, tres leguas al este de Burgos, pero los leoneses ocuparon de noche un altozano cercano y desde él cayeron al amanecer contra los navarros y sus aliados. Fernando dio orden de coger vivo
a su hermano, porque así se lo había pedido su esposa Sancha. Pero los nobles de León, que no habían olvidado la muerte su rey Vermudo, acabaron con García. Otra versión atribuye su muerte a un grupo de sus propios súbditos, obligados a huir a C
astilla ante las humillaciones y exigencias tributarias de García.

En todo caso, el ejército de García huyó en desbandada, cayendo numerosos prisioneros en manos leonesas, entre ellos buena parte de sus contingentes moros. Fernando recuperó el cuerpo de su hermano y ordenó enterrarlo en la iglesia que éste había
fundado, Santa María de Nájera. La victoria de Fernando tuvo como consecuencia la reincorporación a Castilla de las tierras reclamadas, estableciéndose la frontera en el río Ebro e imponiéndose vasallaje a su joven sobrino Sancho IV, el nuevo re
y de Pamplona.

Reorganización del reino editar

Sometidos los condes leoneses y seguras las fronteras, Fernando I se aplicó a consolidar las estructuras e instituciones de su reino, ya pacificado. Jugó un papel fundamental en la política peninsular y en la configuración del mapa político del s
iglo XI. Asimismo, en cuanto a política legislativa, su labor fue muy importante, reformando algunos aspectos de la Curia regia leonesa, o restableciendo el derecho canónico visigodo mediante diferentes normas recogidas en el Concilio de Coyanza
(1050) ó (1055), que fue presidido por el mismo monarca.

Durante su reinado se introdujeron en la monarquía leonesa las nuevas corrientes europeistas llegadas a la Península Ibérica a través de Navarra. Entre ellas destacan su relación con Cluny y algunas de las primeras manifestaciones artísticas del
nuevo arte románico en la Península Ibérica: la cripta de San Antolín de la catedral de Palencia y el Pórtico real de la Colegiata de San Isidoro de León (1063), convertida después en panteón real.

Política exterior editar

A partir de ese momento, se inició la política expansiva castellana, sobre todo hacia los territorios musulmanes meridionales, muy debilitados por la división de al-Andalus, tras la caídadel Califato Cordobés y el surgimiento de numerosos reinos
de taifas. Se reanudó así, y ya de forma definitiva y decidida, la Reconquista en la zona occidental de la Península Ibérica.

Uno de los principales resultados de la politica de Fernando I fue el sometimiento de varios de los reinos de taifas y el cobro de las parias (impuesto por la protección y por no ser atacados) a las taifas más ricas, como Toledo, Sevilla, Zaragoz
a o Badajoz. A la vez, se produjeron varios ataques y conquistas. Destacan la conquista de las plazas portuguesas de Lamego (1057) y Viseo (1058) y la toma definitiva (1060) de las de SanEsteban de Gormaz, Berlanga de Duero y demás castillos y p
lazas del río Bordecorés, en territorio del alto Duero. Asimismo, las tomas temporales de Toledo (1062) y Zaragoza (1063), y la definitiva de la estratégica Coimbra (1064), junto al río Mondego, que puso bajo el mando del conde mozárabe Sisnando
Davídiz.

Respondiendo a los pactos acordados, Fernando I envió a su hijo, el infante Sancho, en ayuda de al-Muqtadir, rey taifa de Zaragoza, cuando la plaza de Graus se vio atacada (1063) por Ramiro I de Aragón, su hermanastro, que fue derrotado y muerto.
Posteriormente, condujo una expedición de castigo al valle del Ebro (1065) con el fin de vengar una matanza de cristianos acaecida en Zaragoza y reclamar a al-Muqtadir el vasallaje y el pago de las parias, que no habían sido dadas. Tras este cas
tigo, la expedición continuó hacia Valencia, donde su rey Abd al-Malik ben Abd al-Aziz al-Muzaffar Nizam al-Dawla, tras resistir el asedio de la ciudad, plantó lucha en la batalla de Paterna, donde acabó derrotado. Al poco, Fernando I se sintió e
nfermo y ordenó la vuelta a León.

Muerte editar

Fernando I llegó a León el día de Nochebuena de 1065 y su primera visita fue para la iglesia de San Isidoro, encomendándose a los santos para que le auxiliaran en su tránsito a la otra vida. Aquella noche acompañó en el coro a los clérigos, salmo
diando los maitines en rito mozárabe, y al clarear el día de Navidad vio que la vida se le acababa. Comulgó en la Santa Misa, siguiendo el rito, bajo las dos especies, y a continuación fue llevado en brazos al lecho. Al amanecer del día 26, viend
o aproximarse su final, hizo venir a obispos, abades y clérigos, mandó que le vistieran el manto regio, le colocasen la corona y le trasladasen a la iglesia. Hincó las rodillas ante el altar con las reliquias de san Isidoro y san Vicente, y oró y
suplicó a Dios que acogiese su alma en paz:

Tuyo es el poder, tuyo es el reino, Señor. Encima estás de todos los reyes y a ti se entregan todos los reinos del cielo y la tierra. Y de ese modo el reino que de ti recibí y gobernépor el tiempo que Tú, por tu libre voluntad quisiste, te l
o reintegro ahora. Te pido que acojas mi alma, que sale de la vorágine de este mundo, y la acojas con paz.
Crónica Silense

Después se despojó de manto y corona, se tendió en el suelo y se sometió a la ceremonia de la penitencia pública, vistiendo un sayal y recibiendo la ceniza sobre su cabeza. Al mediodía del día siguiente, 27 de diciembre de 1065, festividad de san
Juan Evangelista, el Rey falleció rodeado de obispos, tras un reinado de 27 años, 6 meses y 12 días, a unos 55 años de edad, que pocos rebasaban en aquel tiempo y que el cronista juzgó "buena vejez y plenitud de días".

Fue enterrado en el Panteón real de San Isidoro que él había construido, junto a la tumba de su padre, Sancho el Mayor, Rex Pirinaeorum montium et Tolosae 3 . Sobre el cobertor de su tumba grabaron el siguiente epitafio:

"Aquí está enterrado Fernando Magno, rey de toda España, hijo de Sancho rey de los Pirineos y Tolosa. Trasladó a León los cuerpos santos de san Isidoro arzobispo, desde Sevilla, y de Vicente mártir, desde Ávila, y construyó esta iglesia de pi
edra, la que antes era de barro. Hizo tributarios suyos, con las armas, a todos los sarracenos de España.Se apoderó de Coimbra, Lamego, Viseo y otras plazas. Se adueñó por la fuerza de los reinos de García y Vermudo. Falleció el 27 de diciembre d
e (la era) 1103".

A su muerte, en vez de respetar el derecho visigodo y leonés que impedía dividir las posesiones reales entre los herederos, siguió los principios jurídicos navarros de considerar al Reinocomo un patrimonio familiar. Así, de forma similar a cómo
hiciera su padre con él y el resto de hermanos y hermanastros, repartió sus territorios entre todos sus hijos. Según su testamento: su primogénito Sancho II heredó Castilla, que se convirtió así en reino, y las parias de Zaragoza.

Fernando nunca se tituló "rey de Castilla". Castilla no era un reino y sólo aparece en un par de documentos, como de rebote, tras el título leonés.
Martínez Díez, Gonzalo

El resto de sus dominios los repartió entre los demás hijos: Alfonso recibió el reino principal y predominante, León, y las parias de Toledo García el de Galicia, el territorio portugués y las parias de Badajoz y Sevilla a sus hijas -además del s
eñorío sobre todos los monasterios del reino- Elvira le correspondió el señorío de la ciudad de Toro y a Urraca, la plaza de Zamora. Tras la guerra civil entre los hermanos, Alfonso VI seconvertiría en el primer rey de la Corona de León y Castil
lacita requerida.

Matrimonio y descendencia editar

Casó con Sancha de León, hija de Alfonso V de León y hermana de Bermudo III de León. De esta unión nacieron:

* Urraca (c. 1033 - 1101), señora de Zamora.
* Sancho (1038 - 1072), rey de Castilla como Sancho I, y de León como Sancho II (1065-1072).
* Alfonso (1040 - 1109), rey de León (1065 - 1072) y de León, Castilla y Galicia (1072-1109), como Alfonso VI.
* Elvira, señora de Toro.
* García (1042 - 1090), rey de Galicia (1066 - 1071 y 1072 - 1073).

Según la Crónica silense:

El rey Fernando educó a sus hijos e hijas instruyéndolos en primer lugar en las disciplinas liberales, que él mismo había estudiado eruditamente, y luego dispuso que sus hijos, a la edad oportuna, aprendiesen las artes ecuestres y los ejercic
ios militares y venatorios al estilo español, ya las hijas, lejos de toda ociosidad, las formó en las virtudes femeninas honestas.

Referencias editar

Bibliografía editar

* Blanco Lozano, Pilar. Colección diplomática de Fernando I (1037-1065). León: Centro de Estudios e Investigación "San Isidoro" (CSIC-CECEL) y Archivo Histórico Diocesano, 1987. ISBN 84-00-06653-7.
* Martínez Díez, Gonzalo. El Condado de Castilla (711-1065). La Historia frente a la leyenda. Valladolid, Junta de Castilla y León, 2004. ISBN 84-8718-275-8
* Sánchez Candeira, Alfonso. Castilla y León en el siglo XI. Estudio del reinado de Fernando I. Madrid: Real Academia de la Historia, 1999. 349 p. ISBN 84-89512-41-8.
* Viñayo González, Antonio. Fernando I, el Magno (1035-1065). Burgos: La Olmeda, 1999. 309 p. ISBN 84-89915-10-5.

Notas editar

1. ↑

"Podemos y debemos afirmar con absoluta certeza el hecho de que Fernando nunca fue rey de Castilla, y que ésta nunca cambió su naturaleza de condado, subordinado al rey de León,para convertirse en un reino, hasta la muerte de Fernando
I el año 1065."
(Gonzalo Martínez Díez 2004: p 713).

2. ↑ El linaje del Cid.
3. ↑ Aunque Sancho tiene otro sarcófago en Oña y su lugar último de reposo sigue siendo objeto de discusión.

Ferdinand I
http://trees.ancestry.com/rd?f=image&guid=cf365328-ad72-4328-b540-be07979753d9&tid=261097&pid=-824041224

867789476. Konge Ferdinand I SANCHOSSON av Castilla-Leon was born in 1017. He was a Konge in 1035 in Kastiljen. (20627) han var en dyktig hersker, som forbedret de gamle vestgotiske lover, reformerte klostertukten og utvidet Kastiljens makt betydelig. He was a Keiser in 1056.(20628) Over deler av Portugal og det nuværende Ny-Kastiljen utbredte han sin makt og antok 1056 keisertitel for å betegne sin overhøyhet over de andre spanske fyrster. Dermed kom han i strid med keiser Henrik III av Tyskland. Men han ødela selv Kastiljens førerstilling ved å dele sitt rike mellom sine tre sønner Sancho, Alfons og Garcia, fanske som hans far hadde gjort. Med Sancha fikk han landene mellom Pisegra og Cea. He died on 27 Dec 1065. (20629) He was married to Dronning Sancha (Beata) ALFONSDTR av Leon og Kastiljen in 1032.

Fernando I De Castilla
http://trees.ancestry.com/rd?f=document&guid=8d3f42c0-bfe5-41b7-9940-d09757cd2c54&tid=10145763&pid=-579037729

Fernando I De Castilla
http://trees.ancestry.com/rd?f=document&guid=8d3f42c0-bfe5-41b7-9940-d09757cd2c54&tid=10145763&pid=-579037729

"El Grande" REY FERNANDO I DE CASTILLA Murió in 1065 in León, España.. Rey de Castilla de León y de Navarra. Hijo segundo de Sancho III, tuvo que luchar a la muerte de este, contra Bermudo III de León, que fue vencido y muerto en Támara (1037). Confirmó y perfeccionó las leyes de los Godos, conquistó parte de Navarra a su hermano García IV y, aprovechando el desmembramiento del Califato de Córdoba, hizo a los moros una guerra encarnizada, sometiendo a su soberanía a los emires de Zaragoza y Toledo

He ruled from 1035 to 1065. He became KIng by conquering Leon and Asturias in 1037. In 1056 he declared himself Emperor of Spain, having disposed of his cousin Garcia in 1054.

Ferdinand I (1017 - 24 June 1065), called the Great (El Magno), was the Count of Castile from his uncle's death 1029 and the King of León, through his wife, after defeating his brother-in-law in 1037. He was the son of Sancho III of Navarre and Mayor of Castile, and is usually recognised as the first King of Castile. He had himself crowned Emperor of Spain in 1056.

Ferdinand was barely in his teens when García Sánchez, Count of Castile, was assassinated by a party of exiled Castilian noblemen as he was entering the church of John the Baptist in León, where he had gone to marry Sancha, sister of Bermudo III. In his role as feudal overlord, Sancho III of Navarre nominated his younger son Ferdinand, born to the deceased count's sister Mayor, as successor, and further arranged for Ferdinand to marry García'a intended bride, Sancha of León.

On his father's death, Ferdinand continued as count of Castile, now recognizing the suzerainty of his brother-in-law Bermudo III, but they fell out and on 4 September 1037 Bermudo was killed in battle with Fernando at Tamarón. Ferdinand took possession of León by right of his wife, who was the heiress presumptive, and the next year had himself formally crowned king of León and Castile. He overran the Moorish section of Galicia, and set up his vassal as count in what is now northern Portugal. With northern Iberia consolidated, Ferdinand, in 1039, proclaimed himself emperor of Hispania. The use of the title was resented by the Emperor Henry III and Pope Victor II in 1055 as implying a claim to the headship of Christendom and as a usurpation of the Roman Empire. It did not, however, mean more than that the sovereign of León was the chief of the princes of the Iberian peninsula. Ferdinand's brothers García V of Navarre and Ramiro I of Aragón opposed his power, but were both killed in ensuing battles, leaving Ferdinand preeminent.

Ferdinand died on the feast of Saint John the Baptist, 24 June 1065, in León, with many manifestations of ardent piety, having laid aside his crown and royal mantle, dressed in the robe of a monk and lying on a bier covered with ashes, which was placed before the altar of the Basilica of San Isidoro. At his death, Ferdinand divided up his kingdom between his three sons: Sancho, who received Castile; Alfonso, who received León; and Garcia, who received Galicia. His two daughters each received cities: Elvira received Toro and Urraca received Zamora. By giving them his dominion, he wanted them to abide by the split in the kingdom and respect his wishes. However, Sancho (born 1032), being the oldest, believed that he deserved more of the kingdom, and therefore sought to gain possession of the divided parts of the kingdom that had been given to his siblings.


References
This article incorporates text from the Encyclopædia Britannica, Eleventh Edition, a publication now in the public domain.

Conde de Castilla (1029-1035)
I Rey de Castilla (1035-1065)
Rey de León (1037-1065)
A la muerte de su cuñado Bermudo (o Vermudo) III de León, quedaron reunida lascoronas de León y Castilla, a las que se agregó Asturias.
Una vez rey de Castilla, introdujo notables modificaciones en la legislación goda, que culminaron en el Concilio de Coyanza (1050), donde se reguló también la administración judicial y la vida de los eclesiásticos. Realizó también fructíferas campañas para extender sus dominios. Conquistó las tierras del sur del Ebro pertenecientes a su hermano García IV, de Navarra; aprovechando las disensiones que minaba el califato de Córdoba, combatió a os moros y conquistó Badajoz y otras comarcas vecinas y sometió a su vasallaje a los emires de Zaragoza y de Toledo en 1057. En 1064 se rindió Coimbra, llegando su dominio hasta el Mondego, y poco después marchó con sus ejércitos hasta Valencia, siendo ésta la primera vez que los castellanos pudieron llegar hasta el Mediterráneo. Sintiendo seriamente lesionada su salud, decidió regresa a León, donde murió crisitanamente, en medio de la consideración de sus súbditos, que le dieron elcalificativo de Magno. Sus estados fueron repartidos entre sus hijos Sancho, Alfonso y García.

1 NAME el Major //
2 GIVN el Major
2 SURN
2 NICK el Major

Name Prefix:<NPFX> King Name Suffix:<NSFX> I, Of Castile "The Great"

Fernando ?den Store? var konge av Castilla 1035 - 1065 og konge av Leon 1037 -
1065.
Han var en dyktig hersker som forbedret de gamle vestgotiske lovene, reformerte
klostertukten og utvidet Castillas makt betydelig. Han utbredte sin makt også over deler av
Portugal og det nåværende Ny-Castilla. Med sin hustru, Sancha, fikk han landene mellom
Pisuerga og Cea.
I 1056 antok han keisertitel for å betegne sin overhøyhet over de andre spanske fyrster
og kom derved i strid med keiser Henrik III av Tyskland. Han ødela imidlertid selv Castillas
førerstilling ved å dele sitt rike mellom sine tre sønner Sancho, Alfons og Garcia, slik hans far
også hadde gjort.

Spain, unlike Britain, never fell outside of history after the collapse of the Western Empire <romania.htm>, which gives us a continuous record of rule from Rome through the Visigoths and beyond. Nevertheless, Spain underwent her own unique transformation in the trauma of the Islamic conquest. The Visigoths <germania.htm> were crushed and for almost three centuries a revived Christian kingdom, Asturias, could do little more than cling to the north coast and the northwest corner of Iberia. Nevertheless, more than one Christian state eventually organized and gradually reconquered the peninsula. Navarre (Navarra), Aragón, and Barcelona all began as march counties of Francia. Asturias/Galicia/León could claim direct succession from the Visigoths, while Castile (Castilla) was a march of León. There were at different times up to five different Spanish Christian kingdoms. These were all eventually consolidated. Portugal, which began as a county of León, was the only kingdom to ultimately maintain its independence of the rest of Spain. Spain was sometimes styled an "empire." Ferdinand I and Alfonso VII of Castile were sometimes styled "Emperor," but in Mediaeval Europe, the Popes <popes.htm> regarded such a title as theirs to dispense, and no self-proclaimed emperors were going to get cooperation from the Church. In fact, Alfonso X <perifran.htm> of Castile was actually elected Holy Roman Emperor in 1257, but nothing came of it all. Alfonso never went to Germany, distracted by civil war (1275) and rebellion (1282), and it was already clear that the Pope had no intention of crowning him. When the Pope finally crowned Emperor a King of Spain, it was Charles V <francia.htm> (Charles I of Spain), a 1/4 German Hapsburg who had been born and raised in Belgium. The Imperial crown then passed to Charles's brother Ferdinand of Austria, not to his son Philip II of Spain. [cf. J.H. Elliott, Imperial Spain, 1469-1716, Mentor, 1963; Adam Wandruszka, The House of Hapsburg, Anchor Books, 1965; & Denys Hay, Europe in the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries, Longmans, Green and Co. Ltd., 1966.]
An issue of note concerns the names of the Kings. Since the major languages of Christendom use many of the same names, it is often possible to give translations. This was formerly the most common, so that in English one talked about "Johns" and "Peters" in the Spanish Kingdoms. This is now sometimes frowned upon, but the desire to use the "native" language of the country in question can produce some gaffs: One occasionally sees Kings of Portugal called "Juan," when this is actually just the Spanish, not the Portuguese, version of "John" -- that would be "João." Since there are other languages in the Iberian Peninsula -- Catalan, Basque, and Galician -- besides standard (Castilian) Spanish and Portuguese, it is often a good question just what vernacular language was being used in a particular time and place. There is also the complication that the Kings of Navarre marry into French Royalty and nobility and so after 1234 are all French speaking. The written language during much of the period, of course, would just be Latin.

"John" is "Juan" in Castilian, "Xoán" in Galician, "Ion" or "Jon" in Basque, "Joan" in Catalan, "Jean" in French, and "Johannes" in Latin (another form, "Iban," only occurs in the patronymic "Ibañez"). Simply using "John" would seem to be the least confusing and the most revealing. However, Portuguese and Spanish (Castilian) versions are given for most of the names (somewhat irregularly). Some names -- "Alfonso" and "Sancho" -- really do not have English equivalents. Sancho, the name of many Kings of Navarre, is written "Santxo" in Basque and may in fact have originally been a Basque name, though its origin in now obscure ("Santius" was the Latinized version). "Alfonso" becomes "Alphonse" in French, and this has been borrowed into English to an extent, but it is not very common, so "Alfonso," like "Sancho," is simply given in its Spanish form. Sometimes overlooked, again, is that the Portuguese, "Afonso," is different. Another problem is the English equivalent for Castilian "Juana," the feminine form of "Juan." Although this is simply "Jeanne" in French, or "Jone" in Basque, in English it could be "Joan," "Joanna," "Joanne," "Jane," or even "Jeanne." "Ferdinand" and "Fernando" are both of Spanish derivation, originally "Ferdinando." This was itself Visigothic, and the form now most familiar in English, "Ferdinand," is the version of the name as it passed into German with the marriage of Juana the Mad of Castile to Philip of Hapsburg. One of their sons was then the Emperor Ferdinand I <francia.htm>. He was raised in Spain, speaking Spanish. His grandfather, Ferdinand II of Aragón, contemplated leaving the kingdom of Aragón to him in his will but thought better of it. Later, he was given the rule of Austria by his brother. Elected king of Hungary and Bohemia, he then succeeded his brother as Emperor.

His brother, of course, was the Emperor Charles V. It is "Charles" in French and English, "Carlos" in Spanish and Portuguese, "Carolus" in Latin, and "Karl" in German. The story about Charles is that he only spoke German to his horse. He was raised at the court of his grandfather, the Emperor Maximilian I, in the Netherlands, speaking Flemish, where his name would be, I think, "Karel," as in Dutch. There is a monument to Charles V in Guadalajara, Mexico. It actually calls him "King Charles V" ("Rey Carlos V"), which is not quite right since, as King of Spain, he was Charles I. All this seems to confuse everybody.

The colors here go with the kingdoms, but as the kingdoms combine, the color of the dominant kingdom supersedes the others. Thus yellow, the color for Castile (which started as a County of León, was detached by Sancho the Great of Navarre, and then was willed to his son Ferdinand I as a separate kingdom), is also the color for Spain as a whole, as Castile absorbs León, Aragón, and then, briefly, Portugal. A minor variation is that the red is darker for the Kingdom of the Asturias, of which León was essentially a continuation. The change in name took place after one of the characteristic divisions and then recombinations, several of which we see later, between brothers, sometimes brothers who become hostile and murderous to each other.

The Islâmic <islam.htm> rulers of Spain, 756-1492, are listed separately from this page, with the other rulers of Islâm, linked in the table at right. The first three hundred years after the Islâmic Conquest were tough times, naturally, for Christian Spain, which took quite a while to even get organized in some areas. These years were largely those of the Omayyad Amirs and Caliphs, who may be said to have presided over the Golden Age of Islâmic Spain. The suprisingly rapid decline of the Omayyads in the 11th century quickly led to complete political fragmentation and to grave vulnerability to the rising Christian Kingdoms.

It should be noted that although Spanish Christians later referred to all Spanish, and also North African, Moslems as "Moors," this lumps together ethnically and linguistically distinct peoples, particularly those who were actually Arabs and those who were of North African Berber derivation. There was sometimes tension and conflict between these groups in Islâmic Spain. "Moors" also would mean native Spaniard converts to Islâm, the Muwalladûn. If one then considers sub-Saharan black African Moslems as "Moors," like Shakespeare's Othello, this adds another group, one that would have been noticeable in North Africa but probably not of much significance in Spain. To many people, however, "Moor" always means "black," and this is a serious confusion. Indeed, a factor in the 11th century in Spain were slave troops, the S.aqâliba, that consisted, not of Africans, but of captives from Christian Europe. Also confusing is the tradition of calling Christians in Islâmic Spain "Mozarabs."

Navarre, which is perhaps known too generally by the French version of its name, was originally a kingdom of the Basques, an apparently autochthonous people whose language has no demonstrable affinities to any other in the world, much less to any in the area. Interesting genetic information about this is reported by Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza <trees.htm> in Genes, Peoples, and Languages [University of California Press, 2000]. The Basque region turns out to be the center of a characteristic gene component of European populations. Cavalli-Sforza says:
...the Basques once inhabited a much larger territory than today... During the last Paleolothic period the Basque region extended over almost the entire area where ancient cave paintings have been found. There are some cues [sic, "clues"?] that Basque descends from a language spoken 35,000 to 40,000 years ago, during the first occupation of France by modern humans... The artists of these caves would have spoken a language of the first, preagricultural Europeans, from which modern Basque is derived. [pp.120-121]

Thus, neither the French nor the Spanish ("Navarra") version of the name of the kingdom is necessarily more "accurate" than the Basque version, "Nafarroa." While Navarre was the dominant Spanish kingdom under Sancho the Great, its power and extent declined quickly and decisively. Of the seven Basque provinces in Spain and France (where only about 12,000 people speak Basque any longer), only two ended up belonging to Navarre proper. I have not noticed Basque nationalists claiming to have invented art (i.e. the cave paintings), but they apparently would have as reasonable a claim as anyone.

Spain, unlike Britain, never fell outside of history after the collapse of the Western Empire <romania.htm>, which gives us a continuous record of rule from Rome through the Visigoths and beyond. Nevertheless, Spain underwent her own unique transformation in the trauma of the Islamic conquest. The Visigoths <germania.htm> were crushed and for almost three centuries a revived Christian kingdom, Asturias, could do little more than cling to the north coast and the northwest corner of Iberia. Nevertheless, more than one Christian state eventually organized and gradually reconquered the peninsula. Navarre (Navarra), Aragón, and Barcelona all began as march counties of Francia. Asturias/Galicia/León could claim direct succession from the Visigoths, while Castile (Castilla) was a march of León. There were at different times up to five different Spanish Christian kingdoms. These were all eventually consolidated. Portugal, which began as a county of León, was the only kingdom to ultimately maintain its independence of the rest of Spain. Spain was sometimes styled an "empire." Ferdinand I and Alfonso VII of Castile were sometimes styled "Emperor," but in Mediaeval Europe, the Popes <popes.htm> regarded such a title as theirs to dispense, and no self-proclaimed emperors were going to get cooperation from the Church. In fact, Alfonso X <perifran.htm> of Castile was actually elected Holy Roman Emperor in 1257, but nothing came of it all. Alfonso never went to Germany, distracted by civil war (1275) and rebellion (1282), and it was already clear that the Pope had no intention of crowning him. When the Pope finally crowned Emperor a King of Spain, it was Charles V <francia.htm> (Charles I of Spain), a 1/4 German Hapsburg who had been born and raised in Belgium. The Imperial crown then passed to Charles's brother Ferdinand of Austria, not to his son Philip II of Spain. [cf. J.H. Elliott, Imperial Spain, 1469-1716, Mentor, 1963; Adam Wandruszka, The House of Hapsburg, Anchor Books, 1965; & Denys Hay, Europe in the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries, Longmans, Green and Co. Ltd., 1966.]
An issue of note concerns the names of the Kings. Since the major languages of Christendom use many of the same names, it is often possible to give translations. This was formerly the most common, so that in English one talked about "Johns" and "Peters" in the Spanish Kingdoms. This is now sometimes frowned upon, but the desire to use the "native" language of the country in question can produce some gaffs: One occasionally sees Kings of Portugal called "Juan," when this is actually just the Spanish, not the Portuguese, version of "John" -- that would be "João." Since there are other languages in the Iberian Peninsula -- Catalan, Basque, and Galician -- besides standard (Castilian) Spanish and Portuguese, it is often a good question just what vernacular language was being used in a particular time and place. There is also the complication that the Kings of Navarre marry into French Royalty and nobility and so after 1234 are all French speaking. The written language during much of the period, of course, would just be Latin.

"John" is "Juan" in Castilian, "Xoán" in Galician, "Ion" or "Jon" in Basque, "Joan" in Catalan, "Jean" in French, and "Johannes" in Latin (another form, "Iban," only occurs in the patronymic "Ibañez"). Simply using "John" would seem to be the least confusing and the most revealing. However, Portuguese and Spanish (Castilian) versions are given for most of the names (somewhat irregularly). Some names -- "Alfonso" and "Sancho" -- really do not have English equivalents. Sancho, the name of many Kings of Navarre, is written "Santxo" in Basque and may in fact have originally been a Basque name, though its origin in now obscure ("Santius" was the Latinized version). "Alfonso" becomes "Alphonse" in French, and this has been borrowed into English to an extent, but it is not very common, so "Alfonso," like "Sancho," is simply given in its Spanish form. Sometimes overlooked, again, is that the Portuguese, "Afonso," is different. Another problem is the English equivalent for Castilian "Juana," the feminine form of "Juan." Although this is simply "Jeanne" in French, or "Jone" in Basque, in English it could be "Joan," "Joanna," "Joanne," "Jane," or even "Jeanne." "Ferdinand" and "Fernando" are both of Spanish derivation, originally "Ferdinando." This was itself Visigothic, and the form now most familiar in English, "Ferdinand," is the version of the name as it passed into German with the marriage of Juana the Mad of Castile to Philip of Hapsburg. One of their sons was then the Emperor Ferdinand I <francia.htm>. He was raised in Spain, speaking Spanish. His grandfather, Ferdinand II of Aragón, contemplated leaving the kingdom of Aragón to him in his will but thought better of it. Later, he was given the rule of Austria by his brother. Elected king of Hungary and Bohemia, he then succeeded his brother as Emperor.

His brother, of course, was the Emperor Charles V. It is "Charles" in French and English, "Carlos" in Spanish and Portuguese, "Carolus" in Latin, and "Karl" in German. The story about Charles is that he only spoke German to his horse. He was raised at the court of his grandfather, the Emperor Maximilian I, in the Netherlands, speaking Flemish, where his name would be, I think, "Karel," as in Dutch. There is a monument to Charles V in Guadalajara, Mexico. It actually calls him "King Charles V" ("Rey Carlos V"), which is not quite right since, as King of Spain, he was Charles I. All this seems to confuse everybody.

The colors here go with the kingdoms, but as the kingdoms combine, the color of the dominant kingdom supersedes the others. Thus yellow, the color for Castile (which started as a County of León, was detached by Sancho the Great of Navarre, and then was willed to his son Ferdinand I as a separate kingdom), is also the color for Spain as a whole, as Castile absorbs León, Aragón, and then, briefly, Portugal. A minor variation is that the red is darker for the Kingdom of the Asturias, of which León was essentially a continuation. The change in name took place after one of the characteristic divisions and then recombinations, several of which we see later, between brothers, sometimes brothers who become hostile and murderous to each other.

The Islâmic <islam.htm> rulers of Spain, 756-1492, are listed separately from this page, with the other rulers of Islâm, linked in the table at right. The first three hundred years after the Islâmic Conquest were tough times, naturally, for Christian Spain, which took quite a while to even get organized in some areas. These years were largely those of the Omayyad Amirs and Caliphs, who may be said to have presided over the Golden Age of Islâmic Spain. The suprisingly rapid decline of the Omayyads in the 11th century quickly led to complete political fragmentation and to grave vulnerability to the rising Christian Kingdoms.

It should be noted that although Spanish Christians later referred to all Spanish, and also North African, Moslems as "Moors," this lumps together ethnically and linguistically distinct peoples, particularly those who were actually Arabs and those who were of North African Berber derivation. There was sometimes tension and conflict between these groups in Islâmic Spain. "Moors" also would mean native Spaniard converts to Islâm, the Muwalladûn. If one then considers sub-Saharan black African Moslems as "Moors," like Shakespeare's Othello, this adds another group, one that would have been noticeable in North Africa but probably not of much significance in Spain. To many people, however, "Moor" always means "black," and this is a serious confusion. Indeed, a factor in the 11th century in Spain were slave troops, the S.aqâliba, that consisted, not of Africans, but of captives from Christian Europe. Also confusing is the tradition of calling Christians in Islâmic Spain "Mozarabs."

Navarre, which is perhaps known too generally by the French version of its name, was originally a kingdom of the Basques, an apparently autochthonous people whose language has no demonstrable affinities to any other in the world, much less to any in the area. Interesting genetic information about this is reported by Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza <trees.htm> in Genes, Peoples, and Languages [University of California Press, 2000]. The Basque region turns out to be the center of a characteristic gene component of European populations. Cavalli-Sforza says:
...the Basques once inhabited a much larger territory than today... During the last Paleolothic period the Basque region extended over almost the entire area where ancient cave paintings have been found. There are some cues [sic, "clues"?] that Basque descends from a language spoken 35,000 to 40,000 years ago, during the first occupation of France by modern humans... The artists of these caves would have spoken a language of the first, preagricultural Europeans, from which modern Basque is derived. [pp.120-121]

Thus, neither the French nor the Spanish ("Navarra") version of the name of the kingdom is necessarily more "accurate" than the Basque version, "Nafarroa." While Navarre was the dominant Spanish kingdom under Sancho the Great, its power and extent declined quickly and decisively. Of the seven Basque provinces in Spain and France (where only about 12,000 people speak Basque any longer), only two ended up belonging to Navarre proper. I have not noticed Basque nationalists claiming to have invented art (i.e. the cave paintings), but they apparently would have as reasonable a claim as anyone.

Ferdinand I of León
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Ferdinand I, called the Great (in his time, El Magno) (1017–León, 1065), was the count of Castile from his uncle's death in 1029 and the king of León—through his wife—after defeating his brother-in-law in 1037 until his death in 1065. He was crowned Emperor of All Hispania in 1056.

Ferdinand was barely in his teens when García Sanchez, Count of Castile, was assassinated by a party of exiled Castilian noblemen as he was entering the church of St John the Baptist in León, where he had gone to marry Sancha, sister of Bermudo III. In his role as feudal overlord, Sancho III of Navarre nominated his second legitimate son Ferdinand, born to the deceased count's sister Munia, as successor, and further arranged for Ferdinand to marry García'a intended bride, Sancha of León.

On his father's death, Ferdinand continued as count of Castile, now recognizing the suzerainty of his brother-in-law Bermudo III, but they fell out and on 4 September 1037 Bermudo was killed in battle with Fernando at Tamarón. Ferdinand took possession of León by right of his wife, who was the heiress presumptive, and the next year had himself formally crowned king of León and Castile. He overran the Moorish section of Galicia, and set up his vassal as count in what is now northern Portugal. With northern Iberia consolidated, Ferdinand, in 1039, proclaimed himself emperor of Hispania. The use of the title was resented by the Emperor Henry III and Pope Victor II in 1055 as implying a claim to the headship of Christendom and as a usurpation of the Roman Empire. It did not, however, mean more than that the sovereign of León was the chief of the princes of the Iberian peninsula, and that Iberia was independent of the Holy Roman Empire. Ferdinand's brothers García V of Navarre and Ramiro I of Aragón opposed his power, but were both killed in ensuing battles, leaving Ferdinand preeminent.

Ferdinand died on the feast of Saint John the Baptist, 24 June 1065, in León, with many manifestations of ardent piety, having laid aside his crown and royal mantle, dressed in the robe of a monk and lying on a bier covered with ashes, which was placed before the altar of the church of Saint Isidore. At his death, Ferdinand divided up his kingdom between his three sons: Sancho, who received Castile; Alfonso, who received León; and Garcia, who received Galicia. His two daughters each received cities: Elvira received Toro and Urraca received Zamora. By giving them his dominion, he wanted them to abide by the split in the kingdom and respect his wishes. However, Sancho (born 1032), being the oldest, believed that he deserved more of the kingdom, and therefore sought to gain possession of the divided parts of the kingdom that had been given to his siblings.

(note: the Dutch version of Wikipedia says that Ferdinand died on 27 December 1065 ?)


[edit] References
This article incorporates text from the Encyclopædia Britannica Eleventh Edition, a publication now in the public domain.
Preceded by
Sancho I Count of Castile
1029-1037 Succeeded by
Title Extinct
Preceded by
Bermudo III King of León
1037-1065 Succeeded by
Alfonso VI (in Leon)
Sancho II (in Castile)
Garcia (in Galicia)
Vacant
Title last held by
Bermudo III Emperor of Spain
1056 – 1065 Vacant
Title next held by
Alfonso VI of Castile

Ferdinand I or Ferdinand the Great,d. 1065, Spanish king of Castile (1035?65) and León (1037?65). He inherited Castile from his father, Sancho III of Navarre, conquered León, and took parts of Navarre from his brother García. Ferdinand fought successfully against the Moors and reduced to vassalage the Moorish kings of Zaragoza, Badajoz, Seville, and Toledo. At the Council of Coyanza (1050) he confirmed the laws of Alfonso V and introduced church reforms. He divided his kingdom among his sons: Castile went to Sancho II, León to Alfonso VI, and Galicia to García.

After his troops killed his brother Garcia IV, King of Navarre in 1054, he
assumed rule of Navarre. On his death, he divided his kingdom amongst his
three sons, Sancho, Alfonso, and Garcia. By 1037, the male line of the house
of Leon had become extinct, so Ferdinand united the kingdom with his own. The
history of Leon is identical with that of Castile,until 1157 when Leon became
an independent kingdom. Ferdinand III, King of Castile, inherited the throne
of Leon in 1230, and Leon & Castile became as one: Castile.

After his troops killed his brother Garcia IV, King of Navarre in 1054, he
assumed rule of Navarre. On his death, he divided his kingdom amongst his
three sons, Sancho, Alfonso, and Garcia. By 1037, the male line of the house
of Leon had become extinct, so Ferdinand united the kingdom with his own. The
history of Leon is identical with that of Castile,until 1157 when Leon became
an independent kingdom. Ferdinand III, King of Castile, inherited the throne
of Leon in 1230, and Leon & Castile became as one: Castile.

After his troops killed his brother Garcia IV, King of Navarre in 1054, he
assumed rule of Navarre. On his death, he divided his kingdom amongst his
three sons, Sancho, Alfonso, and Garcia. By 1037, the male line of the house
of Leon had become extinct, so Ferdinand united the kingdom with his own. The
history of Leon is identical with that of Castile,until 1157 when Leon became
an independent kingdom. Ferdinand III, King of Castile, inherited the throne
of Leon in 1230, and Leon & Castile became as one: Castile.

<a href="http://www.britannica.com/eb/article?eu=34623&tocid=0">A biography of Fernando I</a>

After his troops killed his brother Garcia IV, King of Navarre in 1054, he
assumed rule of Navarre. On his death, he divided his kingdom amongst his
three sons, Sancho, Alfonso, and Garcia. By 1037, the male line of the house
of Leon had become extinct, so Ferdinand united the kingdom with his own. The
history of Leon is identical with that of Castile,until 1157 when Leon became
an independent kingdom. Ferdinand III, King of Castile, inherited the throne
of Leon in 1230, and Leon & Castile became as one: Castile.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]