== Notes for [[Item:Q88097|Q88097]] ==

This article is about the Seleucid King of the third century BC. For the king of Commagene of the first century BC, see Antiochus I Theos of Commagene.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antiochus_I_Soter

Gold stater of Antiochus I minted at Ai-Khanoum, c. 275 BC. Obverse: Diademed head of Antiochus right. Reverse: Nude Apollo seated on omphalos left, leaning on bow and holding two arrows. Greek legend: BAΣIΛEΩΣ ANTIOXOY (of King Antiochos). Δ monogram of Ai-Khanoum in left field.

Silver coin of Antiochus I. The reverse shows Apollo seated on an omphalos. The Greek inscription reads ΒΑΣΙΛΕΩΣ ΑΝΤΙΟΧΟΥ (of king Antiochus). Antiochus I Soter (Greek: Αντίοχος Α' Σωτήρ, i.e. Antiochus the Savior, unknown – 261 BC), was a king of the Hellenistic Seleucid Empire. He reigned in 281–261 BC. Antiochus I was half Persian, his mother Apama being one of the eastern princesses whom Alexander the Great had given as wives to his generals in 324 BC. In 294 BC, prior to the death of his father Seleucus I, Antiochus married his stepmother, Stratonice, daughter of Demetrius Poliorcetes. His elderly father reportedly instigated the marriage after discovering that his son was in danger of dying of lovesickness. Stratonice bore five children to Antiochus: Seleucus (he was executed for rebellion), Laodice, Apama II, Stratonice of Macedon and Antiochus II Theos, who succeeded his father as king.

On the assassination of his father in 281 BC, the task of holding together the empire was a formidable one. A revolt in Syria broke out almost immediately. Antiochus was soon compelled to make peace with his father's murderer, Ptolemy Keraunos, apparently abandoning Macedonia and Thrace. In Anatolia he was unable to reduce Bithynia or the Persian dynasties that ruled in Cappadocia.

In 278 BC the Gauls broke into Anatolia, and a victory that Antiochus won over these Gauls by using Indian war elephants (275 BC) is said to have been the origin of his title of Soter (Gr. for "saviour").

At the end of 275 BC the question of Coele-Syria, which had been open between the houses of Seleucus and Ptolemy since the partition of 301 BC, led to hostilities (the First Syrian War). It had been continuously in Ptolemaic occupation, but the house of Seleucus maintained its claim. War did not materially change the outlines of the two kingdoms, though frontier cities like Damascus and the coast districts of Asia Minor might change hands.

On March 27 268 BC Antiochus I laid the foundation for the Ezida Temple in Borsippa.[1] His eldest son Seleucus had ruled in the east as viceroy from 275 BC(?) till 268/267 BC; Antiochus put his son to death in the latter year on the charge of rebellion. Circa 262 BC Antiochus tried to break the growing power of Pergamum by force of arms, but suffered defeat near Sardis and died soon afterwards. He was succeeded in 261 BC by his second son Antiochus II Theos.[2]

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antiochus_I_Soter

ID: I62217

Name: Antiocus I of Syria

Prefix: King

Given Name: Antiocus I

Surname: of Syria

Nickname: The Preserver

Sex: M

_UID: C024F896E2670F4D9730F33A6174FC11ED5F

Change Date: 18 Jun 2004

Note:

Antiochus I, called Soter (“the preserver”) (324-262 or 261 bc), king of Syria (280-262 or 261 bc). The second of the Seleucids, he was the son of Seleucus I, one of the generals and successors of Alexander the Great. In 275 bc Antiochus won a victory over the Galatians in Asia Minor but lost considerable territory to Ptolemy II. He was killed in battle during a war (263-261 bc) against Eumenes I (reigned 263-241 bc), ruler of Pergamum in Asia Minor.

© 1993-2003 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

Birth: ABT 324 BC

Death: 262 BC

Father: Seleucus I of Syria b: ABT 358 BC

Mother: Apama of Bactria

Marriage 1 Sartonice I

Married:

Children

Antiochus II of Syria b: ABT 287 BC

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I62217

--------------------

Antiochus I Soter, King of the Seleucids, was born prior to 281 BC (the beginning of his reign as King of the Seleucids); died circa 261 BC.

--------------------

Antiochus I Soter (Greek: Αντίοχος Α' Σωτήρ, i.e. Antiochus the Savior, unknown - 261 BC), was a king of the Hellenistic Seleucid Empire. He reigned from 281 BC - 261 BC.

Antiochus I was half Persian, his mother Apama being one of the eastern princesses whom Alexander the Great had given as wives to his generals in 324 BC. In 294 BC, prior to the death of his father Seleucus I, Antiochus married his stepmother, Stratonice, daughter of Demetrius Poliorcetes. His elderly father reportedly instigated the marriage after discovering that his son was in danger of dying of lovesickness.

On the assassination of his father in 281 BC, the task of holding together the empire was a formidable one. A revolt in Syria broke out almost immediately. Antiochus was soon compelled to make peace with his father's murderer, Ptolemy Keraunos, apparently abandoning Macedonia and Thrace. In Asia Minor he was unable to reduce Bithynia or the Persian dynasties that ruled in Cappadocia.

In 278 BC the Gauls broke into Asia Minor, and a victory that Antiochus won over these hordes is said to have been the origin of his title of Soter (Gr. for "saviour").

At the end of 275 BC the question of Coele-Syria, which had been open between the houses of Seleucus and Ptolemy since the partition of 301 BC, led to hostilities (the First Syrian War). It had been continuously in Ptolemaic occupation, but the house of Seleucus maintained its claim.

War did not materially change the outlines of the two kingdoms, though frontier cities like Damascus and the coast districts of Asia Minor might change hands.

His eldest son Seleucus had ruled in the east as viceroy from 275 BC(?) till 268/267 BC; Antiochus put his son to death in the latter year on the charge of rebellion. Circa 262 BC Antiochus tried to break the growing power of Pergamum by force of arms, but suffered defeat near Sardis and died soon afterwards. He was succeeded in 261 BC by his second son Antiochus II Theos.[1]

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antiochus_I_Soter
--------------------
Antiochus I Soter (Greek: Αντίοχος Α' Σωτήρ, i.e. Antiochus the Savior, unknown - 261 BC), was a king of the Hellenistic Seleucid Empire. He reigned from 281 BC - 261 BC.

Antiochus I was half Persian, his mother Apama being one of the eastern princesses whom Alexander the Great had given as wives to his generals in 324 BC. In 294 BC, prior to the death of his father Seleucus I, Antiochus married his stepmother, Stratonice, daughter of Demetrius Poliorcetes. His elderly father reportedly instigated the marriage after discovering that his son was in danger of dying of lovesickness.

On the assassination of his father in 281 BC, the task of holding together the empire was a formidable one. A revolt in Syria broke out almost immediately. Antiochus was soon compelled to make peace with his father's murderer, Ptolemy Keraunos, apparently abandoning Macedonia and Thrace. In Asia Minor he was unable to reduce Bithynia or the Persian dynasties that ruled in Cappadocia.

In 278 BC the Gauls broke into Asia Minor, and a victory that Antiochus won over these hordes is said to have been the origin of his title of Soter (Gr. for "saviour").

At the end of 275 BC the question of Coele-Syria, which had been open between the houses of Seleucus and Ptolemy since the partition of 301 BC, led to hostilities (the First Syrian War). It had been continuously in Ptolemaic occupation, but the house of Seleucus maintained its claim.

War did not materially change the outlines of the two kingdoms, though frontier cities like Damascus and the coast districts of Asia Minor might change hands.

His eldest son Seleucus had ruled in the east as viceroy from 275 BC(?) till 268/267 BC; Antiochus put his son to death in the latter year on the charge of rebellion. Circa 262 BC Antiochus tried to break the growing power of Pergamum by force of arms, but suffered defeat near Sardis and died soon afterwards. He was succeeded in 261 BC by his second son Antiochus II Theos

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antiochus_I_Soter
--------------------
Antiochus I Soter (Greek: Αντίοχος Α' Σωτήρ, i.e. Antiochus the Savior, unknown - 261 BC), was a king of the Hellenistic Seleucid Empire. He reigned from 281 BC - 261 BC.

Antiochus I was half Persian, his mother Apama being one of the eastern princesses whom Alexander the Great had given as wives to his generals in 324 BC. In 294 BC, prior to the death of his father Seleucus I, Antiochus married his stepmother, Stratonice, daughter of Demetrius Poliorcetes. His elderly father reportedly instigated the marriage after discovering that his son was in danger of dying of lovesickness. Stratonice bore five children to Antiochus: Seleucus (he was executed for rebellion), Laodice, Apama II, Stratonice of Macedon and Antiochus II Theos, who succeeded his father as king.

On the assassination of his father in 281 BC, the task of holding together the empire was a formidable one. A revolt in Syria broke out almost immediately. Antiochus was soon compelled to make peace with his father's murderer, Ptolemy Keraunos, apparently abandoning Macedonia and Thrace. In Anatolia he was unable to reduce Bithynia or the Persian dynasties that ruled in Cappadocia.

In 278 BC the Gauls broke into Anatolia, and a victory that Antiochus won over these hordes is said to have been the origin of his title of Soter (Gr. for "saviour").

At the end of 275 BC the question of Coele-Syria, which had been open between the houses of Seleucus and Ptolemy since the partition of 301 BC, led to hostilities (the First Syrian War). It had been continuously in Ptolemaic occupation, but the house of Seleucus maintained its claim. War did not materially change the outlines of the two kingdoms, though frontier cities like Damascus and the coast districts of Asia Minor might change hands.

On March 27th 268 BC Antiochus I laid the foundation for the Ezida Temple in Borsippa.[1] His eldest son Seleucus had ruled in the east as viceroy from 275 BC(?) till 268/267 BC; Antiochus put his son to death in the latter year on the charge of rebellion. Circa 262 BC Antiochus tried to break the growing power of Pergamum by force of arms, but suffered defeat near Sardis and died soon afterwards. He was succeeded in 261 BC by his second son Antiochus II Theos.[2]

--------------------
BIOGRAFI:

Nicknames: "Soter", "??t????? ?' S?t?? Se?e???d?? t?? S???a?", "Antiochus I 'Soter-the Preserver' of Syria Soter-the Preserver", "? King"

Birthdate: -324

Birthplace: Macedonia

Death: Died June 2, -261 in Syria

Occupation: Macedonian General

Nærmeste familie

Stratonice I, Queen Consort of S...

wife

Apama II, Queen of Cyrenaica

daughter

Antiochus II Theos, King of the ...

son

Stratonice Syria, Princess of Syria

daughter

Seleucus

son

Laodice I Princess Of Syria, Pri...

wife

Antiochos Artioches

son

Apama I, Queen of the Seleucid E...

mother

Seleucus I Nicator, King of the ...

father

Archaeus I, Prince of Syria

brother

Phila II

sister

Apama

Antiokos I Soter

Fra Wikipedia, den frie encyklopedi

Gå til: navigasjon, søk Antiokos I Soter

Konge av av Selevkideriket

Navn: ??t????? ?' S?t??

Regjeringstid: 281 – 261 f.Kr.

Født: ukjent

Død: 261 f.Kr., Anatolia

Foreldre: Selevkos I Nikator (far)

Apama (mor)

Ektefelle?(r): Stratonike av Syria

Barn: Selevkos

Laodike

Apama II

Stratonike av Makedonia

Antiokos II Theos

Antiokos I Soter (gresk: ??t????? ?' S?t??, «Antiokos Befrieren»; født ukjent - død 261 f.Kr.) var den andre kongen av det hellenistiske Selevkideriket. Han styrte fra 281 f.Kr. ved sin fars død og fram til 261 f.Kr.

Han var selv halvt persisk, hans mor Apama var en av de østlige prinsesser som Aleksander den store hadde gitt som hustruer til sine hærførere i 324 f.Kr.[1] I 294 f.Kr., før hans far Ptolemaios I Soter var død, hadde Antiokos giftet sin stemor, Stratonike av Syria,[2] datter av Demetrios I Poliorketes. Hans aldrende far skal etter sigende ha tilskyndet ekteskapet etter at han oppdaget at hans sønn var i fare for å forgå av forelskelse. Stratonike fødte ham fem barn: Seleukos (som ble henrettet for opprør), Laodike, Apama II, Stratonike av Makedonia og Antiokos II Theos som etterfulgte sin far som konge.

Gullstater av Antiokos I, c. 275 f.Kr. Forside: Antiokos' profil med diadem. Motsatt: Naken, sittende Apollon på omphalos, lener seg på en bue og holder to piler. Gresk tekst: BASI?EOS ANTIOXOY (av kong Antiokos).

Da hans far ble myrdet i 281 f.Kr. havnet store oppgaven med å holde Selevkideriket sammen på Antiokos. Et opprør i Syria brøt ut nesten umiddelbart. Antiokos var snart tvunget til å slutte fred med farens morder, Ptolemaios Keraunos, samtidig som han tydeligvis oppga Makedonia og Trakia. I Anatolia klarte han ikke å bekjempe Bitynia eller de persiske dynastiene som styrte i Kappadokia.

I 278 f.Kr. brøt keltisktalende folk inn i Anatolia og slo seg ned i Galatia. En seier som Antiokos vant over disse ved å benytte indiske krigselefanter i 275 f.Kr. skal etter sigende være opprinnelsen til hans tittel som Soter (gresk for «Befrier» eller «Frelser»). Mot slutten av det samme året førte spørsmålet om Koilesyria, som hadde vært åpent mellom selevkidedynastiet og ptolemeerdynastiet i Egypt siden 301 f.Kr., til åpen fiendskap i form av den første syriske krig. Koilesyria hadde jevnlig vært okkupert av Egypt, men Selevkideriket hadde opprettholdt sitt krav på området. Krigen endret ikke grensene mellom de to rikene i større grad, men grensebyer som Damaskus og kystdistriktene i Anatolia skiftet eier.

Den 27. mars 268 f.Kr. la Antiokos grunnleggelsen for Ezidatempelet i Borsippa.[3] Hans eldste sønn Seleukos hadde styrt i øst som visekonge fra kanskje 275 f.Kr. og fram til 268/267 f.Kr. Han ble nødt å henrette sønnen det sistnevnte året, anklaget for opprør. En gang rundt 262 f.Kr. forsøkte Antiokos å bryte den voksende makten til Pergamon med våpenmakt, men gikk på et nederlag ved Sardis og døde kort tid etterpå. Han ble etterfulgt i 261 f.Kr. av hans andre sønn Antiokos II Theos.[4
--------------------
'''
=Antiochus I Soter=
'''

Antiochus I Soter (Greek: Ἀντίοχος Α΄ ὁ Σωτήρ; epithet means "the Saviour"; c. 324/3-261 BC), was a king of the Hellenistic Seleucid Empire. He reigned in 281-261 BC.

Antiochus I was half Persian, his mother Apama being one of the eastern princesses whom Alexander the Great had given as wives to his generals in 324 BC. In 294 BC, prior to the death of his father Seleucus I, Antiochus married his stepmother, Stratonice, daughter of Demetrius Poliorcetes. His elderly father reportedly instigated the marriage after discovering that his son was in danger of dying of lovesickness. Stratonice bore five children to Antiochus: Seleucus (he was executed for rebellion), Laodice, Apama II, Stratonice of Macedon and Antiochus II Theos, who succeeded his father as king.

On the assassination of his father in 281 BC, the task of holding together the empire was a formidable one. A revolt in Syria broke out almost immediately. Antiochus was soon compelled to make peace with his father's murderer, Ptolemy Keraunos, apparently abandoning Macedonia and Thrace. In Anatolia he was unable to reduce Bithynia or the Persian dynasties that ruled in Cappadocia.

In 278 BC the Gauls broke into Anatolia, and a victory that Antiochus won over these Gauls by using Indian war elephants (275 BC) is said to have been the origin of his title of Soter (Gr. for "saviour").

At the end of 275 BC the question of Coele-Syria, which had been open between the houses of Seleucus and Ptolemy since the partition of 301 BC, led to hostilities (the First Syrian War). It had been continuously in Ptolemaic occupation, but the house of Seleucus maintained its claim. War did not materially change the outlines of the two kingdoms, though frontier cities like Damascus and the coast districts of Asia Minor might change hands.

On March 27 268 BC Antiochus I laid the foundation for the Ezida Temple in Borsippa. His eldest son Seleucus had ruled in the east as viceroy from 275 BC(?) till 268/267 BC; Antiochus put his son to death in the latter year on the charge of rebellion. Circa 262 BC Antiochus tried to break the growing power of Pergamum by force of arms, but suffered defeat near Sardis and died soon afterwards. He was succeeded in 261 BC by his second son Antiochus II Theos.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antiochus_I_Soter

Antiochus I, called Soter ("the preserver") (324-262 or 261 bc), king of
Syria (280-262 or 261 bc). The second of the Seleucids, he was the son of
Seleucus I, one of the generals and successors of Alexander the Great. In
275 bc Antiochus won a victory over the Galatians in Asia Minor but lost
considerable territory to Ptolemy II. He was killed in battle during a war
(263-261 bc) against Eumenes I (reigned 263-241 bc), ruler of Pergamum in
Asia Minor.

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per00568.htm#0
http://www.gbnf.com/genealogy/sahlin/html/d0100/I12439.HTM

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Syria 282-261 BCE

He ruled Syria from about 26 Aug 282 to 2 Jun 261 bc.

He ruled Syria from about 26 Aug 282 to 2 Jun 261 bc.

"SOTER"; KING OF SYRIA 281-261 BC; b. 323-d. 6/2/261 BC

Birth: in 324 BC 1
Death: in 262 - 261 BC 1
Event: Ancestor M
Event: Ruled 281 - 261 BC, Seleucid King of Syria 1
Event: Ruled 292 - 281 BC, Seleucid King of Eastern Syria 1
Note:
Antiochus I SOTER (b. 324 BC--d. 262/261), king of the Seleucid kingdom of Syria, who ruled about 292-281 BC in the east and 281-261 over the whole kingdom. Under great external pressures, he consolidated his kingdom and encouraged the founding of cities.
Antiochus was the son of Seleucus I, founder of the Seleucid kingdom,and his Sogdian queen, Apama. When an invasion of nomads threatened the eastern possessions of his father's realm (between the Caspian and Aral seas and the Indian Ocean), Antiochus was appointed king (292). He restored some of the damage caused by the invaders and rebuilt three cities. Because his father still had interest in expanding the eastern trade, Antiochus dispatched a noted geographer and general to explore the environs of the Caspian Sea.
In 294 a sensational scandal occurred at the court of Seleucus I. Antiochus, his son by Apama, fell in love with his beautiful stepmother, Stratonice, and his unrequited passion affected his health. Seleucus gave him Stratonice, assigned him as commander in chief to the upper satrapies, and appointed him co-regent.
After his father's assassination in 281, Antiochus succeeded to the entire realm, but he was immediately beset by revolts in Syria (probably instigated by Egypt), by independence movements in northern Anatolia, and by a war led by Antigonus II Gonatas, ruler of the Greek citiesand Macedonia. In 279, after the Gauls invaded Greece and almost ruined Antigonus, he and Antiochus signed a pact promising not to interfere with one another's territory. The next year, however, 20,000 Gauls crossed into Asia Minor, and the independent states in the northern part recruited them to harass Antiochus. He was preoccupied with the pacification of Syria until 275, when, utilizing Indian elephants broughtfrom the east, he defeated the Gauls, who were afterward settled by their allies in Phrygia to make it a buffer state. The Ionian city-states that Antiochus had spared from the Gauls' ravages hailed him as a god and named him Soter ("Saviour"). In 275 the alliance with Antigonus, now fully in possession of Macedonia, was cemented by marriage to Antiochus' half sister.
Following the Gallic incursions in Greece, Antiochus encouraged Greekimmigration to his realm and established many new cities in Asia Minor to serve as counterweights to the Gauls. He built other cities in Iran to forestall the Parthian threat to his eastern frontier, and he probably fostered a revival of Babylonian culture and religion to counteract Persian influence. At Babylon he rebuilt the ancient Esagila shrine, although he moved the city's populace to a great Seleucid city a short distance away on the Tigris River.
The aggressions of Ptolemy II of Egypt caused continuous friction with Antiochus. In 279 he lost Miletus, in southwestern Asia Minor, and in 276 the Egyptians invaded northern Syria. But Antiochus defeated his opponent, repelled him, and secured an alliance with the Egyptian ruler's half brother who ruled Cyrene. After Ptolemy married the energetic Arsinoe II, however, the war turned against the Seleucids, and about 273-272, Phoenicia and the coast of Asia Minor were lost to Egypt.
The continuous troubles in the west caused Seleucid control in the far eastern part of the empire to weaken. In 280 Antiochus made his eldest son king in the east, but he proved incompetent. Between 266 and 261 Antiochus was drawn into a war with Pergamum, and in 262 he suffered a defeat and lost additional territory. Soon afterward he died, leaving his son Antiochus II as successor.

Birth: in 324 BC 1
Death: in 262 - 261 BC 1
Event: Ancestor M
Event: Ruled 281 - 261 BC, Seleucid King of Syria 1
Event: Ruled 292 - 281 BC, Seleucid King of Eastern Syria 1
Note:
Antiochus I SOTER (b. 324 BC--d. 262/261), king of the Seleucid kingdom of Syria, who ruled about 292-281 BC in the east and 281-261 over the whole kingdom. Under great external pressures, he consolidated his kingdom and encouraged the founding of cities.
Antiochus was the son of Seleucus I, founder of the Seleucid kingdom,and his Sogdian queen, Apama. When an invasion of nomads threatened the eastern possessions of his father's realm (between the Caspian and Aral seas and the Indian Ocean), Antiochus was appointed king (292). He restored some of the damage caused by the invaders and rebuilt three cities. Because his father still had interest in expanding the eastern trade, Antiochus dispatched a noted geographer and general to explore the environs of the Caspian Sea.
In 294 a sensational scandal occurred at the court of Seleucus I. Antiochus, his son by Apama, fell in love with his beautiful stepmother, Stratonice, and his unrequited passion affected his health. Seleucus gave him Stratonice, assigned him as commander in chief to the upper satrapies, and appointed him co-regent.
After his father's assassination in 281, Antiochus succeeded to the entire realm, but he was immediately beset by revolts in Syria (probably instigated by Egypt), by independence movements in northern Anatolia, and by a war led by Antigonus II Gonatas, ruler of the Greek citiesand Macedonia. In 279, after the Gauls invaded Greece and almost ruined Antigonus, he and Antiochus signed a pact promising not to interfere with one another's territory. The next year, however, 20,000 Gauls crossed into Asia Minor, and the independent states in the northern part recruited them to harass Antiochus. He was preoccupied with the pacification of Syria until 275, when, utilizing Indian elephants broughtfrom the east, he defeated the Gauls, who were afterward settled by their allies in Phrygia to make it a buffer state. The Ionian city-states that Antiochus had spared from the Gauls' ravages hailed him as a god and named him Soter ("Saviour"). In 275 the alliance with Antigonus, now fully in possession of Macedonia, was cemented by marriage to Antiochus' half sister.
Following the Gallic incursions in Greece, Antiochus encouraged Greekimmigration to his realm and established many new cities in Asia Minor to serve as counterweights to the Gauls. He built other cities in Iran to forestall the Parthian threat to his eastern frontier, and he probably fostered a revival of Babylonian culture and religion to counteract Persian influence. At Babylon he rebuilt the ancient Esagila shrine, although he moved the city's populace to a great Seleucid city a short distance away on the Tigris River.
The aggressions of Ptolemy II of Egypt caused continuous friction with Antiochus. In 279 he lost Miletus, in southwestern Asia Minor, and in 276 the Egyptians invaded northern Syria. But Antiochus defeated his opponent, repelled him, and secured an alliance with the Egyptian ruler's half brother who ruled Cyrene. After Ptolemy married the energetic Arsinoe II, however, the war turned against the Seleucids, and about 273-272, Phoenicia and the coast of Asia Minor were lost to Egypt.
The continuous troubles in the west caused Seleucid control in the far eastern part of the empire to weaken. In 280 Antiochus made his eldest son king in the east, but he proved incompetent. Between 266 and 261 Antiochus was drawn into a war with Pergamum, and in 262 he suffered a defeat and lost additional territory. Soon afterward he died, leaving his son Antiochus II as successor.

Antiochus I Soter
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Antiochus I Soter (i.e. "Saviour") (324/?323-?262/?261 BC), was an emperor of the Hellenistic Seleucid Empire. He reigned from 281 BC - 261 BC. He was half Persian, his mother Apame being one of those eastern princesses whom Alexander the Great had given as wives to his generals in 324 BC.

On the assassination of his father Seleucus I in 281 BC, the task of holding together the empire was a formidable one, and a revolt in Syria broke out almost immediately. With his father's murderer, Ptolemy Keraunos, Antiochus was soon compelled to make peace, abandoning apparently Macedonia and Thrace. In Asia Minor he was unable to reduce Bithynia or the Persian dynasties that ruled in Cappadocia.

In 278 BC the Gauls broke into Asia Minor, and a victory that Antiochus won over these hordes is said to have been the origin of his title of Soter (Gr. for "saviour").

At the end of 275 BC the question of Coele-Syria, which had been open between the houses of Seleucus and Ptolemy since the partition of 301 BC, led to hostilities (the "First Syrian War"). It had been continuously in Ptolemaic occupation, but the house of Seleucus maintained its claim.

War did not materially change the outlines of the two kingdoms, though frontier cities like Damascus and the coast districts of Asia Minor might change hands.

About 262 BC Antiochus tried to break the growing power of Pergamum by force of arms, but suffered defeat near Sardis and died soon afterwards (262 BC). His eldest son Seleucus, who had ruled in the east as viceroy from 275 BC(?) till 268/267 BC, was put to death in that year by his father on the charge of rebellion. He was succeeded (261 BC) by his second son Antiochus II Theos.

After the death of his father, Antiochus married his step-mother, Stratonice, daughter of Demetrius Poliorcetes, their son Antiochus II Theos succeeded his father. http://www.attalus.org/translate/malalas.html]
Preceded by:
Seleucus I Nicator Seleucid King
281–261 BC Succeeded by:
Antiochus II Theos

This article incorporates text from the Encyclopædia Britannica Eleventh Edition, a publication now in the public domain.

Birth: in 324 BC 1
Death: in 262 - 261 BC 1
Event: Ancestor M
Event: Ruled 281 - 261 BC, Seleucid King of Syria 1
Event: Ruled 292 - 281 BC, Seleucid King of Eastern Syria 1
Note:
Antiochus I SOTER (b. 324 BC--d. 262/261), king of the Seleucid kingdom of Syria, who ruled about 292-281 BC in the east and 281-261 over the whole kingdom. Under great external pressures, he consolidated his kingdom and encouraged the founding of cities.
Antiochus was the son of Seleucus I, founder of the Seleucid kingdom,and his Sogdian queen, Apama. When an invasion of nomads threatened the eastern possessions of his father's realm (between the Caspian and Aral seas and the Indian Ocean), Antiochus was appointed king (292). He restored some of the damage caused by the invaders and rebuilt three cities. Because his father still had interest in expanding the eastern trade, Antiochus dispatched a noted geographer and general to explore the environs of the Caspian Sea.
In 294 a sensational scandal occurred at the court of Seleucus I. Antiochus, his son by Apama, fell in love with his beautiful stepmother, Stratonice, and his unrequited passion affected his health. Seleucus gave him Stratonice, assigned him as commander in chief to the upper satrapies, and appointed him co-regent.
After his father's assassination in 281, Antiochus succeeded to the entire realm, but he was immediately beset by revolts in Syria (probably instigated by Egypt), by independence movements in northern Anatolia, and by a war led by Antigonus II Gonatas, ruler of the Greek citiesand Macedonia. In 279, after the Gauls invaded Greece and almost ruined Antigonus, he and Antiochus signed a pact promising not to interfere with one another's territory. The next year, however, 20,000 Gauls crossed into Asia Minor, and the independent states in the northern part recruited them to harass Antiochus. He was preoccupied with the pacification of Syria until 275, when, utilizing Indian elephants broughtfrom the east, he defeated the Gauls, who were afterward settled by their allies in Phrygia to make it a buffer state. The Ionian city-states that Antiochus had spared from the Gauls' ravages hailed him as a god and named him Soter ("Saviour"). In 275 the alliance with Antigonus, now fully in possession of Macedonia, was cemented by marriage to Antiochus' half sister.
Following the Gallic incursions in Greece, Antiochus encouraged Greekimmigration to his realm and established many new cities in Asia Minor to serve as counterweights to the Gauls. He built other cities in Iran to forestall the Parthian threat to his eastern frontier, and he probably fostered a revival of Babylonian culture and religion to counteract Persian influence. At Babylon he rebuilt the ancient Esagila shrine, although he moved the city's populace to a great Seleucid city a short distance away on the Tigris River.
The aggressions of Ptolemy II of Egypt caused continuous friction with Antiochus. In 279 he lost Miletus, in southwestern Asia Minor, and in 276 the Egyptians invaded northern Syria. But Antiochus defeated his opponent, repelled him, and secured an alliance with the Egyptian ruler's half brother who ruled Cyrene. After Ptolemy married the energetic Arsinoe II, however, the war turned against the Seleucids, and about 273-272, Phoenicia and the coast of Asia Minor were lost to Egypt.
The continuous troubles in the west caused Seleucid control in the far eastern part of the empire to weaken. In 280 Antiochus made his eldest son king in the east, but he proved incompetent. Between 266 and 261 Antiochus was drawn into a war with Pergamum, and in 262 he suffered a defeat and lost additional territory. Soon afterward he died, leaving his son Antiochus II as successor.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]