== Notes for [[Item:Q114027|Q114027]] ==

NUMBER 9 ERA Mcxxxvi.

Celanova.

A "o C. 1097. 19 de Mayo.

La Infanta D. Elvira, hija de D. Fernando 1, presents "This monastery is y" Su Abad Pedro, en un Cortijo Composteia and Hab "A sido de Cipriano Siena "Menendez.

I want to be known as Elvira nobilisimi Reg "S liispanorum Fredenandi daughter. '''This was the palace I nurse Ciprianum sisnandiz''', and the '''house mee Egon''' mum determination ", and "Axor name Aragou "E" tribe ". Qu " Both the single They set themselves a charter of marriage benefaction the "mnibus their own affairs. After no pores in a long time I service and the enemy of my brother, Emperor Dom Alfonso happened to die. Leaving Aragones said his wife was in the I after this the mor ... In the same way the law of your own nakedness. I am, however, when he had taken the death of his ... And he left all things to all men on millet My ownership I gave some of his relatives. Some gave a for their lives. "Among que ...

this will be decided De Corte This in Compostella in that Campus Cipriani, who was mentioned earlier and Aragones this ... monastery cellenoue and you abbot Dom no Petro ... Noto day 14 Fortieth era 1135.

Diego gilmirus cleric and vicar in Casa Domni James the Apostle.

Bishop Peter of Orense. Gundesindus abbot.

Ferreira, Lopez. (2013). pp. 569-70. Historia de la Santa Iglesia de Santiago de Compostela. London: Forgotten Books. (Original work published 1900)

Ferreiro, López. Historia de la Santa Iglesia de Santiago de Compostela. 1900. Reprint. London: Forgotten Books, 2013. 569-70. Print.

see page 569

http://www.forgottenbooks.com/readbook_text/Historia_de_la_Santa_Iglesia_de_Santiago_de_Compostela_1400003604/569

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]