== Notes for [[Item:Q91495|Q91495]] ==

[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mattathias '''Mattathias ben Johanan'''] (Hebrew: מַתִּתְיָהוּ‎, Matitiyahu or Matisyahu ben Yochanan HaCohen) was a Jewish priest whose role in the Jewish revolt against the Syrian Greeks is related in the Books of the Maccabees. Mattathias is accorded a central role in the story of Chanukah and, as a result, is named in the Al Hanissim prayer Jews add to Grace after meals and the Amidah during the festival's eight days.

'''History'''
Mattathias was from a rural priestly family from Modi'in. He was a son of John (Johanan), grandson of Simeon, and great-grandson of Asmon or Hasmonaeus, a Kohen of the lineage of Joarib known for being the fifth grandson of Idaiah, son of Joarib and grandson of Jachin, in turn a descendant of Phinehas, third High Priest of Israel. Like many priests, he served in the Second Temple in Jerusalem for a period.

Mattathias was the father of Judas Maccabeus (Judah Maccabee), Eleazar Avaran, Simon Thassi (Simeon), John Gaddi, and Jonathan Apphus (Yonatan). In 168–167 BCE, a series of Seleucid persecutions of traditional Judaism began, spearheaded by King Antiochus IV Epiphanes and possibly High Priest Menelaus as well. At some point, Mattathias returned to Modi'in. In 167 BCE, when asked by a Seleucid Greek government representative under King Antiochus IV Epiphanes to offer sacrifice to the Greek gods, he not only refused to do so, but slew with his own hand the Jew who had stepped forward to do so. He then killed the government official that required the act.

"Let everyone who is zealous for the law and supports the covenant come out with me!" (Mattathias, after killing the government official, 1st Maccabees 2:27.)

Upon the dramatic killing of the official and the Jew, he and his five sons fled to the wilderness of Judea where they began to build a guerilla force of followers. The area was then known as the Gophna Hills, a region near modern Jifna. Mattathias then disappears from historical record. According to 1 Maccabees, he died in the 146th year of the Ancient Macedonian calendar, equivalent to some point between Spring 166 – Spring 165 BCE.

'''Context'''

This was the first step in the war of the Maccabees against the Seleucid Greeks, the result of which was Jewish independence, which had not been enjoyed for 400 years. The events of the war of the Maccabees form the basis for the holiday of Hanukkah, which is celebrated by Jews on the 25th of Kislev (on the Hebrew calendar, corresponding to Mid-November to Late-December on the Gregorian Calendar).

'''In literature and liturgy'''

The story of the Maccabees can be found in the deuterocanonical book of 1 Maccabees, in Josephus, and in Talmudic references (Shabbat 21b, Shabbat 23a – related to the candles). He is also made reference to in chapter 28 of 1 Meqabyan, a book considered canonical in the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church. The "Al HaNisim" prayer, added into the Amidah and Birkat Hamazon on Hanukkah, refers to the story of the Maccabees and to Mattathias by name.

[http://he.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D7%9E%D7%AA%D7%AA%D7%99%D7%94%D7%95_%D7%94%D7%9B%D7%94%D7%9F '''מתתיהו הכהן''']

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Judea; father of Simon Maccabaeus King and high priest of Judea
- - Judas Maccabaeus King and high priest of Judea
- - Jonathan King and high priest of Judea
- - John Prince of Judea

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per01357.htm#0

DIED 166 BCE

Mattathias
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Mattathias (?????? Matitiyahu or Matisyahu ben Yochanan HaCohen in Hebrew) was a Jewish high priest depicted in the Books of the Maccabees, and the father of the Judah Maccabee, the leader of the Maccabees. In 170 BC, when asked by a Seleucid Greek government representative under King Antiochus IV to offer sacrifice to the Greek Gods, he not only refused to do so, but slew with his own hand the Jew who had stepped forward to do so. He then attacked the government official that required the act.

Upon the edict for his arrest, he took refuge in the wilderness of Judea with his five sons, and called upon all Jews to follow him. This was the first step in the war of the Maccabees against the Seleucid Greeks, the result of which was Jewish independence, which had not been enjoyed for 400 years. The events of the war of the Maccabees form the basis for the holiday of Hanukkah, which is celebrated by Jews on the 25th of Kislev (on the Hebrew calendar, corresponding to Mid-November to Late-December on the Gregorian Calendar).

The story of the Maccabees can be found in the deuterocanonical books of 1 Maccabees and 2 Maccabees and in Talmudic references (Shabbat 21b, Shabbat 23a - related to the candles).

The addition of "Al Hanisim" into the Amidah and other prayers is customary during this holiday.

This article incorporates text from the public domain 1907 edition of The Nuttall Encyclopaedia.
This Jewish history-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.
This Judaism-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]