== Notes for [[Item:Q98204|Q98204]] ==

From [https://www.wikitree.com/wiki/Bat_Assad-1 Wikitree - Adoa bat Assad]

===Date Estimation and Family Members===

"Numerous sources make Adoa bat Assad to be the daughter of Asad ibn Hashim, and the same person as his daughter Adai binte Assad bin Hashim. This poses a dating difficulty because Asad's best estimated birth is 485, he died prior to Muhammed's birth in 571, and Asad's children were likely born in the time frame 516-536. Adoa on the other hand, is said to be born in 610, and married Bustanai, born in 600. This conflict is not resolved, but in the interim, Adoa has been de-linked as a daughter of Assad.

===Date Estimation and Contemporary Events===

If Adoa was born about 610, assume that she married at the age of 20, in 630. Her children's birth year estimation would be 631 and 633.

The narrative in this profile assumes movement of peoples between Mesopotamia and Quraish, since her father was a Quraishi chieftain but her mother was the daughter of an exilarch.

In 622, Muhammed, prophet of the new Islamic religion, arrived in Yathrib (now Medina) and negotiated peace between the various tribes there, including the Banu Qurayza, the Quraish Jewish tribe. In 627, believing that the Banu Qurayza had betrayed an alliance, the male members of the tribe were executed and the women and children enslaved. This account is disputed by some scholars.

The narrative in this profile would assume that Adoa was not in Quraish by 627. Perhaps she was already married to Bustanai by then."

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
6702EFB9734051EFBBF89829A6488A4D3D88
geni:6000000009117227972

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]