== Notes for [[Item:Q112537|Q112537]] ==

* [http://www.geneall.net/H/per_page.php?id=7923 '''Munia Nunez de Brañosera, b. c. 0811''']

NUÑO Núñez "Rasura", son of --- . He is named in the 12th century Crónica Najerense as one of the original judges appointed by Alfonso II King of Asturias to govern Castile[80]. The Chronicon de Cardeña records the appointment by “los Castellanos [de] dos Alcaydes Nuño Rasuera è Lain Calvo” during the reign of King Fruela, adding that “el Conde Ferran Gonzalez” descended from the former[81].

same person as …? MUNIO Núñez "él de Brañosera" (-after 860). This possible co-identity is mentioned by Pérez de Urbel[82], although the names "Nuño" and "Munio" are generally taken to be different. “Monnio Nunnez et uxor mea Argilo” granted rights to Brañosera by charter dated 13 Oct 824, confirmed by “Gundisalvo Fernandiz comite” who names them as “avi mei”, further confirmed by “Fernando Gundisalviz comite et uxor mea Urraca”, and further confirmed by “Sancio Garcianez comes” who names “meos avos Gundisalvo Fernandiz et Fernando Gundisalvez”[83]. Brañosera is within the jurisdiction of Aguilar de Campoo, west of the source of the river Ebro in the lower mountains of Burgos[84].

m ARGILO, daughter of --- . “Monnio Nunnez et uxor mea Argilo” granted rights to Brañosera by charter dated 13 Oct 824, confirmed by “Gundisalvo Fernandiz comite” who names them as “avi mei”[85]. She is named as wife of Munio Núñez, paternal grandmother of Gonzalo Fernández, in the latter's confirmation of the rights of Brañosera in 912[86].

Munio & his wife had two children:

1. NUÑO Muñoz "él de Castrojeriz" (-after 910). He is referred to as Conde de Castilla 1 Mar 899, 1 Feb 909 and 23 Jul 909, although he was probably not in control of the whole county[87]. He is referred to as father-in-law of García de Asturias in Ximénez de Rada, suspected of preparing a rebellion against King Alfonso III in 910 and placing his son-in-law on the throne[88]. Maybe m --- Rodríguez de Castilla, daughter of RODRIGO Conde de Castilla. This marriage is not referred to in Pérez de Urbel. It may be speculative in an attempt to explain the nomination of Nuño as Conde de Castilla, although it is not certain that his appointment was due to family connections. Nuño & his wife had two children:

a) NUÑO Núñez "él de Roa" (-after [914/15]). Conde de Castilla 914/15. The Annales Complutense record that “Munio Nunniz” populated “Roda” in 912[89].

b) MUNIADOMNA. Her parentage is indicated by the Cronica de Sampiro which names "socer…eius [Garsea] Nunio" when recording his rebellion, implying from the context of the passage that the marriage took place before her husband's accession[90]. The primary source which confirms her name has not yet been identified. Pérez de Urbel says that her second marriage is not certain but "suspected"[91]. m [firstly] (before 910) GARCÍA de Asturias, son of ALFONSO III "el Magno" King of Asturias & his wife Jimena Garcés de Pamplona ([871]-Zamora 19 Jan 914). He succeeded his father in 910 as GARCÍA I King of Asturias and León. [m secondly FERNANDO Ansúrez, son of ANSUR --- (-930 or after). Conde de Castilla 927-930.

2. FERNANDO Muñoz

--------------------

Nuño Nuñez "Rasura", señor de Amaya1,2,3,4

b. circa 825, d. after 860

Father Nuño Rodríguez, señor de Amaya4 b. circa 795?

Also called Lord Nuño of Amaya. Nuño Nuñez "Rasura", señor de Amaya was born circa 825. He was the son of Nuño Rodríguez, señor de Amaya.4 Nuño Nuñez "Rasura", señor de Amaya married Argilo (?) before 855.1,2 Nuño Nuñez "Rasura", señor de Amaya died after 860.1,2

Family

Argilo (?) b. circa 830

Children

Nuño Nuñez "el de Castrogeriz", señor de Amaya+ b. c 8551,4

Fernan Nuñez "el Negro"+ b. a 8551

Citations

[S187] Royal Genealogy Database, online http://www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/public/genealogy/

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 285-39.

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, RfC, 287-39.

[S1316] Reyes y Reinos Genealogias, online www.homar.org, España - 08.A.

--------------------
http://www.geneall.net/H/per_page.php?id=7920

(mixed up for his father!?)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nuño_Rasura

It has been suggested that Nuño Rasura is to be identified with a historical Munio Núñez (named as Nuño Núñez in older histories), the early ninth century repoblador who along with wife Argilo in 824 granted certain fueros (charters of privileges) to the village of Brañosera.

contradictory with: Munio and Argilo are thought to have been grandparents (or more distant ancestors) of Castilian counts Munio Núñez of Castrogeriz...

(mixed up for his son?) http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nu%C3%B1o_N%C3%BA%C3%B1ez
--------------------
Outras fontes: - Actas do 17º Congresso Internacional de Ciências Genealógica e Heráldica, Instituto Português de Heráldica, Lisboa, 1986, Tab. II - pág. 317 - Genea Portugal (ver http://www.geneall.net/P/per_page.php?id=7920)

Sources Individual: Nobiliário das Famílias de Portugal, Felgueiras Gayo, Carvalhos de Basto, 2ª Edição, Braga, 1989, vol. IV - pág. 237 (Castros)

Segundo a Genealogia de Ricardo Borda Luchin,
Nuno Muñoz RAZURA ** [Pais] nasceu c. 780. Ele casou-se com Tenda URRAQUES *** c. 810. casou-se com
Tenda URRAQUES *** nasceu c. 790. Ela casou-se com Nuno Muñoz RAZURA ** c. 810.
e teve Munio Nuñez de BRANÕSERA nasceu c. 810.
Já segundo a árvore do MyHeritage (fonte II) , Tenda Urraques teria se casado com Munio Nuñes.
Os dados encontrados no Geneweb colocam da seguinte forma:
Nuño Moniz <<Rasura>> com desconhecida teve
Munio Nuñez el de Castrojeriz de Brañosera com Argilo diaz tiveram:
* Nuño Moniz de Castrogeriz com <<>>Rodrigues de Castilha
# Munio Nuñez de Roa +909/
# Mumiadona Nuñez
# Controle Nuñez
# Rodrigo Nuñez
* Godinha Moniz com Fernán González el Negro de Castrosiero +870/, tiveram
# Gonzalo Fernandez de Castilla +ca 923
# Nuño Fernandez de Amaya
* Munia Moniz (seria talvez Muniadona de Vierzo) com Ordoño I, rey de Asturias, tiveram
# Leodegundia Ordoñez de Astúrias ca 846
# Alfonso III el Grande ca 848-910
# Nuño Ordoñez
# Bermudo Ordoñez +ca 928
# Odoario Ordoñez
#Froila Ordoñez
* Diego Moniz (sem filhos)
* Numa Moniz ( com Fernan Anzures, 6 filhos)

Name Suffix:<NSFX> Of Viero

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]