== Notes for [[Item:Q106207|Q106207]] ==

'''IDRIS I OF MOROCCO'''

Idris ibn Abdullah was the first ruler of the Idrisites from 788 to 791.

Idris ibn Abdellah (el-Kamil) was a descendant of Ali ibn Abi Talib (656–661). After involvement in an Alid revolt against the Abbasids (786), he had to flee Medina and came to Morocco via Egypt. There he spread Islam among the auraba berbers in northern Morocco, some of whom were still pagan. He was recognized as an imam by the Berbers in northern Morocco and the Rif Mountains. The center of his reign was Walila (the ancient Volubilis).

By conquering Agadir at Tlemcen in 789 and defeating the Banu Ifran, Idris I also began to expand his sphere of power. He also expanded his influence through an alliance with the Magrawa Berbers under Muhammad ibn Hazar. In the following years, he founded a fortified army camp at today's Féz in 789.

In 791, Before the birth of his son Idris II (791–828), Idris I was poisoned. This is said to have been done on the orders of the Caliph Harun ar-Rashid. Idris I was buried in Walila, now Moulay Idris. Later, this place became an important place of pilgrimage for the Muslims in Morocco. _________________________________________________________ Idris ibn Abdullah, arabisch ‏إدريس بن عبدالله‎) war der erste Herrscher der Idrisiden von 788 bis 791.

Idris ibn Abdellah (el-Kamil) war ein Abkömmling des Kalifen Ali ibn Abi Talib (656–661). Nach der Verwicklung in eine Revolte der Aliden gegen die Abbasiden (786) musste er aus Medina fliehen und kam über Ägypten nach Marokko. Dort verbreitete er unter den, teilweise noch heidnischen, Auraba-Berbern im nördlichen Marokko den Islam. Er wurde von den Berbern in Nordmarokko und dem Rif-Gebirge als Imam anerkannt. Zentrum seiner Herrschaft wurde Walila (das antike Volubilis).

Indem er 789 Agadir bei Tlemcen eroberte und die Banu Ifran besiegte, begann Idris I. auch mit der Ausdehnung seines Machtbereiches. Außerdem weitete er seinen Einfluss durch ein Bündnis mit den Magrawa-Berbern unter Muhammad ibn Hazar aus. In der Folgezeit gründete er 789 beim heutigen Fès ein befestigtes Heerlager.

791 wurde Idris I., vor der Geburt seines Sohnes Idris II. (791–828), vergiftet. Dies soll auf Anordnung des Kalifen Harun ar-Raschid geschehen sein. Idris I. wurde in Walila, dem heutigen Moulay Idris, bestattet. Später entwickelte sich dieser Ort zu einer bedeutenden Wallfahrtstätte für die Muslime in Marokko.

http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Idris_I.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000005439883766

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]