== Notes for [[Item:Q79476|Q79476]] ==

He was a descendant of the Gordiani family of Dardania, and was one of the most considerable nobles in that region. His great grandson Julius boasted that the family was descended from the warlike Maesians. The Dardanians dwelt on the edge of Maesia.

Some reconstructions of this family make him a son of [https://www.geni.com/people/Titus-Flavius-Sabinus-VI/6000000000700903118 Flavius Titus], a maternal grandson of the Emperor Titus.

ID: I6923

Name: Flavius Eutropius of the Gordiani

Given Name: Flavius Eutropius

Surname: of the Gordiani

Name: Eutropious OF THE GORDIANI

Given Name: Eutropious

Surname: OF THE GORDIANI

Sex: M

_UID: E00B2AFA5118D811BE490080C8C142CC7FA2

Change Date: 3 Oct 2005

Birth: 218**

Birth: ABT 230**

Death: deceased

Father: Titus Flavius b: ABT 160

Mother: Gordiana Balba b: ABT 210

Marriage 1 Claudia Crispina Illyria b: ABT 192

Married:

Children

Gaius Flavius Valerius Constantius b: 31 MAR 250**

Eutropia Crispina of Rome b: ABT 235

Father: Titus Flavius b: ABT 160**

Mother: Gordiana Balba b: ABT 210**

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I6923

** A megjelölt adatok egymáshoz való viszonya több, mint kétséges. / The marked data to each other the relation of truth more, than dubious.

--------------------

ID: I66372

Name: Flavius Crispus

Given Name: Flavius

Surname: Crispus

Sex: M

_UID: 25DF9847C652F84AA84CB9C45170DA398263

Change Date: 3 Oct 2005

Birth: ABT 230

Death: deceased

Father: Flavius Numerius

Mother: Claudia Appelinius b: ABT 200

Marriage 1 Aurelia Pompeiana Pompeianus

Married:

Children

Eutropia Crispina Crispus b: ABT 250

Claudia Crispus

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I66372

--------------------

Reference: http://fabpedigree.com/s080/f000016.htm
--------------------
•ID: I122464

•Name: EUTROPIUS (NOTES) OR FLAVIUS (L) DE ROME 1 2

•Sex: M

•ALIA: FLAVIUS (NOTES) (L) /EUTROPIUS/

•Name: AKA EUTROPIOUS (NOTES) OF (L) ROME

•Birth: BET 200 AND 240

•Death: 305

•Event: 1 AKA FLAVIUS (NOTES) EUTROPIUS OF THE (L) GORDIANI

•Event: 2 AKA EUTROPIOUS (NOTES) OF THE (L) GORDIANA

•Event: 3 AKA EUTROPIUS (NOTES) OF (L) DARDANIA

•Event: 4 AKA M. EUTROPIUS (NOTES) (L) GORDIANI

•Note:

SOME SOURCES SAY EUTROPIUS'S FATHER WAS TITUS (L) FLAVIUS, HIS MOTHER WAS GORDIANA BALBA OR (L) BALBUS AND HIS GRANDFATHER WAS TITUS FLAVIUS (L) SABINUS.

OTHER POSSIBLE PARENTS ARE SHOWN BELOW BUT THIS INDIVIDUAL IS NOT SHOWN AS A CHILD ON THE FOLLOWING POSSIBLE PARENTS' FAMILY PAGES, TO DO SO WOULD BE CONSIDERED ERRORS BY THIS PROGRAM. EVEN THOUGH THESE LAST POSSIBLE PARENTS MAY BE THE CORRECT ONES, SHOWING MORE THAN ONE SET OF PARENTS COULD CAUSE MY "FAMILY TREE" PROGRAM TO MALFUNCTION.

OTHER SOURCES SAY HIS FATHER WAS FLAVIUS (NOTES) (L) EUTROPIUS ANOTHER OF HIS MOTHER GORDIANA'S HUSBANDS.

STILL OTHER SOURCES SAY HIS FATHER WAS MARCUS ANTONIUS (NOTES) GORDIANUS I (L) DE ROME AND HIS GRANDFATHER WAS GORDIANI OF DARDANIA (L) DE ROME

Father: TITUS (L) FLAVIUS b: ABT 160

Mother: GORDIANA BALBA OR (L) BALBUS b: BET 200 AND 210

Marriage 1 CLAUDIA (NOTES) CRISPINA (L) ILLYRIA b: BET 192 AND 230

Children

1. CONSTANTIUS I (NOTES) EMPEROR (L) ROMAN EMPIRE b: BET 230 AND 31 MAR 250

2. Eutropia (NOTES) Crispina of (L) ROME b: BET 235 AND 252

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=pusch&id=I122464
--------------------
Reference: http://familytrees.genopro.com/318186/jarleslekt/default.htm?page=toc_families.htm
--------------------
http://larryvoyer.com/genealogy/getperson.php?personID=I52243&tree=v7_28

http://familytreemaker.genealogy.com/users/s/e/i/Robert-Seipp/WEBSITE-0001/UHP-0524.html
--------------------

1 NAME Constantius Angelus of /Rome/ 2 SOUR S033320 3 DATA 4 TEXT Date of Import: Jan 17, 2001 1 BIRT 2 PLAC ,Britain 2 SOUR S033320 3 DATA 4 TEXT Date of Import: Jan 17, 2001 1 DEAT 2 PLAC ,York 2 SOUR S033320 3 DATA 4 TEXT Date of Import: Jan 17, 2001

[De La Pole.FTW]

Sources: Ancestral Roots 45; Kraentzler 1669, 1680, 1795. K-1795: Constantius I, Emperor of Britain, Gaul, Spain and Rome ("Chlorus"). His British name appears to have been Cystennan. K-1669: Flavius Constantius "Chlore," Emperor of Britain, Rome and Gaul. Roots: Theodora Comnena, married Constantinus Angelus.

=========================

Constantinos was the governor of Dalmatia, and appointed Caesar to rule Gaul and Britain March 1, 293. Born in Illyria 214, he was trained in the hard school of warfare on the Danube frontier. Constantius I became Emperor of Rome in May 305, and in right of his wife, King of England. He was born in 242 and died at Eboracum (present day York, England) on July 25, 306. The son of Helen and Constantius I was Constantine the Great.

=================

file:///E:/E-S009/genealogy/Grab_A_Site_downloads/stirnet/romans2.htm#link4

1. Constantius Chlorus, Emperor of Rome (b 242, d 07.306) m1. (div) Helena 'of the Cross' (d 328, possibly dau of Coilus, King of Cochester) ... m2. Theodora (dau of Maximianus Herculius, Emperor of Rome) @@4@@ above ...

_____________________________________

Constantius I (Flavius Valerius Constantius Chlorus) "the Pale", Emperor of Rome

Governor of Dalmatia, appointed Caesar to rule Gaul and Britain March 1, 293. He was the son of *Eutropious, a Dardanian nobleman descended from the *Gordiani, and his wife, *Claudia, daughter of *Claudius II (Marcus Aurelius Flavius Claudius Gothicus), a virtuous and worthy Roman Emperor (268-270), who was a soldier, statesman, and a distinguished officer. Born in Illyria 214, he was trained in the hard school of warfare on the Danube frontier, and died of the Plague in 270, aged 55, whereupon his brother Marcus Aurelius Claudius Quintillus became Emperor. Constantius I became Emperor of Rome in May 305, and in right of his wife, King of England. He was born in 242 and died at Eboracum (present day York, England) on July 25, 306. On becoming "Caesar," he was required by Diocletian to put aside *Helena and to take Maximian's stepdaughter, Theodora, as his wife. From the first union, *Helena and *Constantius I had an illegitimate son, *Constantine the Great. He married (2) Theodora, daughter of Maximinus, Roman Emperor. Gibbon says *Claudia was the niece of *Claudius II (Marcus Aurelius Flavius Claudius Gothicus). Encyclopedia Brittanica maintains Constantius I's descent from Claudius Gothicus was a fiction.

SOURCES: "Neuman-Smith-Goodale Family and Ancestors" Michael R. Neuman michaelneuman@@earthlink.net (who has generously shared the above narrative at AWTP.)

Sources

[S395] royal_lineage.ged, June 2006.

[S2119] rootsweb, Mark Willis-Ballard, Willis-Ballard, Markrootsweb, (http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=SHOW&db=mwballard&surname=Ballard%2C+Living : 2014 feb 01).

--------------------
http://ancienthistory.about.com/od/emperors/a/imperialdates.htm

Rome was originally the capital of the Roman emperor. Later, it moved to Milan, and then Ravenna (A.D. 402-476). After the fall of Romulus Augustulus, in A.D. 476, Rome continued to have an emperor for almost another millennium, but that Roman emperor ruled from the East.

Julio-Claudians

(31 or) 27 B.C. - 14 A.D. Augustus 14 - 37 Tiberius 37 - 41 Caligula 41 - 54 Claudius 54 - 68 Nero Year of the 4 Emperors

(ends with Vespasian) 68 - 69 Galba 69 Otho 69 Vitellius

Flavian Dynasty

69 - 79 Vespasian 79 - 81 Titus 81 - 96 Domitian 5 Good Emperors

96 - 98 Nerva 98 - 117 Trajan 117 - 138 Hadrian 138 - 161 Antoninus Pius 161 - 180 Marcus Aurelius (161 - 169 Lucius Verus)

(The next cluster of emperors is not part of a specific dynasty or other common grouping, but includes 4 from the year of the 5 emperors, 193.) 177/180 - 192 Commodus 193 Pertinax 193 Didius Julianus 193 - 194 Pescennius Niger 193 - 197 Clodius Albinus

Severans

193 - 211 Septimius Severus 198/212 - 217 Caracalla 217 - 218 Macrinus 218 - 222 Elagabalus 222 - 235 Severus Alexander (More emperors without a dynastic label, although it includes the year of the 6 emperors, 238.) For more on this age of chaos, read Brian Campbell's excellent synopsis in The Romans and Their World.

235 - 238 Maximinus 238 Gordian I and II 238 Balbinus and Pupienus 238 - 244 Gordian III 244 - 249 Philip the Arab 249 - 251 Decius 251 - 253 Gallus 253 - 260 Valerian 254 - 268 Gallienus 268 - 270 Claudius Gothicus 270 - 275 Aurelian 275 - 276 Tacitus 276 - 282 Probus 282 - 285 Carus Carinus Numerian

Tetrarchy

285-ca.310 Diocletian 295 L. Domitius Domitianus 297-298 Aurelius Achilleus 303 Eugenius 285-ca.310 Maximianus Herculius 285 Amandus 285 Aelianus Iulianus 286?-297? British Emperors 286/7-293 Carausius 293-296/7 Allectus

293-306 Constantius I Chlorus Dynasty of Constantine

293-311 Galerius 305-313 Maximinus Daia 305-307 Severus II 306-312 Maxentius 308-309 L. Domitius Alexander 308-324 Licinius 314? Valens 324 Martinianus 306-337 Constantinus I 333/334 Calocaerus 337-340 Constantinus II 337-350 Constans I 337-361 Constantius II 350-353 Magnentius 350 Nepotian 350 Vetranio 355 Silvanus 361-363 Julianus 363-364 Jovianus

(More emperors without a dynastic label) 364-375 Valentinianus I 375 Firmus 364-378 Valens 365-366 Procopius 366 Marcellus 367-383 Gratian 375-392 Valentinianus II 378-395 Theodosius I 383-388 Magnus Maximus 384-388 Flavius Victor 392-394 Eugenius

[See: Table of Eastern and Western Emperors]

395-423 Honorius [Division of the Empire - Honorius' brother Arcadius ruled the East 395-408] 407-411 Constantine III usurper 421 Constantius III 423-425 Johannes 425-455 Valentinian III 455 Petronius Maximus 455-456 Avitus 457-461 Majorian 461-465 Libius Severus 467-472 Anthemius 468 Arvandus 470 Romanus 472 Olybrius 473-474 Glycerius 474-475 Julius Nepos 475-476 Romulus Augustulus

Table of Eastern and Western Emperors

Print Resources Chris Scarre: Chronicle of the Roman Emperors Adkins and Adkins: Handbook to Life in Ancient Rome

Rome and Roman Empire Maps Related Articles

Roman Battles Here's Why These Are the Most Important People in Ancient History How Taxes Led to the Fall of Rome Dates of the Roman Emperors A Timeline of the 5 Eras of Ancient Roman History Age at Accession of the Roman Emperors Our Expert Recommends

Emperors Age At Accession Roman Emperors Names and Dates from Diocletian to A.D. 476. Second Century Timeline of the Roman Emperors Roman Emperors Timeline of the Third Century Roman Emperors Timeline of the 4th Century DIR An Online Encyclopedia of Roman Emperors Fifth Century Roman Timeline Byzantine Emperors Other Third Century Chaos Emperors

AKA:
FLAVIUS EUTROPIUS OF THE GORDIANI
EUTROPIOUS OF THE GORDIANA
EUTROPIUS OF DARDANIA
M. EUTROPIUS GORDIANI

OF DALMATIA OR, MORE PROBABLY, DARDANIA

1 NAME /Eutropius/

1 NAME /Eutropius/

1 NAME /Eutropius/

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]