== Notes for [[Item:Q88167|Q88167]] ==

http://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:-lvnoDqSyQgJ:freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.com/~dantrogers/pafg921.htm+%22prince+lagos+of+Macedonia%22&cd=2&hl=en&ct=clnk

Lagos of Macedonia + was born about 400 BC. He married Princess Arsinoe of Macedonia +.

Other marriages: of Macedonia, Antigone +

Princess Arsinoe of Macedonia + [Parents] was born about 390 BC. She married Lagos of Macedonia +.

They had the following children:

M i King Ptolemy I Soter of Egypt +

--------------------
Magas of Macedonia married Antigone of Macedonia, daughter of Cassander of Macedonia.1

Child of Magas of Macedonia and Antigone of Macedonia:

Queen of Egypt Berenice I of Macedonia + b. 0333 B.C., d. 0275 B.C.

[S1052] Chris Bennett's Egyptian Royal Genealogy Website, online . Hereinafter cited as Egyptian Royal Genealogy.
--------------------
Lagus / Lagos "The Rabbit" of Macedonia, Prince Birthdate: -384 Death: Died in (Macedonia), Greece Immediate Family: Husband of Arsinoe I Father of Ptolemy I Soter, Pharaoh of Egypt and Menelaus of Egypt

KNOWN AS "THE RABBIT"

Lagus
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Lagus (Greek ?a???; lived 4th century BC) was the father, or reputed father, of Ptolemy, the founder of the Ptolemaic dynasty. He married Arsinoe, a concubine of Philip II, king of Macedon, who was said to have been pregnant at the time of their marriage, on which account it is told that the Macedonians generally looked upon Ptolemy as in reality the son of Philip; but it is possible that this is a later myth fabricated to glorify the Ptolemaic dynasty.1 From an anecdote recorded by Plutarch2, it is clear that Lagus was a man of obscure birth; hence, when Theocritus3 calls Ptolemy a descendant of Heracles, he probably means to represent him as the son of Philip. Lagus appears to have subsequently married Antigone, niece of Antipater, by whom he became the father of Berenice, afterwards the wife of her step-brother Ptolemy.4
[edit]

References

* Smith, William (editor); Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology, "Lagus (1)", Boston, (1867)

[edit]

Notes
1 Pausanias, Description of Greece, i. 6; Curtius Rufus, Historia Alexandri Magni, ix. 8; Suda, s.v. "Lagos"
2 Plutarch, Moralia, "Concerning the Cure of Anger. A Dialogue", 9 (42 MB PDF)
3 Theocritus, Idylls, xvii. 7
4 Scholia ad Theocritum

This article incorporates text from the public domain Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology by William Smith (1867).

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]