== Notes for [[Item:Q88317|Q88317]] ==

Darius II (Persian: داريوش دوم‎‎) (Dārayavahuš), was king of the Persian Empire from 423 BC to 405 BC.

Issue Darius II was married to the daughter of Gobryas. With the daughter of Gobryas, Darius II had four sons, through whom one of his sons became the father of Artabazanes, who served as King of Media Atropatene in the second half of the 3rd century BC.

By Parysatis Artaxerxes II Cyrus the Younger Oxathres or Oxendares or Oxendras Artoxexes Ostanes Amestris wife of Teritouchmes & then Artaxerxes II & seven other unnamed children By other wives Artostes The unnamed satrap of Media at 401 B.C.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Darius_II

468 - 404 F.KR. GIFT MED SØSTEREN

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Persia 423-405/4 BCE

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per00530.htm#0

Han var en utomäktenskaplig son till Antaxerxes I. Enligt hans grekiska namn
Nothos, som betyder "bastard".

OR "DARIUS II OCHUS/OKHOS (THE BASTARD); GREAT KING OF PERSIA 423-404 BC;
PER-'O AS MERY.AMEN.RE' 423-404 BC; b. 475 BC-d. 404 BC; HAD 13 OTHER CHILDREN
BESIDES THOSE SHOWN

He ruled from 424 to 404 b.c.

He ruled from 424 to 404 b.c.

His original was name Ochus. He was an illegitimate son hence his Greek
name, Nothos, meaning "bastard." As Ochus, he was a satrap of the province
of Hyrcania when his father died. Ochus's half brother, Xerxes II, was
king for a few weeks; another half brother, Sogdianus, murdered Xerxes II
and was king for a few months; then Ochus murdered Sogdianus and ascended
the throne, assuming the name of Darius. In the early years of his reign
the power of Athens prevented him from interfering in the affairs of
Greece. But after Athens was defeated by Syracuse in 413 bc, Darius II
intervened and supported Sparta for the remaining years of the
Peloponnesian War. In 407 bc he sent his son Cyrus the Younger to command
the combined Persian and Spartan forces in Asia Minor. Three years later
he died. The 20 years of Darius's reign were notable primarily for
ruthless suppression of a series of revolts within his empire.

Darius II of Persia
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.

Darius II, originally called Ochus and often surnamed Nothus (from Greek ?????, meaning 'bastard'), was emperor of Persia from 423 BC to 404 BC.

Artaxerxes I, who died shortly after December 24, 424 BC, was followed by his son Xerxes II. After a month and a half Xerxes was murdered by his brother Secydianus or Sogdianus (the form of the name is uncertain). His illegitimate brother, Ochus, satrap of Hyrcania, rebelled against Sogdianus, and after a short fight killed him, and suppressed by treachery the attempt of his own brother Arsites to imitate his example. Ochus adopted the name Darius (in the chronicles he is called Nothos, meaning "the bastard"). Neither Xerxes II nor Secydianus occurs in the dates of the numerous Babylonian tablets from Nippur; here the reign of Darius II follows immediately after that of Artaxerxes I.

Of Darius's reign we know very little (a rebellion of the Medes in 409 BC is mentioned in Xenophon), except that he was quite dependent on his wife Parysatis. In the excerpts from Ctesias some harem intrigues are recorded, in which he played a disreputable part. As long as the power of Athens remained intact he did not meddle in Greek affairs; even the support which the Athenians in 413 BC gave to the rebel Amorges in Caria would not have roused him, had not the Athenian power been broken in the same year before Syracuse. He gave orders to his satraps in Asia Minor, Tissaphernes and Pharnabazus, to send in the overdue tribute of the Greek towns, and to begin a war with Athens; for this purpose they entered into an alliance with Sparta. In 408 BC he sent his son Cyrus to Asia Minor, to carry on the war with greater energy. In 404 BC Darius II died after a reign of nineteen years, and was followed by Artaxerxes II.

Based on an article from a 1911 encyclopedia




Preceded by:
Sogdianus Great King of Media and Persia
423–404 BC Succeeded by:
Artaxerxes II
King of Egypt
423–404 BC Succeeded by:
Amyrtaeus

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]