== Notes for [[Item:Q2489|Q2489]] ==

{geni:about_me} III (1263-1245) roi des Hittites
<p>--------------------------------------------------------</p>
<p>Hattusili III</p>
<p>From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 [[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]] 
 
 </p>
<p>Title</p>
<p>King of the Hittites</p>
<p>Predecessor</p>
<p>Mursili III</p>
<p>Successor</p>
<p>Tudhaliya IV</p>
<p>Religion</p>
<p>Hittite religion</p>
<p>Spouse(s)</p>
<p>Puduhepa</p>
<p> Babylonian Princess</p>
<p>Children</p>
<p>Nerikkaili</p>
<p> Tudhaliya IV</p>
<p> Maathorneferure[1]</p>
<p> Kiluš-Ḫepa[2]</p>
<p> Gaššulawiya</p>
<p>Parents</p>
<p>Mursili II</p>
<p> Queen Gassulawiya</p>
<p>Hattusili III (Hittite: "from Hattusa") was a king of the Hittite empire (New Kingdom or Late Empire) ca. 1267–1237 BC (short chronology timeline).[3]</p>
<p>[edit] Family</p>
<p>Hattusili was the fourth and last son of Mursili II.[4] His mother was Queen Gassulawiya and his brother was Muwatalli II.[5]</p>
<p>Hattusili married Puduhepa, a priestess of Ishtar, who later became Hittite queen.[6][7]</p>
<p>Mursili appointed Hattusili as a priest of Sausga of Samuha, and Hattusili remained loyal to the Ishtar of Samuha to the end of his days.</p>
<p>His older brother Muwatalli moved his seat in Tarhuntassa and appointed him governor of Hattusa.</p>
<p>Hattusili was a commander of Hittite forces during the famous Battle of Kadesh against Egypt in 1274 BC. Hattusili reconquered Nerik and became the High Priest of its storm god. Hattusili named his eldest son and crown prince Nerikkaili in honor of this achievement.[8]
<p>His nephew Mursili III (or Urhi-Teshub) moved the capital back to Hattusa (KBo 21.15 i 11-12), rendering Hattusili’s governorship redundant. Mursili then deposed him from Nerik, triggering a civil war. Hattusili defeated and exiled his nephew. Hattusili renamed Urhi-Teshup’s sibling Ulmi-Teshup "Kurunta" and appointed Kurunta over Tarhuntassa in his place. After this, Hattusili elevated a junior son Tudhaliya IV as crown prince instead.
<p>Hattusili and the Egyptian pharaoh Ramesses II sealed a written peace treaty based upon Hittite models which, due to Egyptian monumental copies of it, has become the earliest well known treaty in history, establishing a long-lasting peace between the two rival empires. Ramesses married Hattusili’s daughter, and conferred upon her an Egyptian name, Maathorneferure.[9] Years later he married another Hittite princess.[10]
<p>An archive of over 200 letters have been found from the royal palace at Hattusa which show that Hattusili exchanged letters with numerous Near Eastern kings including Ramesses II. They are an important primary source for this period.
<p>[edit] References</p>
<p>1.^ Dodson, Aidan; Hilton, Dyan (2004). The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt. Thames & Hudson. p. 140. ISBN 978-0-5000-51283.</p>
<p> 2.^ Singer (1991) 327f.</p>
<p> 3.^ Bryce, Trevor (1998). The Kingdom of the Hittites. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-924010-4., pp.xiii-xiv</p>
<p> 4.^ Trevor Bryce, Life and society in the Hittite world. Oxford University Press, 2002. ISBN 0-19-924170-8</p>
<p> 5.^ Edel, E., (1994): Die ägyptisch-hethitische Korrespondenz aus Boghazköi in babylonischer und hethitischer Sprache</p>
<p> 6.^ Darga, Muhibbe. Women in the Historical Ages. In Women in Anatolia, 9000 Years of the History of the Anatolian Woman, Turkish Republic Ministry of Culture, Istanbul, 1993, page 30.</p>
<p> 7.^ Letter from Ramses II of Egypt to Puduhepa, from Women in Anatolia, 9000 Years of the History of the Anatolian Woman, Turkish Republic Ministry of Culture, Istanbul, 1993.</p>
<p> 8.^ Apology of Hattusili III</p>
<p> 9.^ Wilkinson, Toby (2011). The Rise and Fall of Ancient Egypt. Bloomsbury. pp. 340-41. ISBN 978-1-4088-1002-6.</p>
<p> 10.^ J.H. Breasted, Ancient Records of Egypt, Part Three, § 415ff</p>
<p>http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hattusili_III</p>
<p>--------------------</p>
<p>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Muwatalli_II</p>
<p>Muwatalli II was a king of the New Kingdom of the Hittite empire (ca. 1295–1272 BC .</p>
<p>He was the eldest son of Mursili II and Queen Gassulawiya, and he had several siblings.</p>
<p>He is best known as the Hittite ruler who fought Ramesses II to a standstill at the Battle of Kadesh around 1274 BC. Aside from the battle with Egypt, he is best known for relocating the Hittite capital to Tarhuntassa and appointing his brother Hattusili as governor in Hattusa.
<p>A copy of a treaty has been recovered between him and Alaksandu, ruler of Wilusa (Troy), one of the Arzawa lands.</p>
<p>Egyptologists suspect that some time prior to Ramesses II's accession to the Egyptian throne, Muwattalli had reached an informal peace treaty or understanding with Seti I over Kadesh to avoid a clash between the two powers over control of Syria. In it, Seti effectively ceded Kadesh to the Hittite king in order to focus on domestic issues in Egypt.
<p>Muwatalli had a wife named Tanu-Ḫepa and at least two children. One was Urhi-Teshup, who became king as Mursili III until his uncle Hattusili III deposed him. Another was Kurunta who became the vassal ruler of Tarhuntassa during the reign of Hattusili III. Another person named Ulmi-Teshup is suggested to be a third son of Muwatalli II but it is quite likely that Ulmi-Teshup and Kurunta are the same person.
<p>Tudhaliya IV and Egyptian Queen Maathorneferure were the nephew and niece of Muwatalli.</p>
<p>Muwatalli's namesake, Muwatalli I, was a pre-Empire king of the early 14th century, the predecessor of Tudhaliya I.</p>
<p>RESEARCH NOTES:</p>
<p>King of the Hittites 1263-1245 BCE</p>
<p>SOURCE NOTES:</p>
<p>http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per00728.htm#0</p>
<p>Hattusili III</p>
<p>From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 [[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]] 
 
 </p>
<p>Hattusili III was a king of the Hittite empire (New kingdom) 1265 BC–1235 BC. He was the fourth and last son of Mursili II. Mursili appointed Hattusili as priest of Sausga of Samuha, and Hattusili remained loyal to the "Ishtar of Samuha" to the end of his days.
<p>His older brother Muwatalli II moved his seat in Tarhuntassa and appointed him governor of Hattusa. Hattusili was the commander of Hittite forces in 1274 BC which defeated an Egyptian campign into Syria in the famous Battle of Kadesh. Hattusili as governor also reconquered Nerik and became the High Priest of its storm god. Hattusili named his eldest son and crown prince "Nerikkaili" in honor of this achievement.
<p>His nephew, Mursili III (or Urhi-Teshub) moved the capitol back to Hattusa (KBo 21.15 i 11-12), rendering Hattusili's governorship redundant. Mursili then deposed him from Nerik, triggering a civil war. Hattusili defeated and exiled his nephew. Hattusili renamed Urhi-Teshup's sibling Ulmi-Teshup "Kurunta" (or: married her off to Kurunta), and appointed Kurunta over Tarhuntassa in his place. After this, Hattusili elevated a junior son Tudhaliya IV as crown prince instead.
<p>Hattusili and the Egyptian pharaoh Ramesses II signed the first written peace treaty in history, establishing a long-lasting peace between the two rival empires. Ramesses married Hattusili's daughter Maathorneferure.</p>
<p>An archive of over 200 letters have been found from the royal palace at Hattusa which show that Hattusili exchanged with letters with numerous Near Eastern kings including Ramesses II of ancient Egypt. They are an important primary source for this period.
<p>Preceded by:</p>
<p>Mursili III Hittite king Succeeded by:</p>
<p>Tudhaliya IV</p>
<p>OR "KHATTUSHILISH"; KING OF HATTI (HITTITES) ca. 1289-ca. 1265 BC; SIGNED
<p>TREATY WITH RA.MESSE II IN 1284 BC</p>


[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]