== Notes for [[Item:Q116848|Q116848]] ==

'''Lope I Díaz de Haro''', IV Señor de Vizcaya born c. 1105 died May 6, 1170

The fourth Lord of Biscay (from at least 1162).

He was an important magnate in Castile during the reign of the Emperor Alfonso VII and in the kingdom of his son and grandson. Between 1147 and 1168 he is recorded as governing Old Castile on behalf of the crown.

== Sources ==

[http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/VIZCAYA.htm#InigoLopezdied1077 FMG MedLands Vizcaya]

== Links ==

[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lope_D%C3%ADaz_I_de_Haro Wiki - Lope Díaz I de Haro]

Lope Diaz de Haro I (? - † May 6 of 1170). Son of Diego López de Haro I and Ms Almicena. Was fourth Lord of Biscay between 1124 and 1170.

Life

He was faithful to Urraca of Leon and Castile as had been his father, which could not intervene in La Rioja, which had seized the husband of Urraca, Alfonso I of Aragon, even though after the death of this, his son Alfonso claimed the throne of Castile. Lope At this time lost the lordship over castles Haro and Buradón for the Aragonese.

In 1130 he settled with his family in the town of Najera, where he will live his successors to the Lordship of Biscay, to the entrance of the first woman to him, after the death of Diego Lopez de Haro V childless. In this village improved Abbey Hospital, which had begun to build the King Alfonso VII.

After the death of Alfonso of Aragon in 1134 without issue, along with other Lope Rioja Najera rebounded the kingdom to give to Alfonso VII, King of Leon. As a reward Alfonso was given the title of count and confirmed in the lordship of the town of Haro, as reflected by a privilege given by the October 10, 1134, which gave the monastery of San Millán various churches and estates, in which began: "Lope Diaz confirmed by his great qual ..."

In 1141 was awarded to Santo Domingo de la Calzada privilege of population, appearing in all documentation Lope as governor of La Rioja.

It was entitled Alferez Real, as it appears since 1158.

After the death of Alfonso VII, Lopez continued to serve his successors, first to Sancho el Deseado and only a year later Alfonso VIII of Castile, son of the former which was only three years old when he ascended the throne.

In 1163 building on the minority of Alfonso VIII, Sancho VI the Wise occupy part of the territory of La Rioja, leaving Logroño, Trains, Navarrete, Ausejo, Arnedo, Quel and Resa in the hands of Navarra. A Lope as governor of La Rioja touch you face them in 1163 and 1167, and afterwards his heir in office, his son Pedro Ruiz in 1174.

He coined a currency called lobis or Lobres, referring to the wolves the symbol of his lineage that contained therein.

=============================
Lope Díaz I de Haro (fallecido 6 de mayo de 1170​), llamado el Rubio o el de Nájera, fue hijo de Diego López I de Haro y la condesa María Sánchez, hija del conde Sancho Sánchez de Erro y la condesa Elvira García, hija legítima del conde García Ordóñez. Fue el IV señor de Vizcaya entre los años 1124 y 1170.

En 1169 él y su mujer, donaron a unas monjas benedictinas de Santo Domingo de la Calzada unas tierras en Cañas , para ayudarlas a construir allí una abadía con la condición de que pasasen a cumplir la orden cisterciense . Thus began building the monastery of Santa Maria de San Salvador de Cañas.

https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lope_D%C3%ADaz_I_de_Haro
===================================================

Lope came in 1169 purse Zorita with other men, to support the King Alfonso VIII, without this I asked him. Do not let the king to hand him a salary for their assistance, so in gratitude I give the government of the town of Najera, Earl besides this.

He died in 1170 and was buried in the cloister of the Knights of the monastery of Santa Maria la Real de Najera.

[Edit] Nicknames

He called himself Count D Lope Diaz de Haro, having resided in the town of Haro be furnished after his father. The nickname "Haro" would be used since then by their descendants.

In the book History of Spain's King Alfonso X the Wise is referred to as Count Don Lope de Navarra, because they settled in La Rioja, which had belonged to the kingdom of Navarre.

It is also sometimes named as Don Lope de Najera, that tube in government ownership and the town of Najera, of great importance for having been Head of the Kingdom.

[Edit] Descendants

Married Aldonza Rodriguez de Castro (some call Mencia) daughter of Rui Fernandez Calvo and Stephanie Perez de Trava, taking by children:

Diego López de Haro II, his successor.

Lope Lopez. Lord of Miranda de Ebro and Almenara married Maria de Urgel.

Alonso Lopez de Haro. Commander of San Salvador de Soria, the Order of Calatrava.

Martin Lopez de Haro

Probably had another son named Lope Diaz de Haro would have been bishop of Segovia.

Urraca López de Haro, third wife of King Ferdinand.

Toda Lopez de Haro, who died on December 1 of 1122

Inheritance

At his death he divided his estate, leaving his son Pedro Ruiz as governor of the Rioja Alta. His son Lope Lopez continue with the office of Mayor Murphy and his firstborn Diego Castilla lord of Biscay.

[Edit] See also

Haro Family

References

De War, Juan Carlos. "Volume 6, Title 11, Chapter VI", Royal Academy of History (ed.). Illustrations Bascongada genealogical lineages content is the greatness of Spain., Pp. 513-514.

Larrea, Antonio (1968). Editions Literoy (ed.). "Historia de Haro. Recensión's work Hergueta Dimingo.

Don Lope Diaz noveno Señor de Vizcaya fue, el que fin fer llamado acudio al cerco de Çurita, a quien el Rey don Alonfo el octavo por le hazer fu vaffallo, dio en Feudo la ciudad de Najera. Por efto fue llamado don Lope Diaz el de Najera, y el Arçobifpo don Rodrigo le llama el Conde de Najera. El qual defavenido del Rey de Caftilla, fe paffô a Navarra, y por efto fue llamdo el Conde don Lope de Navarra. Finalmente el Rey de Caftilla viendo quan gran Cavallero era, le reftituyô en fu gracia, y le dio por juro de heredad la vida de Haro, que es en la rioja cerca del Rio Ebro, en la qual habitò efte Cavallero, y fue pueblo, q a el y fus decendientes dio el apellido de Haro, que tan poderofo â fido en eftos Reynos, fiendo efte Conde el primero que vfò del. Fue cafado (fegun el Conde don Pedro) con doña Aldonça Rodriguez hija de Ruy Fernandez el Calvo, y fegun Eftevan de Garivay (a quien figo) con doña Mencia hija del Conde don Arias, en quien vuo a don Diego Lopez de Haro Señor de Vizcaya, y a doña Vrraca Lopez Reyna de Leon muger de don Fernando fegundo defte nombre Rey de Leon, y a don Lope Diaz de haro Obifpo de Segovia, y a don Martin Lopez de Haro, y a don Diego Lopez de Haro, que le fucedio en el Señorio. Los cuerpos de todos lôs quales yacen enn el Monafterio de Sancta Maria la Real de Najera. Efte Conde (como efcrive el Conde don Pedro) murio a feys de Mayo año de 1170 y hizo Moneda; que llamaron Lobis, porque yvan eftampados en ella dos Lobos, que eran fus Armas. Tambien ariman, tuvo otra hija don Lope Diaz Señor de Vizcaya llamada doña Gaufreda Reyna de Navarra muger de don Garcia el feptimo Rey de Navarra. Lo qual no apureva Eftevan de Garivay en el capit. 3 libr. 24 de fu hiftoria.
NOBLEZA DEL ANDALVZIA
Por Gonçalo Argote de Molina, Sevilla 1588. De Don Lope Chico Primer Caudillo del Reyno de Iaen, y de las Armas y fucefsion del apellido de Haro y de Baeça. Cap. LXXXIII. Pág. 85

--------------------
Lope Díaz I de Haro (c. 1105 – 6 May 1170) was the fourth Lord of Biscay (from at least 1162). He was an important magnate in Castile during the reign of the Emperor Alfonso VII and in the kingdom of his son and grandson. Between 1147 and 1168 he is recorded as governing Old Castile on behalf of the crown.

Political career

Lope was the eldest son of Diego López I and María Sánchez. On his father's death in 1124, Alfonso the Battler seized the Basque señoríos and the Rioja, annexing them to the Kingdom of Navarre. By 17 June 1125 the Battler was in the castle of Haro.[2] Diego was succeeded by the Navarrese magnate Ladrón Íñiguez. Lope was, at the time, probably a youth of about twenty years of age. He is recorded in the Chronica Adefonsi imperatoris (I, §7) among the eleven Castilian noblemen who swore fealty Alfonso VII upon his succession in 1126.

Lope was appointed a count by 1 February 1135. By the next year (1136) he had been given the government of Nájera, which was to be the centre of his power until his death. By 1138 he was holding Álava and by 1140 Haro, the castle from which his father took the family name. In that year, however, he rebelled and was dispossessed. He seems to have been reconciled to the emperor and reinstated by 1143.In 1146 he was with the imperial court in September and again in November.There is no record of Lope's participation in the conquest of Almería (1147), but it is not unlikely.

In 1149 the emperor made Nájera the capital of a subkingdom for his eldest son, Sancho “the Desired”, but by August 1154 Lope had received de facto control of it again, although he had to wait until August 1155 to be formally re-installed as lord of Nájera. At some point Lope entrusted the government of Nájera to a certain vassal of his, Lucas López, whom he had knighted himself. After the death of Alfonso VII, Lope served Sancho as alférez between November 1157 and July 1158, although in December 1157 that post was briefly held by Pedro Fernández. on 29 November 1157 he issued a fuero to the town of Fañuela.

In 1162 Sancho's son and successor, Alfonso VIII, granted Lope the Trasmiera, the Rioja, and Biscay to govern as tenencias. In that year he used the high-sounding title Count of Nájera and Biscay (comes naiarensis atque bizchayensis) for the first time.

Religious patronage

Lope founded two religious houses on his lands. In 1162 he established the Praemonstratensians in San Juan de la Peña, Begoña, Arratia and Guernica. The founding charter was drawn up by a scribe named John, a chaplain of Santa María la Real de Nájera, and the original survives. Lope subscribed the document with his own hand and embellished his signature with a large cross, the rough features of which suggest the count's lack of familiarity with the pen. It leaves open the question of how literate Lope may have been. In 1169 Lope founded a Cistercian convent at Hayuela (Fayola) in the Rioja. In 1170 it was re-founded at nearby Cañas.

In 1168 Lope gave his brother Sancho his property in the monastery of San Cipriano and in Villamezquina.

Marriage, death and heirs

Sometime before 1162 Lope married a lady named Aldonza (Endolza, Endulcia). Her patronymic is not recorded in primary document and her parentage has been much discussed. The earliest authority to name her father was Pedro de Barcelos in the fourteenth century, who called her Aldonza Ruiz de Castro, a daughter of Rodrigo Fernández de Castro and Elo Álvarez, although she is not mentioned among Rodrigo's children in the De rebus Hispaniae. A century later Lope García de Salazar called his wife Mencía, a daughter of Arias. Luis de Salazar y Castro believed that Lope had an earlier wife, name unknown, who bore him several sons, among them Lope López, who married María de Almenar. This thesis is based in part on the assumption that Lope Díaz was not the type to sire children outside of marriage. Most recently José María Canal Sánchez-Pagín has dissented from the view that Aldonza was a Castilian like her husband. She was widowed while her offspring were still young, and they rose to positions of importance in the León and Galicia, where they would have been considered foreigners if their mother was not a Leonese or Galician.

Considering Aldonza's longevity (she outlived her husband by about forty years, and was probably at least thirty years his junior), she must have been born around 1135. Jaime de Salazar y Acha, in his study of the Vela family, suggested that she was a daughter of Rodrigo Vélaz, and Canal Sánchez-Pagín originally suggested that she was his granddaughter, a daughter of Álvaro Rodríguez. In a document of 1182 recording a donation to San Prudencio de Monte Laturce that survives only in a Spanish translation by Gaspar Coronel, Aldonza calls herself a first cousin (consobrina) of Rodrigo Álvarez, son of Álvaro Rodríguez and Sancha Fernández de Traba. It is most likely, then, that she was a daughter of Sancha's brother, Gonzalo Fernández de Traba. She is known to have had close relations with Gonzalo's other children, Gómez and Urraca. She was a daughter of Gonzalo by his first wife, Elvira, a daughter of Rodrigo Vélaz.

Besides his heir, Diego II, Lope Díaz had three sons—García, Lope, and Rodrigo—and eight daughters—Aldonza, Elvira, Estefanía, María, Mencía, Sancha, Toda, and Urraca, who married Ferdinand II of León as his final wife. Lope died on 6 May 1170, a date confirmed by the Annales compostellani. By June 1171, his widow had entered the convent at Cañas, where for over thirty years she acted as de facto abbess. She was still living in May 1207, when she made a donation to San Marcos de León.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lope_Diaz_I_de_Haro

http://dbe.rah.es/biografias/43974/lope-diaz-de-haro Díaz de Haro, Lope. El de Nájera. Conde y señor de Vizcaya. ?, c. 1105 – V.1170. Conde, tenente terrae. Conde castellano, hijo de Diego López de Haro I y de María Sánchez. Desposeído de los territorios vizcaínos —señorío familiar— tras la derrota y muerte de su padre frente a las tropas de Alfonso el Batallador (1124), se mantuvo fiel a la Casa Real castellano-leonesa. En la primavera de 1126 acató al nuevo soberano, Alfonso VII, junto a quien luchó por recuperar el control de los territorios castellanos y riojanos aún en poder del Batallador. Por entonces, Nájera, plaza muy vinculada a los Haro, estaba en manos de nobles afines a Alfonso I y lo mismo podría decirse del señorío vizcaíno. En lo que respecta a los territorios vascos, las paces de Támara (1227) legitimaron el control navarro de aquellos territorios, en manos del conde Ladrón desde la derrota de Diego López de Haro. La reacción castellano-leonesa se vio beneficiada por la muerte de Alfonso I de Aragón y la restauración de la independencia navarra por García Ramírez. En mayo de 1135, se halla Lope Díaz de Haro al frente de la Vizcaya nuclear, aunque Durango y las comarcas guipuzcoanas permanecieron en manos del rey García. No obstante, Alfonso VII, que había asumido la dignidad imperial, no tardó en aceptar el vasallaje de García IV, reconociendo su posesión de los territorios vascos bajo fórmulas de vasallaje. El desplazamiento de los Haro se vio completado con la permanencia del conde Ladrón Íñiguez en Vizcaya, Álava y Guipúzcoa, si bien un nuevo enfrentamiento armado le deparó su captura y derrota por las tropas castellanas. El conde fue obligado a prestar vasallaje a Alfonso VII y a reconocer la incorporación de Álava a Castilla, mientras que Vizcaya y Guipúzcoa permanecían bajo soberanía navarra a cargo de Vela Ladrón, hijo del anterior. Entre tanto, Lope Díaz de Haro I vio recompensada su fidelidad a Alfonso VII con la dignidad condal, la concesión de tierras al oeste del río Nervión, entre ellas las Encartaciones, y la tenencia de varias comarcas y fortalezas de Castilla la Vieja y La Rioja occidental. Incluso se llega a documentarle al frente de Álava durante el sometimiento del conde Ladrón, aunque algo debió empañar la relación entre Alfonso VII y su vasallo, pues el conde Lope desaparece de la Corte en 1140. El motivo de la desavenencia pudo estar en el reconocimiento del dominio navarro sobre Vizcaya o en algún desacuerdo sobre los territorios y tenencias entregados a su cargo. De hecho, la actitud hostil de García Ramírez en los años previos, pese a haber jurado vasallaje al Emperador, fue solventada con nuevas paces en 1140, que volvieron a sancionar el control navarro de los territorios vascos. No se sabe si Lope Díaz de Haro I participó en la conquista del Alto Valle del Guadalquivir y la ciudad de Almería (1147), pues nada dicen las fuentes. No obstante, parece que había recuperado el favor regio, aunque ello no evitó nuevos acuerdos entre Alfonso VII y la familia Ladrón, quienes confirman en los diplomas de Sancho III desde 1153, aún bajo la autoridad del Emperador. La presencia de Don Sancho III en Nájera explica la vinculación de Lope Díaz de Haro I con el que sería sucesor de Alfonso VII, pues el conde era tenente de aquella localidad y se había asentado en las comarcas del Alto Ebro. En los primeros meses de 1158, al poco de acceder Sancho III al trono castellano, se halla al magnate a cargo de la alferecía regia, sin abandonar su decidida participación en el gobierno y defensa de La Rioja durante los años difíciles que siguieron a la muerte del Soberano. Las disputas políticas durante la minoría de Alfonso VIII, cuya Corte se encontraba dominada por los Lara, ampliaron el poder de Lope Díaz de Haro, pues la conflictividad reinante en las comarcas fronterizas de Castilla y León dejaron el sector nororiental en manos del tenente de Nájera, que también controlaba Castilla la Vieja y Trasmiera. El conde Lope Díaz gozó de gran autonomía y poder en los territorios bajo su mando, en connivencia con los Lara. Esta actitud encontró su paralelismo en las alianzas matrimoniales, pues Lope Díaz de Haro casó con Aldonza, dama gallega emparentada con los Traba y, por tanto, familiar de Teresa Fernández, esposa de Nuño Pérez de Lara. A su vez, dos de las hijas de Lope Díaz enlazaron con Álvaro Pérez y Pedro Rodríguez de Lara, mientras que su hijo y heredero, Diego López de Haro II, contrajo esponsales con María Manrique de Lara. Los ataques navarros en torno a 1163, cuando Sancho VI llegó a ocupar Logroño, Álava, Grañón y otras localidades de la región, evidencian la debilidad castellana durante aquellos años. Sin embargo, no se puede olvidar que esta fecha coincide con la marcha del conde Vela Ladrón, noble navarro que había acudido a la Corte castellana unos años antes y que estuvo al frente de Álava y gran parte de Vizcaya antes, durante y después de su presencia en Castilla, pues su regreso a la obediencia navarra supuso el retorno a este reino de las comarcas vascas que controlaba. En momentos como éste se demostró la valía del conde Lope Díaz y el oportunismo de sus acuerdos con los Lara, pues los castellanos no tardaron en recuperar posiciones en La Rioja, hasta que las paces de 1167 pusieron formalmente fin a las hostilidades. Eso sí, reconociendo la ocupación navarra de Logroño. La confianza que los Lara otorgaron a Lope Díaz de Haro I se plasma perfectamente en 1165, cuando el conde y su yerno Álvaro Pérez de Lara se encargaron temporalmente de la custodia del joven Alfonso VIII. El magnate aprovechó la ocasión para beneficiar al monasterio najerense de Santa María la Real, contando con la complicidad de Álvaro Pérez de Lara y Pedro Jiménez de los Cameros. Eran momentos difíciles, pues a los conflictos existentes con el reino de León se sumaba la continua hostilidad navarra en La Rioja, frenada por la presencia del conde Lope Díaz de Haro en Nájera y su fidelidad, como la de los señores de los Cameros, a Alfonso VIII. Es posible que la dificultad de defender los territorios a su cargo llevara a Lope Díaz de Haro a renunciar al control de Castilla la Vieja, en manos del conde Nuño Pérez de Lara en 1169, aunque mantuvo el gobierno de Nájera. El conde Lope Díaz de Haro I pudo contemplar el acceso de Alfonso VIII a la mayoría de edad, pero no vivió mucho más, pues falleció en la primavera de 1170. Fue entonces cuando el conde Nuño de Lara, anterior regente de Castilla, recibió la tenencia de Nájera. En lo que respecta a Vizcaya, la parte oriental del señorío y los territorios de Álava estuvieron controlados por la familia Ladrón, por lo que Lope Díaz de Haro sólo pudo transmitir a su hijo el gobierno del sector occidental vizcaíno, próximo a su tenencia de Trasmiera. Lope Díaz de Haro I había casado en dos ocasiones, sin que se conozca el nombre de su primera mujer. De este enlace nacieron Lope y Sancho López, aparte de otras dos probables hijas, Sancha y María. Sin embargo, su descendencia más destacada fue la habida en la condesa Aldonza. De este matrimonio nacieron Diego López de Haro II, que le heredó al frente de su parentela y dominios, y Rodrigo, García, Urraca, Mencía, Estefanía, Aldonza, Elvira y Toda López. De ellos, aparte del mencionado sucesor, son de destacar Urraca López de Haro, reina de León por su matrimonio con Fernando II, y la condesa Mencía, que llegó a ser abadesa del monasterio de San Andrés de Arroyo y testamentaria de Alfonso VIII.

"Europaische Stammtafeln", Isenburg.
"Plantagenet Ancestry", Turton.
"De Ayala de Castile, The Augustan".
[Custer February 1, 2002 Family Tree.FTW]

[merge G675.FTW]

"Europaische Stammtafeln", Isenburg.
"Plantagenet Ancestry", Turton.
"De Ayala de Castile, The Augustan".

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]