== Notes for [[Item:Q116420|Q116420]] ==

Pedro González de Lara (muerto en Bayona, 16 de octubre de 1130) fue un magnate castellano. Sirvió a Alfonso VI de joven y más tarde se convirtió en amante de su heredera, la reina Urraca. Puede que se uniera a la Primera Cruzada siguiendo a Raimundo IV de Tolosa, ganándose el apodo de «El Romero» («el errante, el peregrino»). En el apogeo de su influencia fue la persona más poderosa en el reino después del monarca. La preponderancia de su poder en Castilla está atestiguada en numerosos documentos entre 1120 y 1127. Se opuso a la sucesión del heredero legítimo de Urraca, Alfonso VII. Este conflicto terminó con su muerte prematura.

Fue en la generación de Pedro que se comenzó a utilizar en los reinos ibéricos el uso de toponímicos en vez de solamente el patronímico y Pedro fue el primer miembro de su linaje que añadió a su patronímico el «de Lara», una costumbre continuada por sus descendientes. Un buen ejemplo del estilo de Pedro se encuentra en una carta real de 1 de febrero de 1124: uenerabilis comes dominus Petrus de Lara, «el venerable conde don Pedro de Lara».

https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pedro_Gonz%C3%A1lez_de_Lara#Descendencia

Casó con Eva Pérez de Traba, hija de Pedro Fernández de Traba y Mayor de Urgel...

hijos:

1.- Manrique Pérez de Lara [nació en 1115 y murió en 1202.].

2.- Alvar Pérez de Lara que murió en 1172

3.- Nuño Pérez de Lara, que nació en 1130 y murió en 1177 [ luchando junto a su rey en el cerco de Cuenca]. Aunque no fue el mayor de los hijos, sí gozó del más alto prestigio y alcanzó sin peros la capitanía del clan.

Casó con Teresa Fernández de Trava, nacida en 1155, fallecida en 1180 e hija de Fernando Fernández de Trava y la infanta Teresa Alfonso.

4.- Elvira Pérez de Lara.

5.- María Pérez de Lara.

6.- Milia Pérez de Lara.

También se casó [2] Pedro González de Lara, como hemos dicho, con Urraca, Reina de León (1109-1126), hija de Alfonso VI el Bravo, Rey de Castilla (1072-1109) e Inés de Aquitania. Con ella tuvo los hijos siguientes:

7.- Fernando Pérez de Lara.

8.- Elvira Pérez de Lara (a), que casó [1] con García Pérez de Traba y [2] en segundas con el Conde Beltrán de Risnel.>>

Genealogía de los LARA desde GONZALO NUÑEZ, primer Tenente de Lara (Los LARA históricos)

II.- ORIGEN DOCUMENTADO.

http://www.euskalnet.net/laviana/gen_hispanas/lara.htm

http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/SPANISH%20NOBILITY%20LATER%20MEDIEVAL.htm#FernandoNunezdied1217

--------------------

don PEDRO González, son of don GONZALO Núñez & his wife doña Goto [Núñez] ([1080/85]-killed Bayonne 16 Oct 1130). “Pedro González” was Alférez of Alfonso VI King of Castile [1089 to 1091], and 30 Sep 1107 to 10 Sep 1109[1006], although it is assumed that the former citations refer to a different person assuming that Pedro's birth date is correctly estimated as shown here. Named armiger regis by the king in 1098 and 1108[1007]. Tenente of Lara from 1107 to 1129, of Peñafiel in 1113. Conde 1110. "Urraca…tocius Ispanie regina" confirmed rights of the monastery of San Millán de la Cogolla by charter dated Aug 1110, confirmed by "…Petrus Gonzalvez comes de Metina…"[1008]. "P[etrus] Gallecie comes…cum fratre meo obtimate R necnon sororibus meis…sanctimonialis Munina atque Visclavara" donated "monasterium Sancti Martini de Juvia" to Cluny by charter 14 Dec 1113 confirmed by "Froyla Vimaraci, Menendo Vimaraic, Menendo Solinizi, Comes Gugues, Comes Munio Pelagis, comes Rudericus Veilazi"[1009]. "Urracha…Ispanie regina, regis Aldefonsi regineque Constantie filia" donated property to the abbey of Silos by charter dated 26 Mar 1119, confirmed by "…Petrus Gonsalvi comes, Rodericus Gonsalvi…"[1010]. "Petrus Larensis comes" donated property to the abbey of Silos, with the advice of "domine mee Urrache regine", by charter dated 2 Sep 1125, confirmed by "Rodericus comes frater comitis Petri, Fernandus Garciez maior, Fernandus Garciez minor, Garcia Enneget nepos comitis Petri…Petro Lopet de Montfort, Petro Gonçalvet de Munio…"[1011]. After the death of Queen Urraca in 1126, he allied himself with Alfonso I King of Aragon. The Chronica Adefonsi Imperatoris names "the Castilians Count Pedro de Lara and his brother Count Rodrigo González" as leaders of the opponents of Alfonso VII King of Castile on his accession in 1126[1012]. He reluctantly submitted to the authority of Alfonso VII King of Castile, but was later banished. The Chronica Adefonsi Imperatoris records that Alfonso VII King of Castile captured "Count Pedro de Lara and his son-in-law Count Bertran" at Palencia and imprisoned them at León until they surrendered all their castles[1013]. The same source records that Pedro left for Bayonne to join the king of Aragon, where he challenged Alphonse Jourdain Comte de Toulouse to a duel, broke his arm after falling from his horse, and died a few days later[1014].

m ([late 1108/1109]) as her second husband, doña EVA, widow of conde don GARCÍA Ordóñez, daughter of --- (-after 1147). According to Salazar y Castro[1015], she was doña Eva Pérez de Traba, daughter of don Pedro Froílaz de Traba & his first wife doña Urraca Fróilaz. Barton[1016] says there is no documentary proof to substantiate this claim. Menéndez Pidal de Navascués[1017] suggests that she was a countess of French origin, Szabolcs de Vajay and Salazar[1018] suggesting more specifically that she was the daughter of Aimery II Vicomte de Rochechouart whose mother was named Eva, and whose name in the form "Almanricus" may have been the origin of the name "Manrique" given to her son by her second marriage. It is all the more improbable that doña Eva was the daughter of don Pedro Froílaz because her son by her first husband married one of don Pedro's younger daughters, who would have been his aunt if the relationship was correct. She names her children (in order) Manrique, Álvaro, Nuño, Elvira, María and Milia in a charter dated 1147[1019].

Mistress (1): [1112/14] doña URRACA Queen of Castile and León, daughter of don ALFONSO VI King of Castile and León & his third wife Berta de Bourgogne-Comté (late 1080[1020]-Saldaña 8 Mar 1126, bur León, Monastery of San Isidoro). The Crónica Latina records that the queen accepted “la excesiva familiaridad del conde Pedro de Lara, padre del conde Malrico, del conde Nuño y del conde Álvaro” and that it was said that they had “un hijo llamado Fernando Hurtado”[1021]. Szabolcs de Vajay states that there is no evidence for a secret marriage between Queen Urraca and don Pedro González de Lara[1022].

Pedro & his wife had seven children:

1. don MANRIQUE [Almerico] Pérez de Lara

2. don ÁLVARO Pérez de Lara (-15 Sep 1172). “Comes Malricus…cum fratribus et sororibus nostris Albar Petriz et Nun Petriz, comitissa domna Elvira, Mari Petriz, Milia Petriz” conferred rights on San Juan de Tardajos by charter dated 31 Jan 1147[1050]. Conde 19 Nov 1166[1051].

3. doña MAYOR Pérez de Lara (-before 1147).

4. don NUÑO Pérez de Lara (-Cuenca Jun 1177). “Comes Malricus…cum fratribus et sororibus nostris Albar Petriz et Nun Petriz, comitissa domna Elvira, Mari Petriz, Milia Petriz” conferred rights on San Juan de Tardajos by charter dated 31 Jan 1147[1052]. Conde 1162.

- see below.

5. don RODRIGO Pérez de Lara (-before 1147).

6. doña MARÍA Pérez de Lara . “Comes Malricus…cum fratribus et sororibus nostris Albar Petriz et Nun Petriz, comitissa domna Elvira, Mari Petriz, Milia Petriz” conferred rights on San Juan de Tardajos by charter dated 31 Jan 1147[1053].

7. doña MILIA Pérez de Lara (-before 6 Dec 1186). “Comes Malricus…cum fratribus et sororibus nostris Albar Petriz et Nun Petriz, comitissa domna Elvira, Mari Petriz, Milia Petriz” conferred rights on San Juan de Tardajos by charter dated 31 Jan 1147[1054]. m ([1141/47]) don GÓMEZ González de Manzanedo, son of conde don GONZALO Rodríguez de Bureba & his first wife [doña Estefanía López] (-12 Oct 1182). Conde 1170.

Pedro had two illegitimate children by Mistress (1):

8. doña ELVIRA Pérez de Lara (before Sep 1117[1055]-after 1174). The Chronica Adefonsi Imperatoris records that Alfonso VII King of Castile captured "Count Pedro de Lara and his son-in-law Count Bertran" at Palencia and imprisoned them at León until they surrendered all their castles[1056]. “Comes Malricus…cum fratribus et sororibus nostris Albar Petriz et Nun Petriz, comitissa domna Elvira, Mari Petriz, Milia Petriz” conferred rights on San Juan de Tardajos by charter dated 31 Jan 1147[1057]. m firstly don GARCÍA Pérez de Traba Señor de Trastámara, son of don PEDRO Fróilaz de Traba & his second wife doña Mayor Rodríguez. m secondly (before Jan 1130) as his second wife, conde don BELTRÁN de Riseñoral Señor de Carrión, [nephew of ALFONSO I King of Aragon] (-1138).

9. don FERNANDO Pérez de Lara "Furtado" ([1120/Oct 1123]-after 30 Aug 1156). The Crónica Latina records that the queen accepted “la excesiva familiaridad del conde Pedro de Lara, padre del conde Malrico, del conde Nuño y del conde Álvaro” and that it was said that they had “un hijo llamado Fernando Hurtado”[1058]. “Fernandus Petri minor filius” confirmed a charter dated 4 Nov 1123 under which Queen Urraca donated property to León[1059]. Señor de Escarrona, Cueto, Mendivíl y Martioda. The Chronicon Lusitanum names “…Fernandum Furtado fratrem Imperatoris…” among those in the army of “Imperator D. Alfonsus filius comitis Raymundi et Reginæ Donnæ Orracæ” when they unsuccessfully invaded Portugal in 1178 (1140)[1060]. Mayordomo of Alfonso VII King of Castile 31 Dec 1155-30 Aug 1156. m doña GUYOMAR Alonso, daughter of ---. Fernando & his wife had two children:

a) don PEDRO Fernández Furtado (-1184).

b) doña LEONOR Fernández de Lara. Señora de Mendivil, Martioda, Escarrona y Cueto. m don DIEGO López de Mendoza Señor de la casa de Mendoza.

''in: Castile Nobility <http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/SPANISH%20NOBILITY%20LATER%20MEDIEVAL.htm#_Toc278442951>''

"Plantagenet Ancestry", Turton.
"Pedigrees from Mike Talbot of Metairie, LA".
"Ancestral roots of certain American colonists who came to America before1700", Weis, 1992, seventh edition.
"The Lineage and Ancestry of HRH Prince Charles", Gerald Paget.
[Custer February 1, 2002 Family Tree.FTW]

[merge G675.FTW]

"Plantagenet Ancestry", Turton.
"Pedigrees from Mike Talbot of Metairie, LA".
"Ancestral roots of certain American colonists who came to America before1700", Weis, 1992, seventh edition.
"The Lineage and Ancestry of HRH Prince Charles", Gerald Paget.

Senor de Montealegre, Mayordomo of King Alfonso VI de Leon, (Meneses)

COUNT OF LARA

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]