== Notes for [[Item:Q102600|Q102600]] ==

Nahum al-Baradānī was a classmate of "Hay Gaon".

Nahum al-Baradānī flourished in the second half of the tenth century and the first decade of the eleventh as the third (at least) in a line of poets and cantors. As indicated by his name, the family must once have been based in the Baghdad suburb of Baradān, but this would have been before the time of Nahum’s father, Joseph, who served as the “Great Cantor” in Baghdad’s central synagogue. Although his main occupation seems to have been as a merchant—and a quite wealthy one, at that—Nahum is known to have served as cantor and spiritual leader in Fustat in 994. Some while afterward—either on business or, as suggested by Goitein (p. 300), “as an emissary of the Iraqian yeshivas”—Nahum traveled to Qayrawān, where he served as a jurist and, perhaps, as cantor in the main synagogue. That his skill as a cantor was highly regarded is evident from a letter written by Hay Gaon on August 11, 1006, to Judah rosh ha-seder ben Joseph of Qayrawān, in which, after affirming his close personal friendship with Nahum, going back to their school days, the gaon writes that “our community has great need of [Nahum], for the elders have passed away, and he is now the most distinguished among [or, supervisor over] all the cantors in Babylon” (meqomenu ṣarikh lo harbeh ki neʾesfu ha-zeqenim ve-huʾ ʿakhshav ha-muqaddam ʿal kol ha-ḥazzanim asher be-vavel).

As to his poetic output, Nahum seems to have produced relatively little by comparison with his father, Joseph (for whom 303 piyyuṭim are extant). To date approximately thirteen piyyuṭim by Nahum have been identified from the Cairo Geniza in addition to a couple of stanzas of pizmon inserted into a piyyuṭ by his father (see Beeri, pp. 9, 450–451, and Ben-Sasson, p. 166, n. 54). Nahum had three sons—Solomon (Abū Manṣūr?), Yannai (Sahl), and Baruch—of whom Yannai, at least, seems to have spent some time with his father in Qayrawān and later (after Nahum’s death?) moved with his two adult sons, Nahum and Joseph, to Tyre, where they continued in the family occupation as merchants. Nahum’s son Solomon appears to have carried on the family’s payṭanic-cantorial tradition, as he is alluded to (though this is not definite) in the above letter of Hay Gaon as “serving in the Great Synagogue of Baghdad and beloved” (beno ʿomed ba-kenesset ha-gedola be-vagdad ve-ahuv), and at least one piyyuṭ of his has been identified in the Geniza (see Scheiber in Sefunot 68, no. 1 [1980]). Nahum himself was also friendly with the Babylonian geonim Sherira and Samuel ben Hophni, and in a letter written to the latter in 999 (see Gil, Be-Malkhut, vol. 2, §58) refers to himself as Samuel’s disciple.

Michael G. Wechsler

Bibliography

Beeri, Tova. The “Great Cantor” of Baghdad: The Liturgical Poems of Joseph ben Ḥ ayyim al-Baradani (Jerusalem, 2002) [Hebrew].

Ben-Sasson, Menahem. The Emergence of the Local Jewish Community in the Muslim World: Qayrawan, 800–1057, 2nd ed. (Jerusalem: Magnes Press, 1997) [Hebrew].

Gil, Moshe. Be-Malkhut Yishmaʾʿel bi-Tqufat ha-Geʿonim, 4 vols. (Tel Aviv, 1997); slightly revised version of vol. 1 trans. D. Strassler, Jews in Islamic Countries in the Middle Ages (Leiden: Brill, 2004).

———. Ere ṣ Yisraʾel ba-Tequfa ha-Muslimit ha-Riʾshona, 3 vols. (Tel Aviv, 1983 ), revised version of vol. 1 trans. E. Broido, A History of Palestine, 634–1099 (Cambridge, 1992).

Goitein, Shlomo Dov. A Mediterranean Society, vol. 3: The Family (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1978).

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000022305889101

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]