== Notes for [[Item:Q87114|Q87114]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mucia_Tertia

-------------------------------------------------------------

ID: I46328

Name: Mucia Tertia

Given Name: Mucia Tertia

Sex: F

_UID: CA197057B7DF2B4DB3237E600DC23C74EBF5

Change Date: 3 Oct 2005

Death: deceased

Marriage 1 Geaus Pompeius b: 106 BC

Married:

Children

Pompeia Minor Pompeius

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I46328
--------------------
Anteckningar från http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mucia_Tertia

Mucia Tertia

Från Wikipedia, den fria encyklopedin

Mucia Tertia var en romersk matrona som bodde i 1: a -talet fKr. Hon var dotter till Quintus Mucius Scaevola , den Pontifex Maximus, konsul i 95 f Kr. Hennes mor var en Licinia som frånskild sin far att gifta sig med Quintus Caecilius Metellus Nepos , i en skandal som nämns av flera källor. Hennes namn , Mucia Tertia , tyder på att hon var en tredje dotter , enligt den romerska namnkonventionen för kvinnor , även om man tror att detta var istället att skilja henne från hennes två mostrar . Mucia hade också två yngre bröder från hennes mors andra giftermål (se Caecilius Metellus släktträd ) , och hon var en kusin ( soror ) av Q. Metellus Celer , konsul i 60 f.Kr., och Q. Metellus Nepos , konsul i 57 f Kr.

Mucia första make var kortlivat och otur Gaius Marius dy . Hans död i händerna på Sulla lämnat henne en bonde av segrarna.

Sulla , som diktator , behövs för att säkra Pompejis lojalitet och att göra det , han arrangerade hans giftermål med Mucia omkring 79 f Kr. Detta äktenskap resulterade i tre barn: Gnaeus Pompejus ( Pompejus den yngre ) , flickan Pompeia Magna ( gift med Faustus Cornelius Sulla ) och Sextus Pompejus . Hon hade oturen att överleva alla tre av hennes barn.

Mellan 76 och 61 f.Kr. Pompejus tillbringade större delen av tiden borta från Rom , kampanjarbete i Hispania mot Sertorius , i Medelhavet mot pirater och i öster , och kampen mot kung Mithridates VI av Pontos . På sin sista utvisning, i 61 f.Kr., sände Pompejus Mucia en skrivelse av skilsmässa. Enligt Cicero personliga brev , var motivet äktenskapsbrott (det sägs att hon var en av Julius Caesars många frågor) . Mucia nästa gift Marcus Aemilius Scaurus , en styvson av diktator Sulla . I 39 f.Kr. , Mucia på allvar begäran av den romerska folket, gick till Sicilien för att medla mellan sin son Sextus Pompejus och Augustus. Hon bodde vid tiden för slaget vid Actium , 31 BC . Augustus behandlade henne med stor respekt.

•Death : AFT 31 f.Kr.

--------------------
'''
=Mucia Tertia=
'''

Mucia Tertia was a Roman matrona who lived in the 1st century BC. She was the daughter of Quintus Mucius Scaevola, the pontifex maximus, consul in 95 BC. Her mother was a Licinia that divorced her father to marry Quintus Caecilius Metellus Nepos, in a scandal mentioned by several sources. Her name, Mucia Tertia, would suggest that she was a third daughter, according to the Roman naming convention for women, though it is believed that this was instead to differentiate her from her two aunts. Mucia had also two younger brothers from her mother's second marriage (see Caecilius Metellus family tree), and she was a cousin (soror) of Q. Metellus Celer, consul in 60 BC, and of Q. Metellus Nepos, consul in 57 BC.

Mucia's first husband was the short-lived and unlucky Gaius Marius the Younger. His death at the hands of Lucius Cornelius Sulla left her a pawn of the victors.

Sulla, as dictator, needed to secure Pompey's loyalty and to do that, he arranged the latter's marriage to Mucia around 79 BC. This marriage resulted in three children: elder son Gnaeus Pompeius (Pompey the Younger), daughter Pompeia Magna (married to Faustus Cornelius Sulla) and younger son Sextus Pompey. She had the misfortune to outlive all three of her children.

Between 76 and 61 BC, Pompey spent most of the time away from Rome, campaigning in Hispania against Sertorius, in the Mediterranean Sea against the pirates and in the East, and fighting king Mithridates VI of Pontus. On his final return, in 61 BC, Pompey sent Mucia a letter of divorce. According to Cicero's personal correspondence, the motive was adultery (it is said that she was one of Julius Caesar's many affairs, although Pompey's friendship and alliance with Caesar at the time would tend to suggest that Pompey himself either did not regard this rumour as true or did not consider it important). Mucia next married Marcus Aemilius Scaurus, a stepson of the dictator Sulla, with whom she had an other son named Marcus. In 39 BC, Mucia, at the earnest request of the Roman people, went to Sicily to mediate between her son Sextus Pompey and Augustus. She was living at the time of the battle of Actium, 31 BC. Augustus treated her with great respect.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mucia_Tertia

Mucia Tertia
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Mucia Tertia was a Roman matrona that lived in the 1st century BC. She was the daughter of Quintus Mucius Scaevola, the pontifex maximus, consul in 95 BC. Her mother was a Licinia that divorced her father to marry Quintus Caecilius Metellus Nepos, in a scandal mentioned by several sources. Her name, Mucia Tertia, suggests that she was a third daughter, according to the Roman naming convention for women. Mucia had also two younger brothers from her mother's second marriage (see Caecilius Metellus family tree), and she was a cousin (soror) of Q. Metellus Celer, consul in 60 BC, and of Q. Metellus Nepos, consul in 57 BC.

Sulla, as dictator, needed to secure Pompey's loyalty and to do that, he arranged his marriage to Mucia around 79 BC. This marriage resulted in three children: Gnaeus Pompeius (Pompey the Younger), the girl Pompeia Magna (married to Faustus Cornelius Sulla) and Sextus Pompeius.

Between 76 and 61 BC, Pompey spent most of the time away from Rome, campaigning in Hispania against Sertorius, in the Mediterranean Sea against the pirates and in the East, and fighting king Mithridates VI of Pontus. On his final return, in 61 BC, Pompey sent Mucia a letter of divorce. According to Cicero's personal correspondence, the motive was adultery (it is said that she was one of Julius Caesar's many affairs). Mucia next married M. Aemilius Scaurus, a step­son of the dictator Sulla. In 39 BC, Mucia, at the earnest request of the Roman people, went to Sicily to mediate between her son Sextus Pompey and Augustus. She was living at the time of the battle of Actium, 31 BC. Augustus treated her with great respect.


[edit] References
Asconius, Pro Scauro, p.19, Orelli-Baiter (ed.) (1845).
Cicero, Epistulae ad Familiares, v, 2.
Cicero, Epistulae ad Atticum, i. 12.
Dio Cassius, xxxvii. 49, xlviii, 16, li. 2, lvi. 38.
Appian, Bellum Civile v. 69, 72.
Suetonius, Life of Julius Caesar, 50.
Plutarch, Life of Pompey, 42.
Zonaras, x. 5.
Hieronymus, Adversus Jovinianum, i. 48.
This article incorporates text from the public domain Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology by William Smith (1867).

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]