== Notes for [[Item:Q88718|Q88718]] ==

ID: I62264

Name: Tiglath Pileser III of Assyria

Prefix: King

Given Name: Tiglath Pileser III

Surname: of Assyria

Sex: M

_UID: 3A6AE3182792A84FAAB21E4B7F1358090730

Change Date: 26 Nov 2005

Note:

Tiglath-pileser III (reigned 745-727 bc), considered the founder of the last Assyrian Empire, which stretched from present-day Iran to Israel. Tiglath-pileser reestablished the Assyrian Empire as a dynamic power after half a century of anarchy and stagnation. He is also significant for implementing a centralized system of government that allowed him and his successors to rule vast stretches of territory—a formidable challenge at the time. Little is known about his background or early life, but he likely seized rather than inherited the throne of Assyria in 745 bc. He took the name Tiglath-pileser III in the tradition of Tiglath-pileser I (ruled 1115-1076 bc), a heroic Assyrian warrior king. Tiglath-pileser III conquered the Syrian kingdoms, including Damascus, in 732 bc. He then brought the Phoenician coastal cities, Israel, and Gaza into the empire, and extended his influence as far west as the Anatolian Plateau in modern-day Turkey. His conquests were consolidated through a drastic administrative reorganization, which involved the establishment of Assyrian provinces with Assyrian local governors and the deportation and resettlement of as many as 200,000 people.

In 729 bc, after a struggle for the throne of Babylon following the death of Babylon's king, Tiglath-pileser took the throne of the holy city himself. Babylon already lay within Tiglath-pileser's kingdom, but he had allowed a lesser king to rule the city—probably out of respect for its religious importance. Rather than reduce Babylon to the status of other conquered provinces, Tiglath-pileser took the name of Pulu and ruled the city as a separate-but-equal entity within his kingdom. He was succeeded by his son Shalmaneser V.

© 1993-2003 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

Death: Y

Marriage 1 Spouse Unknown

Children

Sargon II of Assyria

Shalmaneser V of Assyria

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I62264

--------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tiglath-Pileser_III

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kings_of_Assyria

--------------------
Tiglath-Pileser IIIFrom Wikipedia, the free encyclopediaJump to: navigation, search Tiglath-Pileser III: stela from the walls of his palace (British Museum, London).Tiglath-Pileser III (from the Hebraic form[Note 1] of Akkadian: Tukultī-apil-Ešarra, "my trust is in the son of Esharra") was a prominent king of Assyria in the eighth century BC (ruled 745–727 BC)[1][2] and is widely regarded as the ruler who introduced advanced civil, military and political systems into the Neo-Assyrian Empire.[3][4]

Tiglath-Pileser III seized the Assyrian throne during a civil war and killed the royal family. He made sweeping changes to the Assyrian government, considerably improving its efficiency and security. The Assyrian army, already the greatest fighting force in the world, now became the worlds first professional standing army.

Tiglath-Pileser III subjected much of the known world at the time, to the south, the fellow Mesopotamians in Babylonia and Chaldea, and further south still, the Arabs and Dilmunites of the Arabian Peninsula were conquered. In the south west, Israel, Philistia, Samarra, Moab, Edom, the Suteans and Nabatea fell. To the north, Urartu, in the Caucasus Mountains, Cimmeria by the Black Sea, and Nairi were subjugated, and in the north west much of eastern and south western Asia Minor, including the Hittites, Phrygia, Cilicia, Commagene, Tabal, Corduenne and Caria. In the west, the Greeks of Cyprus and Aram (modern Syria), and the Mediterranean City States of Phoenicia/Caanan were subjugated. He defeated Elam, and later in his reign, Tiglath-Pileser III was crowned king in Babylonia.

Tiglath-Pileser III discouraged revolts against Assyrian rule, with the use of forced deportations of thousands of people all over the empire. He is considered to be one of the most successful military commanders in world history, conquering most of the world known to the Assyrians before his death.

Contents [hide] 1 Origins 2 Reign 3 Biblical records 4 Reforms 5 Legacy 6 See also 7 Footnotes 8 References

[edit] OriginsFormer governor of Kalhu (Biblical Calah/Nimrud)[3] and a general, Pulu was a usurper who assumed his Assyrian throne name from two more legitimate predecessors. He described himself as a son of Adad-nirari III in his inscriptions, but it is uncertain if this is truthful. He seized the throne in the midst of civil war on 13 Ayaru, 745 BC.[5][1] As a result of Pulu seizing the throne in a bloody coup d'état, the royal family was slaughtered,[3] and Assyria was set on the path to empire in order to ensure the survival of the kingdom.[3]

[edit] Reign Tiglath-Pileser III besieging a townAssyrian power in the Near East greatly increased as the result of Tiglath-Pileser's military reforms (see "Reforms" below) and his campaigns of conquest. Upon ascending the throne, he claimed (in Annal 9, which dates to 745 BC, his first regnal year) to have annexed Babylonia, from "Dur-(Kuri)galzu, Sippar of Shamash, ... the cities [of Ba]bylonia up to the Uqnu river [by the shore of the Lo]wer [Sea]"[6] (which referred to the Persian Gulf), and subsequently placed his eunuch over them as governor. Also in his first year of reign he defeated the powerful kingdom of Urartu (modern Armenia), whose hegemony under the rulership of Sarduri II had extended to Asia Minor, northern Mesopotamia,western Iran and Syria; there he found unrivalled horses for his war-chariots.[7] He also defeated the Medes before making war on and conquering the Neo-Hittites, Syria and Phoenicia. He took Arpad in 740 BC after three years of siege, annexed it as a province (over which he placed one of his eunuchs as governors), and subjected Hamath to tribute. Assyrian inscriptions record in 740 BC, the fifth year of his reign, a victory over Azariah (Uzziah), king of Judah, whose achievements are described in 2 Chronicles 26.He also subjugated Damascus, the Arabs under Queen Zabibe, Menahem of Israel and Sam'al's king Azriyau, who all paid him tribute.[8] In 737 and 736 BC he turned his attention again to Iran, conquering the Medes and Persians and occupying a large part of Iran.[8] According to the royal inscriptions of Tiglath-Pileser many of the inhabitants were enslaved and deported to other parts of the Assyrian empire, as commonly done by his predecessors. At sieges captives were slaughtered and their bodies raised on stakes and displayed before the city (illustration, right).

In October 729 BC, Tiglath-Pileser assumed total control of Babylon, capturing the Babylonian king Nabu-mukin-zeri (ABC 1 Col.1:21) and having himself crowned as "King Pulu of Babylon".

[edit] Biblical records Map showing Tiglath's conquests (green) and deportation of Israelites. Tiglath-Pileser III discouraged revolts against Assyrian rule, with the use of forced deportations of thousands of people all over the empire.[9]Biblical records, corroborated by Assyrian ones, describe how Tiglath-Pileser III exacted 1000 talents of silver tribute from King Menahem of Israel (2 Kings 15:19) and defeated his successor Pekah (15:29). Pekah had allied with Rezin, king of the Arameans against Ahaz (known to the Assyrians as Yahu-khazi), king of Judah, who responded by appealing for the Assyrian monarch's help with the Temple gold and silver. Tiglath-Pileser complied by seizing Damascus, executing Rezin, and deporting the Aramaean inhabitants to Kir (16:9). He also seized the northern half of Israel, and deported the Reubenites, Gadites, and Manasseh to Halah, Habor, Hara, and the Gozan river (1 Chron. 5:26). Beyond this, the alliance was not beneficial to Ahaz. (2 Chron 28:20).

[edit] ReformsUpon ascending the throne, Tiglath-Pileser instituted several reforms to different sectors of the Assyrian state, which arguably revived Assyria's hegemony over the Near East.

The first of such reforms entailed thwarting the powers of the high Assyrian officials, which during the reigns of his predecessors had become excessive. Officials such as Šamši-ilu, who was turtanu and a prominent official since the time of Adad-Nirari III, often led their own campaigns and erected their own commemorative stelae, often without mentioning the king at all.[10] Since his earliest inscriptions (and thus from the beginning of his reign), he gave regular mention of appointing eunuchs as governors of (newly conquered) provinces; this removed the threat of provincial rule becoming a dynastic matter. He also sought to reduce the power of his officials by reducing the size of the provinces (in some cases the northern provinces were increased to include newly conquered territories), thus decreasing their resources, should they have desired to incite a revolt. Subsequently, there were more provinces, more governors (most of which were eunuchs), and less power per governor.

The second reform targeted the army. Instead of a largely native Assyrian army which normally campaigned only in the summer time, Tiglath-Pileser incorporated large numbers of conquered people into the army, thus adding a substantial foreign element. This force mainly comprised the infantry, whereas the native Assyrians comprised the cavalry and chariotry. As a result of Tiglath-Pileser's military reforms, the Assyrian Empire was armed with a greatly expanded army which could campaign throughout the year. The addition of the cavalry and the chariot contingents to the army was mostly due to the steppe cultures lurking nearby to the north, which sometimes invaded their northern lands, using mainly cavalry and primitive chariots.

[edit] LegacyTiglath-Pileser III's conquests and reforms led to the establishment of the Neo-Assyrian Kingdom as a true empire. He built a royal palace in Nimrud (the so-called "central palace"), later dismantled by Esarhaddon. He had his royal annals engraved across the bas-reliefs depicting his military achievements on the sculptured slabs decorating his palace.

On his death he was succeeded by his son Ululayu, who took the name Shalmaneser V and further campaigned in the Levant, and captured Samaria.

[edit] See also Ancient Near East portal Kings of Assyria Syro-Ephraimite War [edit] Footnotes1.^ Spelled as "Tiglath-Pileser" in the Book of Kings (2Kings 15:29) and as "Tilgath-Pilneser" in the Book of Chronicles (2Chronicles 28:20). [edit] References1.^ a b Lendering, Jona (2006). "Assyrian Eponym List (2/3)". Livius.org. http://www.livius.org/li-ln/limmu/limmu_1c.html. 2.^ Tadmor, Inscriptions, p. 29. 3.^ a b c d Healy, Assyrians, p. 17 4.^ "History of Mesopotamia". Encyclopædia Britannica. http://www.britannica.com/eb/article-55456/History-of-Mesopotamia. 5.^ "Babylonia and Assyria". The 1911 Classic Encyclopedia. http://www.1911encyclopedia.org/Babylonia_and_Assyria. 6.^ Tadmor, Inscriptions, p. 43. 7.^ Luckenbill, Ancient Records, vol II, p. 84. 8.^ a b Roux, Georges. Ancient Iraq 9.^ Healy, p. 21 10.^ Shafer, A.T. (1998). The Carving of an Empire: Neo-Assyrian Monuments on the Periphery, p.32-33 Healy, Mark (1991). The Ancient Assyrians. London: Osprey. ISBN 1-85532-163-7. OCLC 26351868. http://books.google.com/books?id=Hodh6fgx-DMC&printsec=frontcover&dq=isbn=1855321637. Luckenbill, D. D. Ancient Records of Assyria and Babylonia, vol II, (Chicago, 1927). Saggs, H. The Might that was Assyria (London, 1984). Tadmor, Hayim, The inscriptions of Tiglath-pileser III, King of Assyria: critical edition, with introductions, translations, and commentary (Jerusalem, Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities, 1994). Yehuda Kaplan, "Recruitment of Foreign Soldiers into the Neo-Assyrian Army during the Reign of Tiglath-pileser III," in Mordechai Cogan and Dan`el Kahn (eds), Treasures on Camels' Humps: Historical and Literary Studies from the Ancient Near East Presented to Israel Eph'al (Jerusalem, Magnes Press, 2008), Preceded by Ashur-nirari V King of Assyria 745 – 727 BC Succeeded by Shalmaneser V Preceded by Nabu-mukin-zeri King of Babylon 729 – 727 BC [show]v ·t ·eAssyrian kings

Early Bronze Age "Kings who lived in tents" ca. 2500 – 2000 BC Tudiya ·Adamu ·Yangi ·Suhlamu ·Harharu ·Mandaru ·Imsu ·Harsu ·Didanu ·Hana ·Zuabu ·Nuabu ·Abazu ·Belu ·Azarah ·Ushpia ·Apiashal

"Kings who were forefathers" ca. 2000 BC Apiashal ·Hale ·Samani ·Hayani ·Ilu-Mer ·Yakmesi ·Yakmeni ·Yazkur-el ·Ila-kabkaba ·Aminu

"Kings whose eponyms are destroyed" ca. 2000 – 1900 BC Sulili ·Kikkia ·Akiya ·Puzur-Ashur I ·Shallim-ahhe ·Ilushuma

Middle Bronze Age Old Assyrian period ca. 1906 – 1380 BC Erishum I ·Ikunum ·Sargon I ·Puzur-Ashur II ·Naram-Suen ·Erishum II ·Shamshi-Adad I ·Ishme-Dagan I ·Mut-Ashkur ·Rimush ·Asinum ·(Seven usurpers: Ashur-dugul ·Ashur-apla-idi ·Nasir-Sin ·Sin-namir ·Ipqi-Ishtar ·Adad-salulu ·Adasi) ·Bel-bani ·Libaya ·Sharma-Adad I ·Iptar-Sin ·Bazaya ·Lullaya ·Shu-Ninua ·Sharma-Adad II ·Erishum III ·Shamshi-Adad II ·Ishme-Dagan II ·Shamshi-Adad III ·Ashur-nirari I ·Puzur-Ashur III ·Enlil-nasir I ·Nur-ili ·Ashur-shaduni ·Ashur-rabi I ·Ashur-nadin-ahhe I ·Enlil-nasir II ·Ashur-nirari II ·Ashur-bel-nisheshu ·Ashur-rim-nisheshu ·Ashur-nadin-ahhe II

Late Bronze Age Middle Assyrian period ca. 1353 – 1180 BC Eriba-Adad I ·Ashur-uballit I ·Enlil-nirari ·Arik-den-ili ·Adad-nirari I ·Shalmaneser I ·Tukulti-Ninurta I ·Ashur-nadin-apli ·Ashur-nirari III ·Enlil-kudurri-usur ·Ninurta-apal-Ekur

Iron Age Middle Assyrian period ca. 1179 – 912 BC Ashur-Dan I ·Ninurta-tukulti-Ashur ·Mutakkil-nusku ·Ashur-resh-ishi I ·Tiglath-Pileser I ·Asharid-apal-Ekur ·Ashur-bel-kala ·Eriba-Adad II ·Shamshi-Adad IV ·Ashur-nasir-pal I ·Shalmaneser II ·Ashur-nirari IV ·Ashur-rabi II ·Ashur-resh-ishi II ·Tiglath-Pileser II ·Ashur-Dan II

Neo-Assyrian Empire ca. 912 – 609 BC Adad-nirari II ·Tukulti-Ninurta II ·Ashur-nasir-pal II ·Shalmaneser III ·Shamshi-Adad V ·Shammu-ramat (regent) ·Adad-nirari III ·Shalmaneser IV ·Ashur-Dan III ·Ashur-nirari V ·Tiglath-Pileser III ·Shalmaneser V ·Sargon II ·Sennacherib ·Esarhaddon ·Ashurbanipal ·Ashur-etil-ilani ·Sin-shumu-lishir ·Sin-shar-ishkun ·Ashur-uballit II

Persondata Name Tiglath-Pileser 03 Alternative names Short description King of Assyria who ruled 745–727 BC Date of birth Place of birth Date of death Place of death Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tiglath-Pileser_III&oldid=536531435" View page ratingsRate this page Rate this page Page ratings What's this?Current average ratings. Trustworthy

Objective

Complete

Contains some informationWell-written

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tiglath-Pileser_III

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Assyria 745-727 BC, captured Damascus 732, conquered Babylon 729
Second son: Shalmaneser V King of Assyria

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per02150.htm#0

OR "TUKULTI-APIL-ESHARRA"; KING OF ASSYRIA 744-727 BC; CAPTURED BABYLONIA 729
BC; KING OF BABYLONIA (AS PULU) 729-727 BC

Tiglath-Pileser III


Wikipedia
Tiglath-Pileser III

Tiglath-Pileser III — stela from the walls of his palace (British Museum, London)Tiglath-Pileser III or IV (or Tilgath-Pil-neser or Tiglatpilesar III), was a prominent king of Assyria in the 8th century BC (ruled 744–727 BC).

The name Tiglath-Pileser was a throne-name — that is, one given to the king on his accession to the throne, rather than a name given at birth. In translation, it means "my confidence is the son of Esarra." It is given in several different forms in historical records. The Bible records him as Tillegath-pilneser (2 Chronicles 28:20) and the much-abbreviated Pul (1 Chronicles 5:26 and 2 Kings 15:19,20). In Assyrian cuneiform, his name is given as Tukulti-apil-esarra, which has been rendered into modern languages as Tiglath-Pileser - a great cat name.

His origins are unknown but he may have been a usurper who assumed the name of a more legitimate predecessor. Under his rule, Assyrian power in the Near East greatly increased as the result of campaigns of conquest mounted against western kingdoms. Assyrian inscriptions record, in the fifth year of his reign (739 BC), a victory over Azariah (Uzziah), king of Judah, whose achievements are described in 2 Chronicles 26:6-15. In 733 BC his armies conquered Philistia on the Mediterranean coast, destroyed Damascus and occupied most of Israel, with its northern regions becoming Assyrian provinces. Many of the inhabitants were impaled or deported to other parts of the Assyrian empire.

These events were recorded in the Bible, which describes how Tiglath-Pileser III defeated Pekah, king of Israel, and Rezin, king of the Arameans, who had allied against him. He executed Rezin and Pekah was murdered by Hoshea, who took control of the rump Israelite kingdom as a vassal paying tribute to the Assyrians. (2 Kings 15:29; 16:5-9; 1 Chronicles 5:6, 26) Ahaz (known to the Assyrians as Yahu-khazi), the king of Judah, was also forced to pay tribute to the Assyrian conqueror (2 Kings 16:10-16).

Tiglath-Pileser III's conquests paved the way for the establishment of the Second Assyrian Empire. On his death, the Assyrian throne was seized by Ululai, the governor of Babylon, who assumed the name Shalmaneser V.

Preceded by:
Ashur-nirari V King of Assyria
745–727 BC Succeeded by:
Shalmaneser V

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]