== Notes for [[Item:Q87296|Q87296]] ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antiochus_I_Theos_of_Commagene

Antiochus I Theos Dikaios Epiphanes Philorhomaios Philhellenos (Greek: о Αντίοχος Θεός Δίκαιος Επιφανής Φιλορωμαίος Φιλέλλην, meaning Antiohos, a fair, eminent God, friend of Romans and friend of Greeks, c. 86 BC-38 BC, ruled 70 BC-38 BC) was a king from the Kingdom of Commagene and the most famous king of that kingdom.

The ruins of the tomb-sanctuary of Antiochus are magnificent to behold even today. The site of his interment atop Mount Nemrut, a.k.a. Nemrut dagi, was named to the UNESCO World Heritage list in 1987. Several sandstone bas reliefs discovered at the site contain the oldest known images of two figures shaking hands.[1]

Family, Ancestry and Early Life Antiochus I was the son and probably the only child of King Mithridates I Callinicus and Queen Laodice VII Thea of Commagene. Antiochus was half Armenian and half Greek, a distant member of the Orontid Dynasty.[2] Antiochus’ father Mithridates was the son of King of Commagene Sames II Theosebes Dikaios, while his mother is unknown. Mithridates in descent was related to the kings of Parthia and, according to archaeological research at Mount Nemrut, was also a descendant of King Darius I of Persia.

Antiochus’ mother, Laodice VII Thea, was a Greek Princess of the Seleucid Empire. Laodice’s father was the Seleucid King Antiochus VIII Grypus while her mother was Ptolemaic Princess and later Seleucid Queen Tryphaena. Thus, Antiochus was a direct descendant of Seleucus I Nicator of the Seleucid Empire, Ptolemy I Soter of Egypt, Antigonus I Monophthalmus of Macedonia, Lysimachus of Thrace and the Macedonian regent, Antipater. The five men had served as generals under Greek Macedonian King, Alexander the Great. Antiochus’ parents had married as part of a peace alliance between their kingdoms, while his father had embraced Greek culture. Little is known of his early life. When his father died in 70 BC, Antiochus succeeded his father as king.

Antiochus married a Greek woman called Isias. They had five children who were:

Son, Mithridates II of Commagene - who succeeded Antiochus I after his death in 38 BC Daughter, Laodice, who married King Orodes II of Parthia Son, Antiochus II of Commagene Daughter, Antiochis of Commagene Unnamed Daughter, married to Artavasdes I, King of Atropatene

Relations with the Romans While the Roman Republic was annexing territories in Anatolia through skilled diplomacy, Antiochus was able to keep Commagene independent from the Romans. Antiochus is first mentioned in the ancient sources in 69 BC, when the general Lucullus’ campaign against the Armenian King Tigranes.

Antiochus made peace with general Pompey in 64 BC, when Pompey successfully invaded Syria. Antiochus and Pompey then became allies. Antiochus in 59 BC was granted the Toga Praetexta and was given official recognition from the Roman Senate as an ally to Rome. Antiochus was given an ivory sceptre, an embroidered triumphal robe and he was greeted as king, ally and friend. This recognition was a tradition, which recognises and rewards the allies to Rome. From his reign onwards, monarchs from Commagene proved to be the most loyal Roman allies. When Marcus Tullius Cicero was Roman governor of Cilicia in 51 BC, Antiochus provided Cicero with intelligence of the movements of the Parthians. During the civil war between Julius Caesar and Pompey, Antiochus provided troops for Pompey.

In 38 BC a legatus of Triumvir Mark Antony, Publius Ventidius Bassus, after conquering the Parthians wanted to declare war on Antiochus and his kingdom. Mark Antony and Publius Ventidius Bassus were attracted to the treasury and wealth that Commagene had. As Antony and Bassus, were about to declare a siege on Commagene and its capital Samosata, Antiochus made peace with them.

Mount Nemrut Antiochus is famous for building the impressive religious sanctuary of Nemrud Dağı or Mount Nemrut. When Antiochus reigned as king he created a royal cult for himself and was preparing to be worshipped after his death. Antiochus was inspired to create his own cult in a Hellenized form of Zoroastrianism. Antiochus left many Greek inscriptions revealing many aspects of his religion and explaining his purpose of action. In one inscription, Antiochus suggests his tomb must be in a high and holy place, remote from the people and close to the gods with whom he is in rank. Antiochus wanted his body to be preserved for eternity. The gods he worshipped were a syncretism of Greek and Persian deities, some of them personifications of the Sun, Moon and planets. The monumental effigies had Persian and Greek influences. Persian influences were the clothes, headgear and the colossal state of the deities. While the Greek influences were representation of the gods and showing ancestors of the king. The deities bore Greek features and styles.

Antiochus practiced astrology of a very esoteric kind, and laid the basis for a calendrical reform, by linking the Commagene year, which till then had been based on the movements of the Moon, to the Sothic (Star of Sirius) cycle used by the Egyptians as the basis of their solar calendar.

Antiochus’ version of Hermeticism where his remains were buried. His tomb was constructed in a way that religious festivities could happen. Each month Antiochus had two festivities: his birthday which was celebrated on the 10th of each month and his coronation which was celebrated on the 16th of each month. He would allocate funds for these events.

Priests wore traditional Persian robes and adorn all effigies with crowns of gold as worship to the ancestors. The priests would place incense, herbs and sacrifices on the altars. All the citizens and military garrison were invited to the banquets in honor of the illustrious deceased. During feasts, grudging attitudes were forbidden and priests decreed that the people should enjoy themselves, eat and drink wine. Wine was served however, it was allowed to be consumed during the one day festivities. Antiochus created women musicians for the banquets. Antiochus’ tomb was forgotten for centuries, until 1883 when archaeologists from Germany excavated the tomb.

According to inscriptions, Antiochus appeared to have been a pious person and had a generous spirit. In another city of the kingdom Arsameia, ruins were found of the royal palace. This palace is known as Eski Vale or Old Castle. In Arsameia, Antiochus left many inscriptions in Greek of his public works program and how he glorified the city.

--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antiochus_I_Theos_of_Commagene
--------------------
Antiochus I Theos Dikaios Epiphanes Philorhomaios Philhellen (Greek: Ἀντίοχος ὀ Θεός Δίκαιος Ἐπιφανής Φιλορωμαίος Φιλέλλην, "Antiochos the Just and Eminent God, friend of the Romans and friend of the Greeks", c. 86 BC-38 BC), was an Armenian king of Commagene from 70 BC until his death, and the most famous ruler of that kingdom.

The ruins of the tomb-sanctuary of Antiochus Theos are magnificent to behold even today. The site of his interment atop Mount Nemrut, a.k.a. Nemrut dagi, was named to the UNESCO World Heritage list in 1987. Several sandstone bas reliefs discovered at the site contain the oldest known images of two figures shaking hands.

Antiochus I was the son and probably the only child of King Mithridates I Callinicus and Queen Laodice VII Thea of Commagene. Antiochus was half Armenian and half Greek, a distant member of the Orontid Dynasty.[2] Antiochus’ father Mithridates was the son of King of Commagene Sames II Theosebes Dikaios, while his mother is unknown. Mithridates in descent was related to the kings of Parthia and, according to archaeological research at Mount Nemrut, was also a descendant of King Darius I of Persia.

Antiochus’ mother, Laodice VII Thea, was a Greek Princess of the Seleucid Empire. Laodice’s father was the Seleucid King Antiochus VIII Grypus while her mother was Ptolemaic Princess and later Seleucid Queen Tryphaena (see Cleopatra VI of Egypt). Thus, Antiochus was a direct descendant of Seleucus I Nicator of the Seleucid Empire, Ptolemy I Soter of Egypt, Antigonus I Monophthalmus of Macedonia, Lysimachus of Thrace and the Macedonian regent, Antipater. The five men had served as generals under Greek Macedonian King, Alexander the Great. Antiochus’ parents had married as part of a peace alliance between their kingdoms, while his father had embraced Greek culture. Little is known of his early life. When his father died in 70 BC, Antiochus succeeded his father as king.

Antiochus married a Greek woman called Isias. They had five children who were:

Son, Mithridates II of Commagene - who succeeded Antiochus I after his death in 38 BC

Daughter, Laodice, who married King Orodes II of Parthia

Son, Antiochus II of Commagene

Daughter, Antiochis of Commagene

Unnamed Daughter, married to Artavasdes I, King of Atropatene.

While the Roman Republic was annexing territories in Anatolia through skilled diplomacy, Antiochus was able to keep Commagene independent from the Romans. Antiochus is first mentioned in the ancient sources in 69 BC, when the general Lucullus’ campaign against the Armenian King Tigranes.

Antiochus made peace with general Pompey in 64 BC, when Pompey successfully invaded Syria. Antiochus and Pompey then became allies. Antiochus in 59 BC was granted the Toga Praetexta and was given official recognition from the Roman Senate as an ally to Rome. Antiochus was given an ivory sceptre, an embroidered triumphal robe and he was greeted as king, ally and friend. This recognition was a tradition, which recognises and rewards the allies to Rome. From his reign onwards, monarchs from Commagene proved to be the most loyal Roman allies. When Marcus Tullius Cicero was Roman governor of Cilicia in 51 BC, Antiochus provided Cicero with intelligence of the movements of the Parthians. During the civil war between Julius Caesar and Pompey, Antiochus provided troops for Pompey.

In 38 BC a legatus of Triumvir Mark Antony, Publius Ventidius Bassus, after conquering the Parthians wanted to declare war on Antiochus and his kingdom. Mark Antony and Publius Ventidius Bassus were attracted to the treasury and wealth that Commagene had. As Antony and Bassus, were about to declare a siege on Commagene and its capital Samosata, Antiochus made peace with Antony and Bassus.

Antiochus is famous for building the impressive religious sanctuary of Nemrud Dağı or Mount Nemrut. When Antiochus reigned as king he created a royal cult for himself and was preparing to be worshipped after his death. Antiochus was inspired to create his own cult in a Hellenized form of Zoroastrianism. Antiochus left many Greek inscriptions revealing many aspects of his religion and explaining his purpose of action. In one inscription, Antiochus suggests his tomb must be in a high and holy place, remote from the people and close to the gods with whom he is in rank. Antiochus wanted his body to be preserved for eternity. The gods he worshipped were a syncretism of Greek and Persian deities, some of them personifications of the Sun, Moon and planets. The monumental effigies had Persian and Greek influences. Persian influences were the clothes, headgear and the colossal state of the deities. While the Greek influences were representation of the gods and showing ancestors of the king. The deities bore Greek features and styles.

Antiochus practiced astrology of a very esoteric kind, and laid the basis for a calendrical reform, by linking the Commagene year, which till then had been based on the movements of the Moon, to the Sothic (Star of Sirius) cycle used by the Egyptians as the basis of their calendar.

Antiochus’ version of Hermeticism where his remains were buried. His tomb was constructed in a way that religious festivities could happen. Each month Antiochus had two festivities: his birthday which was celebrated on the 10th of each month and his coronation which was celebrated on the 16th of each month. He would allocate funds for these events.

Priests wore traditional Persian robes and adorn all effigies with crowns of gold as worship to the ancestors. The priests would place incense, herbs and sacrifices on the altars. All the citizens and military garrison were invited to the banquets in honor of the illustrious deceased. During feasts, grudging attitudes were forbidden and priests decreed that the people should enjoy themselves, eat and drink wine. Wine was served however, it was allowed to be consumed during the one day festivities. Antiochus created women musicians for the banquets. Antiochus’ tomb was forgotten for centuries, until 1883 when archaeologists from Germany excavated the tomb.

According to inscriptions, Antiochus appeared to have been a pious person and had a generous spirit. In another city of the kingdom Arsameia, ruins were found of the royal palace. This palace is known as Eski Vale or Old Castle. In Arsameia, Antiochus left many inscriptions in Greek of his public works program and how he glorified the city.

--------------------
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antiochus_I_Theos_of_Commagene
--------------------
'''
=Antiochus I Theos of Commagene=
'''

Antiochus I Theos Dikaios Epiphanes Philorhomaios Philhellen (Armenian: Անտիոքոս Երվանդունի, Ancient Greek: Ἀντίοχος ὁ Θεὸς Δίκαιος Ἐπιφανὴς Φιλορωμαῖος Φιλέλλην, meaning Antiochos, a just, eminent god, friend of Romans and friend of Greeks, c. 86-38 BC, ruled 70-38 BC) was a king from the Kingdom of Commagene and the most famous king of that kingdom.

The ruins of the tomb-sanctuary of Antiochus atop Mount Nemrut in Turkey were named to the UNESCO World Heritage list in 1987. Several sandstone bas reliefs discovered at the site contain the oldest known images of two figures shaking hands.

'''Family, ancestry and early life'''

Antiochus I was the son and probably the only child of King Mithridates I Callinicus and Queen Laodice VII Thea of Commagene. Antiochus was half Armenian, a distant member of the Orontid Dynasty and half Greek. Antiochus’ father Mithridates was the son of King of Commagene Sames II Theosebes Dikaios and an unidentified woman. Mithridates was possibly related to the kings of Parthia and, in the light of archaeological discoveries at Mount Nemrut, even claimed descent from the Achaemenid family of King Darius I of Persia.

More certain are his dynastic connections to the Diadochi. Antiochus’ mother, Laodice VII Thea, was a Greek princess of the Seleucid Empire. Laodice’s father was the Seleucid King Antiochus VIII Grypus, while her mother was a Ptolemaic princess and later Seleucid Queen Tryphaena (see Cleopatra VI of Egypt). Thus, Antiochus was a direct descendant of Seleucus I Nicator of the Seleucid Empire, Ptolemy I Soter of Egypt, Antigonus I Monophthalmus of Macedonia and Asia, Lysimachus of Thrace and the Macedonian regent, Antipater. These five men, the Diadochi 'successors', had served as generals under Macedonian King, Alexander the Great. Antiochus’ parents had married as part of a peace alliance between their kingdoms. Little is known of his early life and education, aside from its philhellenic aspect; however, it seems that when his father died in 70 BC, Antiochus succeeded his father as king.

Antiochus married Princess Isias Philostorgos of Cappadocia, daughter of King Ariobarzanes I of Cappadocia and his wife Athenais Philostorgos I. They had five children:

* Mithridates II of Commagene, succeeded Antiochus as King of Commagene after his death in 38 BC
* Laodice, who married King Orodes II of Parthia
* Prince Antiochus II of Commagene
* Antiochis of Commagene
* Athenais, who married King Artavasdes I of Media Atropatene

'''Relations with the Romans'''

While the Roman Republic was annexing territories in Anatolia, Antiochus, through skilled diplomacy, was able to keep Commagene independent from the Romans. Antiochus is first mentioned in the ancient sources in 69 BC, when Lucullus campaigned against the Armenian King Tigranes the Great. Antiochus made peace with the general Pompey in 64 BC, when Pompey successfully invaded Syria. Antiochus and Pompey then became allies. Antiochus in 59 BC was granted the toga praetexta and given official recognition from the Roman Senate as an ally to Rome. Antiochus received an ivory sceptre and an embroidered triumphal robe, and he was greeted as "king, ally and friend". This recognition was a traditional way of recognising and rewarding the allies to Rome. From his reign onwards, monarchs from Commagene proved to be the most loyal Roman allies. When Marcus Tullius Cicero was Roman governor of Cilicia in 51 BC, Antiochus provided Cicero with intelligence of the movements of the Parthians. During the civil war between Julius Caesar and Pompey, Antiochus provided troops for Pompey.

In 38 BC, a legate of Triumvir Mark Antony, Publius Ventidius Bassus, after campaigning against the Parthians, wanted to attack Antiochus and his kingdom. Antony and Bassus were attracted by Commagene's wealth. Yet as they were preparing to march against Commagene and its capital Samosata, Antiochus negotiated a peaceful settlement with them.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antiochus_I_Theos_of_Commagene

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Commagene 70-36/69-39 BCE

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per01072.htm#0

Wikipédia EN : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antiochus_I_Theos_of_Commagene

"THEOS DIKAIOS EPIPHANES PHILOROMAIOS PHILHELLEN"; KING OF COMMAGENE ca. 69BC-
31 BC; b. 95 BC

He ruled from 70 BC to 36 BC.

He ruled from 70 BC to 36 BC.

Birth: in bef. 69 BC
Death: in 31 BC
Event: Ruled c. 69 - 31 BC, King of Commagene

Birth: in bef. 69 BC
Death: in 31 BC
Event: Ruled c. 69 - 31 BC, King of Commagene

Birth: in bef. 69 BC
Death: in 31 BC
Event: Ruled c. 69 - 31 BC, King of Commagene

Antiochus Theos
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.

Antiochus I Theos Dikaios Epiphanes Philorhomaios Philhellen (69–40 BC), was the most important king of the small Middle East kingdom of Commagene, which was situated in a region that is now in south-eastern Turkey and inhabited largely by ethnic Kurds.

Antiochus was the son of king Mithradates I Callinicus and the Seleucid princess Laodice, daughter of the Syrian King Antiochus VIII. This marriage had been arranged as part of a settlement by Mithradates' father Samos II to ensure peace between the Kingdom of Commagene and the Seleucid Empire.

Antiochus tried to balance the interests of his kingdom with the reality of the world power of the Roman Empire and preserve as much as possible Commagene's independence. Despite his efforts, his reign ended with the Commagene submitting to Rome, becoming a client-state under EmperorAugustus.

Anthiochus was a king who took his religion, a Hellenized form of Zoroastrianism, very seriously. He left behind a large number of Greek inscriptions, revealing many aspects of the royal cult he promoted. The kings of Commagene claimed descent from both the Persian and Selucid royal houses, therefore the gods they worshipped were a syncretism of Greek and Persian deities, some of them were personifications of the Sun, Moon and planets. He is said to nhave practised astrology of a very esoteric kind, and layed the basis for a calendrical reform, by linking the Commagene year, which till then had been based on the movements of the Moon, to the Sothic (Star of Sirius) cycle used by the Egyptians as the basis of their calendar. This would suggest that Antiochus was knowledgeable about, if not fully initiated into the Hermetic tradition.

Today Antiochus is most famous for founding the impressive sanctuary of Nemrud Dagi, which is close to the city of Kahta on a road leading to Mount Nimrod. Its most important monument is his so-called Hierothesion, where his remains were buried. It was constructed not to be a simple tomb but as a place where he would gather his people for religious festivities connected with either his birthday or coronation. Forgotten for centuries, it was excavated in 1883 by a German team of archeologists.

Kahta, the gateway to the lost kingdom of Commagene, is situated north of the modern Turkish civil engineering project Ataturk Baraji (Dam), which distributes the waters of the Euphrates River. Unfortunately, the lake it formed drowned Commagene's original capital of Samosata, built by Samos I in the early 3rd century B.C.

[edit]
Litterature
Adrian G. Gilbert, Magi, Bloomsbury Publishing Plc., 1996

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]