== Notes for [[Item:Q116310|Q116310]] ==

SUNYER de Pallars, son of LOPE de Pallars & his wife Gotruda de Cerdanya (-1010). A Fragmentum historicum in the cartulary of Alaon names “Sumarius” as the son of “Lupus”[21]. "Suniarius…comes hac marchisus" confirmed earlier donations to the abbey of la Grasse by "avus meus Raimundus comes et patruus meus Ysarnus hac frater illius Atonis episcopus…frater meus Raimundus comes" by charter dated 7 Nov 1007 subscribed by "Raimundus comes, Guillelmus suo fratre"[22]. His parentage is also indicated by a charter dated 30 Dec 1035 under which "Stephania…cometissa et filio suo Bernardo chomite" donated property to Santa Maria de Gerri, for the souls of "suscensoribus nostrorum vel Ramundo comite filio Goldergoto et Suniario filio Goldergoto, Wilelmo comite filio Ermetruit"[23]. Conde de Pallars.

m firstly as her second husband, his sister-in-law, ERMENTRUDE, widow of BORELL [I] Conde de Pallars, daughter of ---. Her name and second marriage are indicated by a charter dated 30 Dec 1035 under which "Stephania…cometissa et filio suo Bernardo chomite" donated property to Santa Maria de Gerri, for the souls of "suscensoribus nostrorum vel… Wilelmo comite filio Ermetruit"[24]. According to Europäische Stammtafeln[25], she was Ermentrude de Rouergue, daughter of Raymond [I] Comte de Rouergue & his wife Richarde ---, but the primary source on which this is based has not yet been identified. The primary source which confirms her first marriage has not yet been identified.

m secondly TODA de Ribagorza, daughter of RAIMUNDO [II] Conde de Ribagorza & his wife Gersende de Fezensac. A Fragmentum historicum in the cartulary of Alaon records that “Tota uxor Unifredi” married “Sumarium nepotem suum“ after the death of “Isarni fratris sui”, adding that she was childless and, after her husband, died that she sent “ad Castellam per nepotem suum…Guillelmi Isarni” who was “in curia regis Sancii avunculi sui”[26]. This passage is confused as an earlier part of the text names Sancha as wife of Unifredo. It is assumed that Toda was the sister not wife of Unifredo.

Sunyer & his first wife had three children:

1. RAIMUNDO [III] ([995/1000]-after 1047). A Fragmentum historicum in the cartulary of Alaon names “Raymundum Sumarii et Guillelmum Sumarii” as the sons of “Sumarius”[27]. His birth date is estimated on the assumption that his mother´s first husband died “before 994” as shown in Europäische Stammtafeln[28]. Conde de Pallars-Jussà. “…Comite Guillelmo in Ripa-curtia, comite Raimundo in Palliares” are named in the dating clause of a charter dated 22 Sep 1005 under which “Atho vicecomes de Sola” confirmed the foundation of the monastery of Alaon[29]. A charter of Santa Maria de Gerri dated Apr 18 names "Raimundi Suniarii comtis et uxor mea comitissa…Maior"[30]. The document is dated to [1012] in the compilation but this appears early assuming that his birth date is correctly estimated as shown above. m firstly (repudiated [1027/28]) MAYOR, daughter of [GARCÍA Fernández Conde de Castilla & his wife Aba de Ribagorza] (-after [early 1035]). A charter of Santa Maria de Gerri dated Apr 18 names "Raimundi Suniarii comtis et uxor mea comitissa…Maior"[31]. Her parentage is stated in a Fragmentum historicum in the cartulary of Alaon which names “Major comitissa, soror comitis Sancii de Castella” as wife of “comitis Palliarensis Raymundi Sumarii“[32]. However, this appears doubtful. If she was Conde García's daughter, it is surprising that she did not witness the 8 Mar 974 agreement under which her supposed sister Urraca was consecrated to the monastery of Covarrubias. In addition, the considerable age difference between her and her supposed husband (if, as stated in Europäische Stammtafeln[33], his mother's first husband died before 994) seems unlikely. A more likely possibility is that Mayor was the daughter, not sister, of Sancho Conde de Castilla. After her repudiation, she returned to Castile where she is recorded in 1028 as abbess of the monastery of San Miguel de Pedroso and in early 1035 with Sancho III King of Navarre[34]. m secondly ERMESINDA, daughter of --- (-after 18 Dec 1040). “Raimundo count of Pallars and his wife Ermisenda” sold the castel of Castelló de Tor to Ricolfo by charter dated 18 Dec 1040[35]. Raimundo & his [second] wife had three children:

a) RAIMUNDO [IV] (-[1098 or after]). A Fragmentum historicum in the cartulary of Alaon names “Raymundum” as the son of “Raymundum Sumarii”[36]. Conde de Pallars-Jussà. m VALENCIA de Test, daughter of ARNALDO MIR de Test Vizconde de Ager & his wife ---. Her name is confirmed by the undated charter under which her grandson "Arnau Mir…et seu fill Ramon Roger comtes del Pallars Jussà" confirmed a donation to Santa Maria de Gerri by "avia mea Valenzia"[37]. Raimundo [IV] & his wife had four children:

i) PEDRO [I] (-[after 1113]). A Fragmentum historicum in the cartulary of Alaon names “Petrum…et Bernardum et Arnaldum” as the three sons of “Raymundus”, adding that Pedro succeeded his father but died childless[38]. Conde de Pallars-Jussà.

ii) BERNARDO [I] (-1131). A Fragmentum historicum in the cartulary of Alaon names “Petrum…et Bernardum et Arnaldum” as the three sons of “Raymundus”, adding that Bernardo succeeded his brother as count[39]. Conde de Pallars-Jussà. A Fragmentum historicum in the cartulary of Alaon records the death in 1131 of “Bernardus comes Palliarensis”[40]. m [TODA], daughter of ---. Bernardo [I] & his wife had one child:

(a) DULCE [I] (-[after 1192]). A Fragmentum historicum in the cartulary of Alaon names “Dolziam” as the daughter of “Bernardus”[41]. Condesa de Pallars-Jussà.

iii) ARNALDO [I] (-[after 1111]). A Fragmentum historicum in the cartulary of Alaon names “Petrum…et Bernardum et Arnaldum” as the three sons of “Raymundus”[42]. Conde de Pallars-Jussà.

- see below.

iv) LORETA . m SANCHO Vizconde .

b) SUNYER (-after 1103).

c) RICARDA . m GARCÍA Lizo .

2. GUILLERMO [II] (-before 30 Dec 1035). A Fragmentum historicum in the cartulary of Alaon names “Raymundum Sumarii et Guillelmum Sumarii” as the sons of “Sumarius”[43]. Conde de Pallars-Subirà.

- see below.

3. ERMENGARDA . m GUILLAUME Vicomte de Castelbon, son of ---.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]