== Notes for [[Item:Q88730|Q88730]] ==

Caranus, King of Aegae was the son of Phidon Heraclid. Caranus, King of Aegae settles at Edessa 818 B.C. at Macedonia. He married Lanice (?). Caranus, King of Aegae was an Argive. "This tradition, doubtless closely knit with the legends (later subjected to much literary elaboration), concerning a movement of Greek tribes from the Peloponnese does not differ substantially from the local Macedonian tradition preserved by Herodotus. The essentials which interest us here are to be found in both, namely that it was believed both in Macedonia and by the Greeks in general that the royal house of Aegae was Greek and traced its descent from the Heracleid Temenids of Argos. In the main, independent of the poetic adornments about an expedition from the south, distribution or conquest of Macedonian territory, assault on Edessa and so on, in which as we shall show later some historical significance can be found, the difference lies in the fact that Caranus instead of Perdiccas, whom Herodotus records, emigrated from Argos and founded the Macedonian dynasty

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Caranus_%28king%29
--------------------
Carano (808 a. C. -778 a. C.) Rey argéada , fue el verdadero primer rey del Reino Macedonico Estableció su primer reino en Egas (actualmente, Vergina). Ciudad fundada por él. Según el mito griego, Carano era uno de los hijos del rey Ténemo. Témeno, Cresfontes y Aristodemo eran los tres líderes de los dorios que invadieron el Peloponeso. Entonces procedieron a dividir los territorios conquistados entre ellos .Crestofontes ocupó Mesenia ; Aristodemo tomó Laxonia; y finalmente Tenemo tomó Argos. Después de la muerte del rey Témeno, los príncipes discutieron sobre quién debía ser su rey. Uno de ellos, Fedón, derrotó a sus hermanos en batalla y asumió el control como gobernador. Carano entonces decidió encontrar otro reino para él sólo, donde establecer su gobierno.

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per03866.htm#0

Karanus of Macedon
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

King Karanus (808- 778 BC) was the first king of ancient Macedon. King Karanus established his first kingdom at Aegae (modern Vergina).

According to Greek myth, Karanus was one of King Temenus' sons. Temenos, along with Cresphontes and Aristodemus were the three Doric leaders who invaded the Mycenean Peloponnese region. Then they proceeded to divide the conquered territories between them. Cresphontes was given Messenia and Sparta; Aristodemus took Laconia; and finally Temenos was given Argos. Following the death of King Temenos, the Princes argued about who should be king. One of them, Feidon, defeated his brothers in battle and took over as kingship. Karanos then, decided to find another kingdom of his own, where he could be King. First, however he went to the Oracle of Delphi to ask Pythias' advice. "You should find your kingdom there, were you will find plenty of game and domestic animals, was her advice." Thus Karanos and his entourage moved to the North, in search of suitable land to establish his new kingdom. Finally, he discovered a green valley, with a lot of game and goats, whereupon he thought that the prophecy of Pythia has been fulfilled. Thus he built a city there, which he named "AIGAE", (Greek: Aiga-goat), present day Vergina, a site of substantial archaeological activity, as numerous important findings have been unearthed.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]