== Notes for [[Item:Q112575|Q112575]] ==

Sancho García http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sancho_Garc%C3%ADa

Sancho García, el de los Buenos Fueros (?-1017). Conde de Castilla del 995 al 1017. Hijo de García Fernández y su mujer Ava de Ribagorza. Sucedió a su padre al frente del condado tras su muerte aunque protagonizó una sublevación contra él con apoyo de Almanzor.

Contrajo matrimonio con Urraca Gómez de la familia condal Banu Gómez de Saldaña: 1) García Sánchez (1010-1028), conde de Castilla. 2) Muniadona de Castilla, condesa de Ribagorza y de Castilla, casada con Sancho III de Navarra. 3) Sancha de Castilla (1006-1027), casada con el conde de Barcelona Berenguer Ramón I. 4) Trígida Sánchez, abadesa en el Monasterio de San Salvador de Oña. 5) Urraca Sánchez ( ? -1041) casada con Sancho Guillermo, duque de Gascuña, conde de Burdeos.

En el año 1000 Almanzor ataca Castilla, Sancho García sale a su encuentro y es derrotado en la Batalla de Cervera no sin antes causar un gran número de bajas en las filas de Almanzor. Participó junto con Sancho III de Navarra y Alfonso V de León en la famosa batalla de Calatañazor donde Almanzor sufrió su primera derrota importante.

Apoyó a Sulaiman al-Mustain en las luchas civiles cordobesas, recibiendo a cambio varias plazas en la línea del Duero (Osma, San Esteban de Gormaz, Clunia, Berlanga de Duero, Sepúlveda, Peñafiel) Conocido como "el de los Buenos Fueros" por los privilegios que dio a diversas poblaciones de Castilla. Fue el fundador del Monasterio de San Salvador de Oña en 1011, donde actualmente está enterrado.
--------------------
Sancho García (d. 1017), called of the Good Laws (in Spanish, el de los Buenos Fueros), was the count of Castile and Álava from 995 to his death. He was the son of Count García Fernández, against whom he rebelled with the support of Almanzor, the effective ruler of Córdoba. This resulted in the partition of the county between Sancho and his father, and the county was not reunited until his father's death five years later. He was succeeded by his own son García.

His wife was named Urraca, whose origin has been subject to speculation. The current consensus makes her his cousin, the daughter of count Gómez Díaz of Saldaña, head of the Beni Gómez family, by Muniadona Fernández of Castile. They had:

Muniadona Mayor, eldest daughter, married Sancho III of Navarre, through whom right to the county eventually passed. Ferdinand, died before 2 March 999 Tigridia, abbess of San Salvador de Oña Sancha, married Berenguer Ramon I, Count of Barcelona García, who succeeded his father They may also have been parents of:

Urraca, wife of Sancho VI William of Gascony

--------------------
Sancho García (d. 1017), called of the Good Laws (in Spanish, el de los Buenos Fueros), was the count of Castile and Álava from 995 to his death. He was the son of Count García Fernández, against whom he rebelled with the support of Almanzor, the effective ruler of Córdoba. This resulted in the partition of the county between Sancho and his father, and the county was not reunited until his father's death five years later. He was succeeded by his own son García.

His wife was named Urraca, whose origin has been subject to speculation. The current consensus makes her his cousin, the daughter of count Gómez Díaz of Saldaña, head of the Beni Gómez family, by Muniadona Fernández of Castile. They had:

Muniadona Mayor, eldest daughter, married Sancho III of Navarre, through whom right to the county eventually passed.

Ferdinand, died before 2 March 999

Tigridia, abbess of San Salvador de Oña

Sancha, married Berenguer Ramon I, Count of Barcelona

García, who succeeded his father

They may also have been parents of:

Urraca, wife of Sancho VI William of Gascony
--------------------
Sancho García (died 1017), called of the Good Laws (in Spanish, el de los Buenos Fueros), was the count of Castile and Álava from 995 to his death.

Sancho was the son of count García Fernández and his wife Aba of Ribagorza. He rebelled against his father with the support of Almanzor, the effective ruler of Córdoba. This resulted in the partition of the county between father and son, and the county was not reunited until his father's death five years later. He renewed the Reconquista by rebelling against Almanzor, alongside García Sánchez II of Pamplona and García Gómez of the Banu Gómez. Sancho led the coalition that was defeated at the Battle of Cervera in July 1000, but in early September successfully turned back the Córdoban invasion of his county. Almanzor was again campaigning against Sancho in 1002 when another battle occurred, remembered by the Christians as the Battle of Calatañazor and Muslims as the Pedroso expedition. The two sides report different outcomes to the battle itself, but Almanzor died of injuries received in the conflict, removing Sancho's primary antagonist and leaving the Caliphate of Córdoba in crisis. Sancho ruled for another 15 years, and was succeeded by his own son García.

His wife was named Urraca, whose appears to have been his cousin, the daughter of count Gómez Díaz of Saldaña, head of the Beni Gómez family, by Muniadona Fernández of Castile. They had:

Muniadona Mayor, eldest daughter, married Sancho III of Navarre, through whom right to the county eventually passed.

Ferdinand, died before 2 March 999

Tigridia, abbess of San Salvador de Oña, which he founded for her to direct.

Sancha, married Berenguer Ramon I, Count of Barcelona

García, who succeeded his father

They may also have been parents of:

Urraca, wife of Sancho VI William of Gascony

[edit] Ancestry

Ancestors of Sancho García of Castile[hide]

16. Fernándo González

8. Gonzalo Fernández, Count of Castile

17. Gutina

4. Fernán González, Count of Castile

18. (perh) Ramiro, Anti-King of León

9. Muniadona Ramírez of León

2. García Fernández, Count of Castile

20. García Jiménez of Pamplona

10. Sancho I of Navarre

21. Dadildis of Pallars (sister of 24)

5. Sancha of Navarre

22. Aznar Sánchez, Lord of Larraun

11. Toda Aznárez

23. Oneca Fortúnez of Pamplona

1. Sancho García of Castile

24. Raymond I, Count of Pallars and Ribagorza

12. Bernard I, Count of Ribagorza

6. Raymond II, Count of Ribagorza

26. Galindo Aznárez II, Count of Aragon

13. Tota Galíndez

27. Acibella Garcés (daughter of 28, 29)

3. Ava of Ribagorza

28. García II Sánchez, Duke of Gascony

14. William Garcés, Count of Fézensac

29. Amuna (Munia)

7. Garsinda of Fézensac

Preceded by

García Fernández Count of Castile

995–1017 Succeeded by

García Sánchez

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sancho_Garc%C3%ADa_of_Castile"

Categories: 1017 deaths | 11th-century Spanish people | Counts of Spain | 10th-century rulers in Europe | 11th-century rulers in Europe
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sancho_I_of_Castile
--------------------
He is identified as Sancha Garcia III of Castille who died 5 Feb 1017 by Luis Suarez Fernandez, "Historia de Espana" (Madrid: Edad Madia, 1978).

(From Wikipedia) Sancho García (died 1017), called of the Good Laws (in Spanish, el de los Buenos Fueros), was the count of Castile and Álava from 995 to his death. He was the son of Count García Fernández, against whom he rebelled with the support of Almanzor, the effective ruler of Córdoba. This resulted in the partition of the county between Sancho and his father, and the county was not reunited until his father's death five years later. He was succeeded by his own son García.

His wife was named Urraca, whose origin has been subject to speculation. The current consensus makes her his cousin, the daughter of count Gómez Díaz of Saldaña, head of the Beni Gómez family, by Muniadona Fernández of Castile.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

El Conde don Sancho Garcia fucedio a fu padre en el Señorio de Caftilla. Fue cafado con doña Vrraca, en quien tuvo al Infante don Garcia que le fucedio en el Condado, y a doña Nuña Reyna de Navarra muger de el Rey don Sancho de Navarra, y a la Reyna doña Terefa muger del Rey don Bermudo el Tercero de Leon, y a doña Tigride Abadeffa del Monafterio de Sã Salvador de Oña. El Infante don Garcia fiedo defpofado con la Infanta doña Sancha hija del Rey don Bermudo de Leon fue muerto por el Cõde don Rodrigo Vela, por cuya muerte fucedio en el Señorio de Caftilla la Reyna doña Nuña fu hermana y el Rey don Sancho de Navarra fu cuñado. Y aunque las hiftorias la llaman doña Elvira, fu nombre por efcripturas de aquel tiempo es doña Nuña. NOBLEZA DEL ANDALVZIA Por Gonçalo Argote de Molina, Sevilla 1588. Libro Primero. Don Gomez Manriqve Maestre de Calatrava gana a Alcaudete de los Moros, y el Rey don Fernando la da a la dicha Orden, y fucefsion de fu linage, y del linage de el Conde Fernan Gonçalez. Cap. CV. Pág. 117

--------------------
Gift med sin cousine: Uracca Salvadores (d. 20. Maj 1025).

Leo: Europäische Stammtafeln, J.A. Stargardt Verlag, Marburg, Schwennicke, Detlev (Ed.), Reference: II 51.
--------------------
Sancho García, el de los Buenos Fueros (m. febrero de 1017)1 fue Conde de Castilla del 995 al 1017.

Hijo de García Fernández y su mujer Ava de Ribagorza, y nieto del Conde de Castilla y de Álava (931-944 y 945-970) Fernán González. Sucedió a su padre al frente del condado tras su muerte aunque protagonizó una sublevación contra él con apoyo de Almanzor.

En el año 1000 Almanzor ataca Castilla; Sancho García sale a su encuentro y es derrotado en la Batalla de Cervera no sin antes causar un gran número de bajas en las filas de Almanzor. Participó junto con Sancho Garcés III de Pamplona y Alfonso V de León en la famosa batalla de Calatañazor donde Almanzor sufrió su primera derrota importante.

Apoyó a Sulaiman al-Mustain en las luchas civiles cordobesas, recibiendo a cambio varias plazas en la línea del Duero (Osma, San Esteban de Gormaz, Clunia, Berlanga de Duero, Sepúlveda, Peñafiel)

Conocido como "el de los Buenos Fueros" por los privilegios que dio a diversas poblaciones de Castilla.

Fue el fundador del Monasterio de San Salvador de Oña en 1011, donde fue enterrado. (Fuente: Wikipedia)

27724434. Grev Sancho Garcez GAROCIASON av Kastiljen(5737) was a Greve in 995 in Kastiljen.(5738) Etterfulgte sin far He died between 1017 and 1021. (5739) Han døde mest sansynlig i 1017 og ble bisatt i Onas kloster som var stiftet for ham 1011. Sagnet forteller at hans mor Ona (Ana) hadde gitt ham en giftig drikk. Han betalte tributt til Almanzor og levet derfor i fred med muselnennene, inntil han i 1002 forenet seg med Leons og navarras folk ved Calatanazor. Da Almanzor var død 1008, tok han tilbake Sepulveda og de andre landsdeler han hadde måttet avstå. Fra 1012 levet han i dårlig forhold til konen i Leon. He was married to Urraca N.NSDTR.

SOURCE NOTES:
www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal011092

RESEARCH NOTES:
Count of Castile (995-1017)

Name Prefix:<NPFX> King Name Suffix:<NSFX> I, Of Léon

Greve av Castilla 995 - 1021.
Sanco Garcéz etterfulgte sin far som greve av Castilla i 995. Han betalte tributt til
Almanzor og levde derfor i fred med maurerne inntil han forenet seg med Leons og Navarras
folk ved Calatañazor.
Da Alamanzor døde i 1008 tok han tilbake Sepulveda og de andre landdeler han
hadde måttet avstå. Fra 1012 levde han i et dårlig forhold til kongen i Leon.
Han døde antagelig i 1017, muligens i 1021, og ble bisatt i Oñas kloster som var stiftet
for ham i 1011. Sagnet forteller at hans mor Oña (Ana) hadde gitt ham en giftig drikk.

Sancho I of Castile
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Sancho I García (d. 1017), called of the Good Laws (in Spanish, el de los Buenos Fueros), was the count of Castile and Álava from 995 to his death. He was the son of Count García Fernández, against whom he rebelled with the support of Almanzor, the caliph of Córdoba. He was succeeded by his own son García.


Preceded by:
García I Fernández Count of Castile
995–1017 Succeeded by:
García II Sánchez

-- MERGED NOTE ------------

Wikidata: https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q509637 | Geni: https://www.geni.com/people/6000000012996889204

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]