== Notes for [[Item:Q105340|Q105340]] ==

Josefa de MORALES [663],[885],[1230] was born (date unknown).

According to Marriage Investiation #7-10, page 36 (January 4, 1692; the prospective marriage of Benito Gutierres to Maria Rosa de la Garza), Josefa de Morales had an illicit affair with the prospective groom Benito Gutierres.

Parents: Luis de MORALES and Maria LOBO GUERRERO (aka Maria de las Casas).

Spouse: Manuel GONZALES de Paredes. Josefa de MORALES and Manuel GONZALES de Paredes were married. Children were:
*1. Luis GONZALES de Paredes,
*2. Capt. Juan GONZALEZ,
*3. Joseph GONZALES de PAREDES,
*4. Alferez Manuel GONZALES de Paredes

http://www.raullongoria.net/Genealogy/FamilyTree/b163.html#P7434

=========================

37. JOSEFA4 MORALES-DE-LAS-CASAS (LUIS3 DE MORALES, JUANA2 DE TREVINO-QUINTANILLA-Y-SALAZAR, PEDRO1 DE SALAZAR)
*was born 1652, and
*died in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico.
*She married CAPTAIN MANUEL GONZALEZ-DE-PAREDES-DE-LOS-SANTOS-COY Bef. 1690,
**son of JUAN GONZALEZ-DE-PAREDES-DE-LOS-SANTOS and MARIA DE OLEA-CAMACHO. He was born 1650 in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico, and
**died Aft. 1721 in Salinas Victoria, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.
**Notes for JOSEFA MORALES-DE-LAS-CASAS: A.K.A. Josefa de Morales.
***Notes for CAPTAIN MANUEL GONZALEZ-DE-PAREDES-DE-LOS-SANTOS-COY: Source:Origen de los Fundadores de Texas, Nuevo Mexico, Coahulia, y Nuevo Leon, by Guillermo Garmendia Leal. Page 46.

Children of JOSEFA MORALES-DE-LAS-CASAS and MANUEL GONZALEZ-DE-PAREDES-DE-LOS-SANTOS-COY are:
*1. i. PEDRO5 GONZALEZ-DE-PAREDES-MORALES,
**m. LEONOR-JAVIERA DE-LA-GARZA-FALCON;
***b. Abt. 1703.
*2. ii. JUAN BAUTISTA GONZALEZ-DE-PAREDES-MORALES.
*3. iii. JUAN MARCOS GONZALEZ-DE-PAREDES-MORALES.
*4. iv. JOSEFA GONZALEZ-DE-PAREDES-MORALES.
*5. v. MARIANA GONZALEZ-DE-PAREDES-MORALES.
*6. vi. CAPTAIN MANUEL GONZALEZ-AMAYA-DE-PAREDES-MORALES,
**b. 1682, Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico;
**d. 29 Jul 1750, Boca de Leones, Nuevo Leon, Mexico;
**m. (1) MARIA-JOSEFA DE VILLARREAL-DE-LA-GARZA, 29 Aug 1707, Sagrario Metropolitano, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico;
***b. 04 Apr 1684, Boca de Leones, Villaladama,Nuevo Leon,Mexico;
**m. (2) JOSEFA DE VILLARREAL-TREVINO, 1722, Boca de Leones, Nuevo Leon, Mexico;
***b. 1700, Boca de Leones, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.
****Notes for CAPTAIN MANUEL GONZALEZ-AMAYA-DE-PAREDES-MORALES: Source: Index to the Marriage Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara, by Raul J. Guerra., Nadine M. Vasquez, Baldomero Vela, Jr. Page 192 & 227.
*7. vii. LUIS GONZALEZ-DE-PAREDES-MORALES,
**b. 1688;
**m. MARIA RITA VILLARREAL-CORTINAS, 29 Sep 1710, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico;
***b. 1690.
****Marriage Notes for LUIS GONZALEZ-DE-PAREDES-MORALES and MARIA VILLARREAL-CORTINAS: Marriage source:Index to the Marriage Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara by Raul J. Guerra, Jr., Nadine M. Vasquez, Baldomero Vela, Jr. Page 214.
*8. viii. JOSEPH GONZALEZ-DE-PAREDES-MORALES,
**b. 1690, Boca de Leones, Nuevo Leon, Mexico;
**m. FRANCISCA-JAVIERA DE VILLARREAL, 30 Jul 1712;
***b. 1692, Boca de Leones, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.
****Notes for JOSEPH GONZALEZ-DE-PAREDES-MORALES: Source: Index to the Marriage Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara, by Raul J. Guerra., Nadine M. Vasquez, Baldomero Vela, Jr. Page 221
*9. ix. JOAN GONZALEZ-DE-PAREDES-MORALES,
**b. Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico;
**m. PETRONILA DE VILLARREAL-DE-LA-GARZA, 07 May 1707, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico;
***b. Salinas Victoria, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.
****Notes for JOAN GONZALEZ-DE-PAREDES-MORALES: Source: Index to the Marriage Investigations of the Diocese of Guadalajara, by Raul J. Guerra., Nadine M. Vasquez, Baldomero Vela, Jr. Page 201 A.K.A. Juan Gonzalez

http://www.somosprimos.com/inclan/salazar.htm

----

=== GEDCOM Note ===
(Research):http://www.somosprimos.com/inclan/salazar.htm&nbsp;&nbsp; n.37

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000011153009629

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]