== Notes for [[Item:Q90965|Q90965]] ==

'''
=Claudia Pulchra=
'''

Claudia Pulchra (PIR2 C 1116, 14 BC-AD 26) was a Patrician woman of Ancient Rome who lived during the reigns of the Roman emperors Augustus and Tiberius. She was a daughter of Claudia Marcella Minor and the Roman consul of 12 BC, Marcus Valerius Messalla Appianus. Her younger brother was Marcus Valerius Messalla Barbatus, the father of Valeria Messalina who was her niece and would become the wife of the Roman emperor Claudius. Her maternal grandparents were the consul Gaius Claudius Marcellus Minor and Octavia the Younger, sister of Augustus. Hence she was a grand-niece of Augustus.

She became the third wife of the Roman General and Politician Publius Quinctilius Varus. Pulchra bore Varus a son, a called younger Publius Quinctilius Varus. Her husband committed suicide in September 9 during the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest, Germania Inferior and she never remarried.

Pulchra was always a close friend to her second cousin Agrippina the Elder. Through her friendship with Agrippina, Pulchra became the victim of the intrigues of treason trials of Sejanus in AD 26. Gnaeus Domitius Afer accused her of an attempt to poison Tiberius, casting magic and immorality. She died in exile. The Roman Historian Tacitus, considered the trial to be an indirect political attack against Agrippina.

Her son became wealthy through the inheritance of both his parents. In 27, however the younger Varus found himself facing accusations of treason and was nearly condemned. His trial has been attributed to the increasing distrust of Tiberius towards his environment and the machinations of Sejanus.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Claudia_Pulchra_(great-niece_of_Augustus)

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]