== Notes for [[Item:Q105402|Q105402]] ==

* [https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Matthew+1&version=KJV Matthew 1:13.]

Wikipedia: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matthew_1:13 Matthew 1:13.]

NB! Disputable parentship.

While cleaning up the Tanakh histories, Abiud is not in Tanakh generations of Bereishit. As I understand it, Tanakh is primary source for biblical genealogies. It is infeasible that Tanakh, Samaritan scrolls, and Septuagint had Abiud's pedigree excised so many centuries before Matthew formulated the disputed pedigree of Iesos.

The genealogy of Matthew 1:11-12 is not contained in Tanakh which is the authoritative text of biblical generations. Athol Bloomer and others have spit no end of venom over this issue. We know concretely who wrote Tanakh texts, but we don't know provenance of Matthew. See review - [http://www.earlychristianwritings.com/matthew.html Gospel of Matthew.]

Gospel of Matthew was written in Greek and relied largely upon Mark, not the author's first-hand experience. In other words it is a text of disputed provenance and far removed from the original source of biblical pedigrees.

Moreover, a very recent examination of Iesos, through the eyes of Jews contemporaneous with Iesos, tells us the parentage of Iesos is very different according to Hebrew texts of that period. (Amazon: [http://www.amazon.com/The-Gospel-According-Jews-ebook/dp/B00A1SLRAI The Gospel According to The Jews]).

----
Looks like all or most of about was by Shmuel in June 2024. I know he is working on the Biblical Tree. (LL. 7/2024)
In Discussions - in "ATTENTION Curators, please assist" - the specific comment is: https://www.geni.com/discussions/272643?msg=1711423


Abihud
Meaning: father (i.e., "possessor") of renown.

A descendant of Zerubbabel and father of Eliakim (Matt. 1:13, "Abiud");called also Juda (Luke 3:26), and Obadiah (1 Chr. 3:21).

Abiud (b´d) (KEY) [Gr. for Abihud], son of Zerubbabel in the genealogy atthe beginning of the Gospel of St. Matthew.

Mat 1:13

Father of Honor

Mat 1:13

Father of Honor

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000000424697864

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]