== Notes for [[Item:Q111999|Q111999]] ==

Later, in the 18th century , the queen's remains were placed in the urns of the royal pantheon in the chapel of the Casto King, making it impossible to identify and individualize them today.



-https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Urraca_S%C3%A1nchez_(reina_de_Le%C3%B3n)_

Urraca Sánchez (a veces llamada Teresa Florentina de Navarra, aunque se desconoce si esta era otra persona), hija de Sancho Garcés y de Toda de Navarra, wife of Ramiro II.

--------------------

Urraca Sánchez de Pamplona1

b. circa 905, d. 23 June 956

Father Sancho I Garcés, rey de Pamplona2 b. circa 881?, d. 11 October 925

Mother Urraca Aznárez de Aragón3 b. circa 880

Charts Descendants of Charlemage

Urraca Sánchez de Pamplona was born circa 905. She was the daughter of Sancho I Garcés, rey de Pamplona and Urraca Aznárez de Aragón.2,3 Urraca Sánchez de Pamplona married Ramiro II "el Feroz Guerrero", rey de León, son of Ordoño II, rey de León and Munia Elvira Menéndez, circa 932; His 2nd.2 Urraca Sánchez de Pamplona died on 23 June 956.3

Family

Ramiro II "el Feroz Guerrero", rey de León b. circa 913, d. 1 January 951

Children

Sancho I "el Craso", rey de León+ b. a 932, d. Dec 9663

Elvira "the Chaste" Ramírez de León b. 934?2

Citations

[S882] Armerías ilustres, online http://members.xoom.com/chema, Corona Astur-Leonesa.

[S1074] Bishop Pelayo "the Fabulist" of Oviedo, "CRL", 79.

[S187] Royal Genealogy Database, online http://www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/public/genealogy/

110897745. Grevinne Terese Florentina SANCHOSDTR av Navarra was a Grevinne in Navarra.

Source: Codex of Roda
Also known as Florentina de Navarre, Urraca Sanchez, Urraca Sanches.

Grevinne av Navarra.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]