== Notes for [[Item:Q88659|Q88659]] ==

Perdiccas I, King of Macedonia was the predecessor of Argaeus I, King of Macedonia; King of Macedonia at the Balkan Peninsula 723-675 B.C.). Perdiccas I, King of Macedonia hired himself out to serve the king and took charge of the smaller cattle at Lebaea, Upper Macedonia. He fell afoul of the king because of wages, and with his brothers, and fled to another part of Macedonia, in which they crossed a stream which thereafter swelled so that pursuit was impossible, and took up their abode near the place called "the Gardens of Midas, son of Gordias". He was born at Argos. He was the son of Tyrimmas Argead and Cleonice (?). Perdiccas I, King of Macedonia left Illyria and crossed to Upper Macedonia where he and his brothers came to the town of Lebaea. He fled Argos to the Illyrians. He married Cleopatra (?).

--------------------

Death: 652 B.C.

General Notes

King of Macedonia, the Balkan Peninsula, 0672 B.C.. King of Macedonia Perdiccas I Argead hired himself out to serve the king and took charge of the smaller cattle in Lebaea, Upper Macedonia.2 He fell afoul of the king because of wages, and with his brothers, and fled to another part of Macedonia, in which they crossed a stream which thereafter swelled so that pursuit was impossible, and took up their abode near the place called "the Gardens of Midas, son of Gordias".2 He left Illyria and crossed to Upper Macedonia where he and his brothers came to the town of Lebaea.2 He was the son of Tyrimmas Argead and Cleonice (?) .3,2 He was born in Argos. He fled Argos to the Illyrians.2 He married Cleopatra (?) .3

Child of King of Macedonia Perdiccas I Argead and Cleopatra (?) :

King of Macedonia Argaeus I Argaead+

[S204] Roderick W. Stuart, Royalty for Commoners: The Complete Lineage of John of Gaunt, Son of Edward III, Kings of England, and Queen Philippa (.: ., 3rd Ed., 1998), 413-90. Hereinafter cited as RfC.

[S723] Herodotus of Halicarnassus, The History of Herodotus (London and New York: MacMillan and Co., 1890). Hereinafter cited as Herodotus' History.

[S921] Michael Marcotte's Genealogy: Argead Chart, online . Hereinafter cited as Marcotte's Argead Chart.
--------------------
Pérdicas Primer Rey de Macedonia n 700 AC-678 AC

Según el Historiador Heródoto "tres hermanos -Gavanes, Aéropo y Pérdicas- que descendían de Ténemo huyeron de Argos a Iliria, desde donde pasaron a la Alta Macedonia y llegaron a la ciudad de Lebea En dicha ciudad trabajaron a sueldo al servicio del monarca: uno apacentaba caballos, el otro bueyes y Pérdicas,el más joven de los tres, ganado menor... . "se establecieron en los jardines que, según Heródoto, pertenecieron al reyMidas, el mítico rey de Frigia Se alzaba allí el monte Bermio.Se adueñaron de la región y usándola como base de operaciones conquistaron el resto de Macedonia, es decir los territorios costeros entre el río Haliacmón y el Axio , así como la Macedonia meridional y septentrional, en perjuicio, sobre todo, depeonio y tracios Este proceso de extensión del Reino de Macedonia fue paulatino, prolongándose por espacios de tres siglos y medio.#

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per01308.htm#0

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Macedonia

He was the founder of the Macedonian state, about 700 b.c.

He was the founder of the Macedonian state, about 700 b.c.

Ruled c. 670 - 652 BC, King of Macedonia 1
Note: Argead dynasty, ruling house of ancient Macedonia from about 700 to about 311 BC; under their leadership the Macedonian kingdom was created and gradually gained predominance throughout Greece. PerdiccasI, led the people who called themselves Macedonians eastward from their home on the Haliacmon (modern Aliákmon) River. Aegae (Edessa) became the capital.

Perdiccas I of Macedon
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Perdiccas I (Greek: ?e?d??a?) was king of Macedonia from about 700 BC to about 678 BC.
Preceded by:
Tyrimmas King of Macedon
700 BC–678 BC Succeeded by:
Argaeus I

Ruled c. 670 - 652 BC, King of Macedonia 1
Note: Argead dynasty, ruling house of ancient Macedonia from about 700 to about 311 BC; under their leadership the Macedonian kingdom was created and gradually gained predominance throughout Greece. PerdiccasI, led the people who called themselves Macedonians eastward from their home on the Haliacmon (modern Aliákmon) River. Aegae (Edessa) became the capital.

Ruled c. 670 - 652 BC, King of Macedonia 1
Note: Argead dynasty, ruling house of ancient Macedonia from about 700 to about 311 BC; under their leadership the Macedonian kingdom was created and gradually gained predominance throughout Greece. PerdiccasI, led the people who called themselves Macedonians eastward from their home on the Haliacmon (modern Aliákmon) River. Aegae (Edessa) became the capital.

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]