== Notes for [[Item:Q105034|Q105034]] ==

'''Juana de TREVIÑO''' was born in Mexico City, New Spain.

Parents:

Diego de TREVIÑO and Beatriz de QUINTANILLA.

Spouse:

Marcos Alonso DE LA GARZA y ARCON.

Juana de TREVIÑO and Marcos Alonso DE LA GARZA y ARCON16,1322 were married. According to the 1626 Census of the Villa de Cerralvo (Monterrey), at a distance of one arcabuz shot from the ranch of Bernabe de las Casas (who lived 7 leagues from the Villa), lived the brothers Diego de Treviño and Francisco de la Garza (both widowers) and their unmarried brothers Joseph de Treviño, Pedro de la Garza, Marcos y Bernave Gonzalez.

Children were:

Marcos Alonso DE LA GARZA, Capt. Pedro DE LA GARZA, Capt. Blas DE LA GARZA FALCON, Capt. Francisco DE LA GARZA, Diego de TREVIÑO, Capt. Alonso de TREVIÑO de la Garza, Caudillo Joseph de TREVIÑO (aka Joseph de la Garza).

==Links==

[http://gw5.geneanet.org/sanchiz?lang=en;pz=tomas;nz=sanchez+garza;ocz=0;p=juana;n=trevino+quintanilla Geneanet]

[http://www.raullongoria.net/Genealogy/FamilyTree/b220.html#P979 raullongoria.net]

--------------------
Information provided by Crispin D Rendon.
--------------------
* Reference: [https://www.ancestry.com/family-tree/person/tree/110326636/person/120137628455 Ancestry Genealogy] - [https://www.geni.com/projects/SmartCopy/18783 SmartCopy]: ''Sep 6 2017, 13:03:38 UTC''

--------------------
During this time period the Children began to either use the name Falcon in place of Arcon and some children chose to keep their mothers maiden name of Trevino.

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000006763647063

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]