== Notes for [[Item:Q89192|Q89192]] ==

'''from ''en.Wikipedia''''' [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Puzur-Ashur_III '''Puzur-Ashur III''']: "Puzur-Ashur III was the king of Assyria from c. 1521 BC to 1498 BC. According to the Assyrian King List, he was the son and successor of Ashur-nirari I and ruled for 24 years (or 14 years, according to another copy). He is also the first Assyrian king to appear in the synchronistic history, where he is described as a contemporary of Burnaburiash of Babylon.[2] A few of his building inscriptions were found at Assur. He rebuilt part of the temple of Ishtar in his capital, Ashur, and the southern parts of the city wall.[3]"
# Düring, Bleda S. (2020). ''The Imperialisation of Assyria: An Archaeological Approach''. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. xvi. ISBN 978-1108778701.
# ''Who's who in the ancient Near East'' By Gwendolyn Leick
# ''The Cambridge Ancient History'' edited, by I. E. S. Edwards, C. J. Gadd, N. G. L. Hammond, E. Sollberger

>'''[https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Puzur-Ashur_III Spanish Wikipedia]''', auto-translation:
>"Puzur-Ashur III, king of Assyria, during the paleo-Assyrian period (1521 BC - 1498 BC). ¶ Son and successor of King Assur-nirari I. The Synchronic History mentions border clashes around Samarra with the Kassite Burna-Buriash I of Babylon with whom he eventually signed a peace treaty. The fact of being able to sign an international treaty of equals with the king of Babylon, as was achieved by his successor Assur-bel-nisheshu, shows that by this time, Assyria had already managed to recover national sovereignty, for longer periods. or less long. ¶ Puzur-Assur III managed to distance himself from the influence of the kingdom of Mitanni, laying the foundations for the future splendor of the Middle Kingdom. He also began a program of great constructions in his capital Assur, such as in the city walls and in various temples. ¶ He was succeeded by his son Enlil-nasir I.
>1. Historia Universal Siglo XXI. ''Los imperios del Antiguo Oriente.El fin del segundo milenio'' ISBN 84-323-0041-1
>2. Federico Lara Peinado, ''Diccionario Biográfico del Mundo Antiguo: Egipto y Próximo Oriente'', Editorial Aldebarán (1998), ISBN 8488676425.
>.
>'''[https://www.britannica.com/biography/Puzur-Ashur-III Britannica.com "Puzur-Ashur III"]''' (subscription req. for full online access.)
>"Puzur-Ashur III concluded a border treaty with Babylonia about 1480, as did Ashur-bel-nisheshu about 1405. Ashur-nadin-ahhe II (c. 1392–c. 1383) was even able to obtain support from Egypt, which sent him a consignment of gold...."

* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Assyrian_kings
* https://pantheon.world/profile/person/Puzur-Ashur_III/
* '''YouTube:''' ''The Epic of Ancient Assyria Podcast'' - [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cdEq9aDg6W8 Part 1 | Early Assyria, Ashur and the Anatolian Colonies”].
* '''YouTube:''' ''The Epic of Ancient Assyria Podcast'' - [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R7YyJ18XYfg Part 2 | Ashur during the Age of Shamshi-Adad”].
* '''YouTube:''' ''The Epic of Ancient Assyria Podcast'' - [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ODPsrRiopog Part 3 | The Middle Assyrian Empire (Beginnings)].
* '''YouTube:''' ''The Epic of Ancient Assyria Podcast'' - [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=svUT9gcUrbw Part 4 | Adad-nirari I, Shalmaneser I and Tukulti-Ninurta I].

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]