== Notes for [[Item:Q112639|Q112639]] ==

[https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garc%C3%ADa_Jiménez_de_Pamplona '''García''' '''Jiménez de Pamplona'''] (835-after 885) was a high-medieval knight of the kingdom of Pamplona, who is mentioned with that surname in the Roda Codex. He was co-regent of the kingdom during the reigns of García Íñiguez of Pamplona and her son Fortún Garcés.a


===Biography

Garcia II Jiménez was a sub- or co-king of Pamplona in the late 9th century. The Basque ruling dynasty - the Jiménez - was apparently in control of a part of what would become the kingdom of Navarre distinct from that held by the descendants of Inigo Arista, the first king of Pamplona. Garcia presumably succeeded his father Jimeno during the lifetime of Garcia Iniguez, the son and successor of Inigo Arista, and is listed by the Códice de Roda as being of 'another part of the kingdom' of Pamplona.

By a popular reconstruction, when King Garcia Iniguez supposedly died in 870 while his son and heir Fortún Garcés was imprisoned in Córdoba. Garcia II Jiménez is said to have become uncontested regent of the kingdom until he was killed at Aybar (in 882) in a battle against the Emir of Córdoba. However there is evidence that Garcia Iniguez was still living at the time of his son's return in 880, and it may well have been that he was that monarch who was killed in 882. In fact, there is no documentary evidence of Garcia II Jiménez playing any role in the government of the greater kingdom of Pamplona.

===Family

There is more information about his offspring. Having been known that he was the father of Sancho Garcés I of Pamplona, the first king of the so-called Jimena dynasty, he has traditionally been held by the oldest known representative of that lineage.

According to documentary sources, García Jiménez got married twice. With his first wife, Onneca Rebelle de Sangüesa, he had two children:
# Sancha Garcés de Pamplona, who first married Íñigo Fortúñez and then married Count Galindo II Aznárez of Aragon.
# Íñigo Garcés

His second marriage was to Dadildis de Pallars, daughter of Count Lupo de Bigorra and Faquilena de Roergue, daughter of Ramón I de Tolosa. From this marriage they would be born:
# Sancho Garcés, who would be the first king of Pamplona of the Jimena dynasty.
# Jimeno Gárces.


===Identification

The documentary sources that speak of this character are scarce and contradictory to each other, especially when talking about his ancestry. Based on some of these sources, he has been presented alternately as the son, grandson or great-grandson of Jimeno of Pamplona.1 The Codex of Roda, although he does not mention details of his father, indicates that his patronymic was "Jiménez", which has also led to the defense that García Jiménez was the son of Jimeno of Pamplona. However, this hypothesis does not correspond to the proposed chronology for both characters, since they would have been born with a difference of almost a hundred years from each other.

Recently, and from the publication of new medieval Muslim texts, the theory has been proposed that the copyist of the Codex of Roda confused two characters who were called García, but who had different surnames. The character traditionally held by García Jiménez (located chronologically in the middle of the ninth century) was actually called García Íñiguez and in turn should not be confused with King García Íñiguez of Pamplona, son of King Íñigo Arista, with whom he has traditionally been considered co-regent of the kingdom.

There is also a confusion with this García Jiménez (the probable García Íñiguez) as a possible descendant of Garci Ximénez, the legendary first king of Sobrarbe, who also lived in the first half of the eighth century, and with whom he is linked by other sources and traditions.2


a. There is also the theory that García Jiménez's real name was García Íñiguez, which should not be confused with the Pamplona king García I Íñiguez, son of King Íñigo Arista.

===References
# https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garc%C3%ADa_Jim%C3%A9nez#Matrimonios_y_descendencia
# [https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garc%C3%ADa_Jiménez_de_Pamplona ''García'' '''Jiménez de Pamplona'''] > Wikipedia retrieved 11 March 2023
# https://genealogics.org/getperson.php?personID=I00106646&tree=LEO Cites
## ~Europäische Stammtafeln, J.A. Stargardt Verlag, Marburg, Schwennicke, Detlev (Ed.).2:54
## https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garc%C3%ADa_Jiménez_of_Pamplona cites
### Lacarra de Miguel, José María. "Textos navarros del Códice de Roda". Estudios de Edad Media de la Corona de Aragon. 1:194-283 (1945).
### Pérez de Urbel, Justo. "Lo viejo y lo nuevo sobre el origin del Reino de Pamplona". Al-Andalus. 19:1-42 (1954).
### Sánchez Albornoz, Claudio. "Problemas de la historia Navarra del siglo IX". Princípe de Viana, 20:5-62 (1959).

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]