== Notes for [[Item:Q91159|Q91159]] ==

Marcus Antonius Rhetor di Roma, Praetor di Cilicia, was born circa 143 BC, died circa 87 BC.

--------------------

ID: I6880

Name: Marcus Antonius of Rome

Given Name: Marcus Antonius

Surname: of Rome

Nickname: The Orator

Sex: M

_UID: B50B2AFA5118D811BE490080C8C142CC54F2

Change Date: 18 Jun 2004

Birth: 143 BC

Death: 87 BC

Marriage 1 Spouse Unknown

Children

Marcus Antonius Creticus of Rome b: 100 BC

Forrás / Source:

http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/igm.cgi?op=GET&db=jdp-fam&id=I6880

--------------------

Born : 143 BC - -

Died : 87 BC - -

-------------------------

put to death for backing Sulla

--------------------

Born : 143 BC - -

Died : 87 BC - -

Free 1 : : put to death for backing Sulla

--------------------

Born : 143 BC - -

Died : 87 BC - -

Free 1 : : put to death for backing Sulla

--------------------

Born : 143 BC - -

Died : 87 BC

------------------------------

put to death for backing Sulla

-----------------------------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Antonius_(orator)

--------------------

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Antonius_Orator
--------------------
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Antonius_Orator
--------------------
67481222144880936. Marcus Antonius "the Orator" Consul ROMAN EMPIRE,1601,1746 son of Gaius Antonius I ROMAN EMPIRE and Unknown, was born in 143 B.C. in Roma, Italy and died in 87 B.C. in Roma, Italy at age 56.

General Notes:

Most eloquent orator, Consul and Censor.

Marcus married.

The child from this marriage was:

33740611072440468 i. Marcus Antonius II "Creticus" Praetor ROMAN EMPIRE (born in , , Roma, Italy - died in 68 B.C. in , , Roma, Italy)

http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.com/~mgholler/Caden/a56.htm#i547458981

134962444289761872. Gaius Antonius I ROMAN EMPIRE 1601,1746 was born in 168 B.C. in Roma, Italy.

Gaius married.

The child from this marriage was:

67481222144880936 i. Marcus Antonius "the Orator" Consul ROMAN EMPIRE (born in 143 B.C. in Roma, Italy - died in 87 B.C. in Roma, Italy)

http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.com/~mgholler/Caden/a57.htm#i547458850
--------------------
Marcus Antonius Orator (died 87 BC) was a Roman politician of the Antonius family and one of the most distinguished Roman orators of his time. He started his cursus honorum as quaestor in 113 BC and in 102 BC he was elected praetor with proconsular powers for the province of Cilicia. During his term, Antonius fought the pirates with such success that the Senate voted a naval triumph in his honor. He was then elected consul in 99 BC, together with Aulus Postumius Albinus, and in 97 BC, he was elected censor. He held a command in the Social War in 90 BC. During the civil war between Gaius Marius and Lucius Cornelius Sulla, Antonius supported the latter. This cost him his life; Gaius Marius and Lucius Cornelius Cinna executed him when they obtained possession of Rome in 87 BC.

Throughout his political career, he continued to appear as a mediative defender or an accuser in Roman courts of law. Antonius' modern reputation for eloquence derives from the authority of Cicero, since none of his speeches survive. He is one of the chief speakers in Cicero's De Oratore.

Antonius had a daughter Antonia who was captured in Italy by pirates, from whom her father ransomed her for a large sum. He also had two sons Marcus Antonius Creticus and Gaius Antonius Hybrida. The former was the father of the famous general and triumvir, Mark Antony.
--------------------
Marcus Antonius (143-87 B.C.), one of the most distinguished Roman orators of his time, was quaestor in 113, and praetor in 102 with proconsular powers, the province of Cilicia being assigned to him. Here he was so successful against the pirates that a naval triumph was awarded him.

He was consul in 99, censor 97, and held a command in the Marsic War in 90. An adherent of Sulla, he was put to death by Marius and Cinna when they obtained possession of Rome (87).

Antonius’s reputation for eloquence rests on the authority of Cicero, none of his orations being extant. He is one of the chief speakers in Cicero’s De Oratore.
--------------------
'''Marcus Antonius'''

Marcus Antonius (died 87 BC) was a Roman politician of the Antonius family and one of the most distinguished Roman orators of his time. He was also the grandfather of the famous general and triumvir, Mark Antony.

'''Career'''

He started his cursus honorum as quaestor in 113 BC and in 102 BC he was elected praetor with proconsular powers for the Roman province of Cilicia. During his term, Antonius fought the pirates with such success that the Senate voted a naval triumph in his honor. He was then elected consul in 99 BC, together with Aulus Postumius Albinus, and in 97 BC, he was elected censor. He held a command in the Social War in 90 BC. During the civil war between Gaius Marius and Lucius Cornelius Sulla, Antonius supported the latter. This cost him his life; Gaius Marius and Lucius Cornelius Cinna executed him when they obtained possession of Rome in 87 BC.

Throughout his political career, he continued to appear as a mediative defender or an accuser in Roman courts of law. Antonius' modern reputation for eloquence derives from the authority of Cicero, since none of his speeches survive. He is one of the chief speakers in Cicero's De Oratore.

'''Family'''

His father was named Gaius Antonius.

Antonius had a daughter, Antonia, and two sons, Marcus Antonius Creticus and Gaius Antonius Hybrida. Marcus Antonius Creticus was the father of the triumvir Mark Antony.

In 100 BC, Marcus Antonius obtained a triumph, because he had fought successfully against the Cilician pirates. Some time later his daughter Antonia was kidnapped by pirates from his villa near Misenum and was only released after the payment of a large ransom.

'''Source : '''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Antonius_(orator)

Eloquent orator.[FAVthomas.FTW]

Albert E Myers says: Marcus was a distinguished orator, praetor withproconsular powers, and was put to death as an adherent of Sulla.

SOURCE NOTES:
http://www.american-pictures.com/genealogy/persons/per03757.htm#0

RESEARCH NOTES:
Orator; put to death for backing Sulla

Marcus Antonius Orator
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.

Marcus Antonius Orator (died 87 BC) was a Roman politician of the Antonius family and one of the most distinguished Roman orators of his time. He started his cursus honorum as quaestor in 113 BC, and in 102 BC he was elected praetor with proconsular powers for the province of Cilicia. During his term, Antonius fought the pirates with such a success that the Senate voted a naval triumph in his honour. He was then elected consul in 99 BC, together with Aulus Postumius Albinus, and in 97 BC, he was elected censor. He held a command in the Marsic War in 90 BC. During the civil war between Gaius Marius and Lucius Cornelius Sulla, Antonius supported the latter. This cost him his life; Marius and Lucius Cornelius Cinna executed him when they obtained possession of Rome in 87 BC.

Throughout his political career he continued to appear as a mediative defender or an accuser in Roman courts of law. Antonius' modern reputation for eloquence derives from the authority of Cicero, since none of his speeches survive. He is one of the chief speakers in Cicero's De Oratore. He had two sons, Marcus Antonius Creticus and Gaius Antonius Hybrida, who would not live up to his reputation of excellence. The former was the father of the famous general and triumvir, Mark Antony.

[edit]
References
Velleius Paterculus ii. 22
Appian, Bell. Civ. i. 72
Dio Cassius xlv. 47
Plutarch, Marius, 44
Cicero, Orator, 5, Brutus, 37
Quintilian, Instit. iii. 1, 19
O. Enderlein, De M. Antonio oratore (Leipzig, 1882)
This article incorporates text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica, which is in the public domain.


wtf 4:565

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]