== Notes for [[Item:Q106470|Q106470]] ==

Abd Shams was the oldest son of Abd Manaf ibn Qusai.[1] His younger brothers were Muttalib, Nawfal and Hashim, after whom the Banu Hashim clan was named.[2]

Atikah was wife of Abd Manaf ibn Qusai. The birth of her conjoined twin sons 'Amr (more commonly known as Hashim) and 'Abd Shams was remembered for 'Amr being born with one of his toes pressed into 'Abd Shams's forehead. It was said that they had struggled in the womb seeking to be firstborn. Legend says that their father Abd Manaf ibn Qusai separated the conjoined brothers with a sword and that some priests believed that the blood that had flown between them signified wars between their progeny (confrontations did occur between Banu al'Abbas and Banu Ummaya ibn 'Abd Shams in the year 750 AH).[1][2]

Progenitor of ''Banu 'Abd Shams'' (''Banu Umayyah'') Tribes

Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%27Abd_Shams

----

https://maltagenealogy.com/cordova/

1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1. Abd Shams bin Abd Manaf, married with issue.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abd_Shams_ibn_Abd_Manaf

He was, presumably, the oldest son of Abd Manaf ibn Qusai. His younger brothers were Muttalib, Umayya and Hashim, after whom the Banu Hashim tribe was named.
The Banu Umayyad clan was named after his son Umayya ibn Abd Shams. Abd Shams was the great-great-grandfather of the sahabi Uthman ibn Affan (d.656), the third Caliph of the Muslim Ummah (community).

Abd Shams ibn Abd Manaf
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Abd Shams ibn Manaf (Arabic: ??? ??? ?? ??? ????) was a prominent member of the Quraish tribe of Mecca in modern-day Saudi Arabia. The Banu Abd Shams sub-clan of the Quraish tribe and their descendants take its name from him.

[edit] Lineage

He was, presumably, the oldest son of Abd Manaf ibn Qusai. His younger brothers were Wahab ibn Abd Manaf, Muttalib ibn Abd Manaf, and Hashim ibn Abd Manaf, after whom the Banu Hashim tribe was named.

The Banu Umayyad clan was named after his son Umayya ibn Abd Shams. Abd Shams was the great-great-grandfather of the sahabi Uthman ibn Affan (d.656), the third Caliph of the Muslim Ummah (community).

REFERENCE_NUMBERS:
geni:6000000001823897258

[[Category:Possibly derived from wikipedia]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]