== Notes for [[Item:Q115745|Q115745]] ==

https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sancho_I_de_Portugal

http://genealogics.org/getperson.php?personID=I00020558&tree=LEO

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sancho_I_of_Portugal

Sancho I de Portugal Origem: Wikipédia, a enciclopédia livre. http://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sancho_I_de_Portugal

D. Sancho I de Portugal (11 de Novembro de 1154 - 26 de Março de 1211), cognominado 'o Povoador' (pelo estímulo com que apadrinhou o povoamento dos territórios do país - destacando-se a fundação da cidade da Guarda, em 1199, e a atribuição de cartas de foral na Beira e em Trás-os-Montes: Gouveia (1186), Covilhã (1186), Viseu (1187), Bragança (1187), etc, povoando assim áreas remotas do reino, em particular com imigrantes da Flandres e Borgonha.

Quarto filho do monarca Afonso Henriques, foi baptizado com o nome de Martinho, por haver nascido no dia do santo com o mesmo nome, e não estaria preparado para reinar; no entanto, a morte do seu irmão mais velho, D. Henrique, quando contava apenas três anos de idade, levou à alteração da sua onomástica para um nome mais hispânico, ficando desde então Sancho Afonso.

Por sua mulher, Dulce de Barcelona, infanta de Aragão (1152-1198):
#Teresa, infanta de Portugal (1176-1250), casou com o rei Afonso IX de Leão
#Sancha, infanta de Portugal (ca.1180-1229), abadessa do Lorvão
#Raimundo de Portugal (ca.1180-1189)
#Constança de Portugal (1182-1202)
#Afonso II de Portugal (1185-1233)
#Pedro, infante de Portugal (1187-1258), conde de Urgel pelo casamento com Aurembiaix Armengel; foi também Senhor de Maiorca.
#Fernando, infante de Portugal (1188-1233), viveu no estrangeiro, casou com Joana da Flandres
#Henrique de Portugal (1189-?)
#Branca, infanta de Portugal (1192-1240), senhora de Guadalajara
#Berengária, infanta de Portugal (1194-1221), casada com o rei Valdemar II da Dinamarca
#Mafalda, infanta de Portugal (ca.1200-1257), casada com o rei Henrique I de Castela, depois fundadora do mosteiro cisterciense de Arouca e sua primeira abadessa.

Filhos naturais:

Havidos de Maria Aires de Fornelos
#Martim Sanches de Portugal, conde de Trastâmara
#Urraca Sanches

Havidos de Maria Pais Ribeiro, dita a Ribeirinha, filha de Paio Moniz de Ribeira e de Urraca Nunes de Bragança (1150 - ?), filha de Vasco Pires de Bragança.
#Rodrigo Sanches (1200-1246)
#Gil Sanches (1200-1236)
#Nuno Sanches
#Maior Sanches
#Teresa Sanches (1205-1230)
#Constança Sanches (1210-1269)

Em 1170, Sancho foi armado cavaleiro pelo seu pai logo após o acidente de D. Afonso Henriques em Badajoz e tornou-se seu braço direito, quer do ponto de vista militar, quer do ponto de vista administrativo. Nestes primeiros tempos de Portugal enquanto país independente, muitos eram os inimigos da coroa, a começar pelo reino de Castela e Leão que havia controlado Portugal até então. Para além do mais, a Igreja Católica demorava em consagrar a independência de Portugal com a sua bênção. Para compensar estas falhas, Portugal procurou aliados dentro da Península Ibérica, em particular o reino de Aragão, um inimigo tradicional de Castela, que se tornou no primeiro país a reconhecer Portugal. O acordo foi firmado 1174 pelo casamento de Sancho, então príncipe herdeiro, com a infanta Dulce Berenguer, irmã mais nova do rei Afonso II de Aragão.

Com a morte de Afonso Henriques em 1185, Sancho I torna-se no segundo rei de Portugal. Tendo Coimbra como centro do seu reino, Sancho deu por finda as guerras fronteiriças pela posse da Galiza e dedicou-se a guerrear os Mouros localizados a Sul. Aproveitou a passagem pelo porto de Lisboa dos cruzados da terceira cruzada, na primavera de 1189, para conquistar Silves, um importante centro administrativo e económico do Sul, com população estimada em 20.000 pessoas. Sancho ordenou a fortificação da cidade e construção do castelo que ainda hoje pode ser admirado. A posse de Silves foi efémera já que em 1190 Abu Yusuf Ya'qub al-Mansur cercou a cidade de Silves com um exército e com outro atacou Torres Novas, que apenas conseguiu resistir durante dez dias, devido ao rei de Leão e Castela ameaçar de novo o Norte.

Han gjorde seg fortjent til sitt tilnavn «Bondevennen» ved sin iver for å forbedre landbruket. Han bidro også til byenes oppkomst ved å gi privilegier og befolke dem med kristne nybyggere. Sanho ble gift i 1174 med Dulcia. Han hadde også konkubinene Maria, datter til Arya Nuñes de Fornelos og Maria Paez de Ribera.64

Sancho I (pronounced [?s??u]; rarely translated to Sanctius I), nicknamed the Populator (Portuguese o Povoador), second monarch of Portugal, was born on November 11, 1154 in Coimbra and died on March 26, 1212 in the same city. He was the second but only surviving legitimate son and fourth child of Afonso I Henriques of Portugal by his wife, Maud of Savoy. Sancho succeeded his father in 1185. He used the title King of the Algarve and/or King of Silves between 1189 and 1191

In 1170, Sancho was knighted by his father, King Afonso I, and from then on he became his second in command, both administratively and militarily. At this time, the independence of Portugal (declared in 1139) was not firmly established. The kings of León and Castile were trying to re-annex the country and the Roman Catholic Church was late in giving its blessing and approval. Due to this situation Afonso I had to search for allies within the Iberian Peninsula. Portugal made an alliance with the Kingdom of Aragon and together they fought Castile and León. To secure the agreement, Infante Sancho of Portugal married, in 1174, Infanta Dulce Berenguer, younger sister of King Alfonso II of Aragon. Aragon was thus the first Iberian kingdom to recognize the independence of Portugal.

With the death of Afonso I in 1185, Sancho I became the second king of Portugal. Coimbra was the centre of his kingdom; Sancho terminated the exhausting and generally pointless wars against his neighbours for control of the Galician borderlands. Instead, he turned all his attentions to the south, towards the Moorish small kingdoms (called taifas) that still thrived. With Crusader help he took Silves in 1191. Silves was an important city of the South, an administrative and commercial town with population estimates around 20,000 people. Sancho ordered the fortification of the city and built a castle which is today an important monument of Portuguese heritage. However, military attention soon had to be turned again to the North, where León and Castile threatened again the Portuguese borders. Silves was again lost to the Moors. It should be noted that the global Muslim population had climbed to about 6 per cent as against the Christian population of 12 per cent by 1200.

Sancho I dedicated much of his reign to political and administrative organization of the new kingdom. He accumulated a national treasure, supported new industries and the middle class of merchants. Moreover, he created several new towns and villages (like Guarda in 1199) and took great care in populating remote areas in the northern Christian regions of Portugal, notably with Flemings and Burgundians – hence the nickname "the Populator". The king was also known for his love of

--------------------
Reference Book: He 156.

Konge Sanco Alfonsosen Portugal was Konge av Portugal. He married Dronning Dulcia (--?--) av Aragon. He was born before 1154 at Portugal. He died in 1211 at Portugal. He 156.

Dronning Dulcia (--?--) av Aragon was born at Aragon. She died at Portugal. She married Konge Sanco I Alfonsosen Portugal, son of Konge Alfonso I Henriksen Portugal and Dronning Mathilde (--?--) av Savoie.
--------------------
Portugalin kuningas
--------------------
Sancho I gifte sig med Dulcia, dotter till Ramon Berenguer IV. När Sanchos far Alfonso avled av ålderdom 1185, blev Sancho kung, och fortsatte striderna mot muslimerna i Silves (huvudstaden i Algarve). Han invaderade även Leon genom att ta Tuy. Ett par år senare, besökte Rikard Lejonhjärta Lissabon på hans resa till det heliga landet. Rikard avdelade ett av hans skepp för att hjälpa Sancho försvara Silves mot motattacker. Vid samma tidpunkt tvingades en moorisk expedition att lämna en belägring av Santarem. När flottan hade avlägsnat sig, kom en ny muslimsk armé från Afrika och återtog varenda stad söder om Tagus. Under Sanchos regering, slog tempelriddare tillbaka en belägring vid Tomar, vilket bekräftade hur värdefulla de var i kampen mot moorerna. I striderna mot muslimerna, deltog även riddare från Norden, bl.a. Valdemar Sejr som gifte sig med Sanchos dotter Berengaria. Sancho hade andra intressen förutom erövringar. Han uppmuntrade handeln med Flandern, och hans hov var centrum för lyrisk poesi.
--------------------

Sancho I (pronounced [ˈsɐʃu]; rarely translated to Sanctius I), nicknamed the Populator (Portuguese o Povoador), second monarch of Portugal, was born on November 11, 1154 in Coimbra and died on March 26, 1212 in the same city. He was the second but only surviving legitimate son and fourth child of Afonso I Henriques of Portugal by his wife, Maud of Savoy. Sancho succeeded his father in 1185. He used the title King of the Algarve and/or King of Silves between 1189 and 1191 In 1170, Sancho was knighted by his father, King Afonso I, and from then on he became his second in command, both administratively and militarily. At this time, the independence of Portugal (declared in 1139) was not firmly established. The kings of León and Castile were trying to re-annex the country and the Roman Catholic Church was late in giving its blessing and approval. Due to this situation Afonso I had to search for allies within the Iberian Peninsula. Portugal made an alliance with the Kingdom of Aragon and together they fought Castile and León. To secure the agreement, Infante Sancho of Portugal married, in 1174, Infanta Dulce Berenguer, younger sister of King Alfonso II of Aragon. Aragon was thus the first Iberian kingdom to recognize the independence of Portugal. With the death of Afonso I in 1185, Sancho I became the second king of Portugal. Coimbra was the centre of his kingdom; Sancho terminated the exhausting and generally pointless wars against his neighbours for control of the Galician borderlands. Instead, he turned all his attentions to the south, towards the Moorish small kingdoms (called taifas) that still thrived. With Crusader help he took Silves in 1191. Silves was an important city of the South, an administrative and commercial town with population estimates around 20,000 people. Sancho ordered the fortification of the city and built a castle which is today an important monument of Portuguese heritage. However, military attention soon had to be turned again to the North, where León and Castile threatened again the Portuguese borders. Silves was again lost to the Moors. It should be noted that the global Muslim population had climbed to about 6 per cent as against the Christian population of 12 per cent by 1200. Sancho I dedicated much of his reign to political and administrative organization of the new kingdom. He accumulated a national treasure, supported new industries and the middle class of merchants. Moreover, he created several new towns and villages (like Guarda in 1199) and took great care in populating remote areas in the northern Christian regions of Portugal, notably with Flemings and Burgundians – hence the nickname "the Populator". The king was also known for his love of knowledge and literature. Sancho I wrote several books of poems and used the royal treasure to send Portuguese students to European universities.

--------------------
Segundo rei de Portugal (1185-1211), filho de D. Afonso Henriques e de D. Mafalda, foi cognominado "o Povoador". Nasceu em 11 de Novembro de 1154, em Coimbra, e morreu em 26 de Março de 1211 na mesma cidade. Casou em 1174 com D. Dulce de Aragão, filha de Raimundo Béranger IV. Subiu ao trono em Dezembro de 1185 por morte de D. Afonso Henriques. Foi iniciado na vida militar aos 12 anos, tendo chefiado uma expedição a Cidade Rodrigo contra Fernando II que se saldou por um fracasso. Foi armado cavaleiro em 15 de Agosto de 1170, na cidade de Coimbra, logo após o acidente de D. Afonso Henriques em Badajoz. Participou desde então no exercício do poder político, talvez devido à incapacidade física do rei. O povoamento das terras abandonadas foi uma das suas principais preocupações. Para alcançar este objectivo desenvolveu as instituições municipais e concedeu diversos forais, principalmente na Beira e em Trás-os-Montes: Gouveia (1186), Covilhã (1186), Viseu (1187), Bragança (1187), etc. Entre os anos de 1192 e 1195 receberam também forais Penacova, Marmelar, Pontével, Povos e S. Vicente da Beira. Os concelhos fronteiriços receberam privilégios particulares, tais como isenção de trabalhar na construção de castelos e muros, isenção do pagamento dos impostos de portagem e de colheita. A criação dos concelhos, para além do contributo que deu para o melhoramento económico e social, trouxe também vantagens de ordem militar e financeira, pois promoveu o aumento do número de combatentes que não recebiam soldo. Fixaram-se também em Portugal neste período numerosos colonos estrangeiros. As ordens religiosas, nomeadamente as militares, receberam de D. Sancho inúmeras concessões de terras e castelos. O monarca aproveitou a passagem pelo porto de Lisboa dos cruzados da terceira cruzada, na primavera de 1189, para atacar o Algarve. Tomou o castelo de Alvor e atacou Silves (que era na época uma das mais populosas e cultas cidades do ocidente peninsular). Foi acordado que a cidade seria para os portugueses e o saque para os cruzados. Após uma rápida conquista dos subúrbios, portugueses e cruzados depararam-se com uma encarniçada resistência que durou 43 dias. D. Sancho I passou então a intitular-se rei de Portugal e dos Algarves. Durou pouco tempo esta conquista, já que em 1190 Iacub Almançor cercou a cidade de Silves com um exército e com outro atacou Torres Novas, que apenas conseguiu resistir durante 10 dias. Torres Novas foi, pouco depois, restituída pelos muçulmanos, mas estes, entusiasmados com a reconquista de Silves, reconquistaram também Alcácer, Palmela e Almada. D. Sancho envolveu-se também nos conflitos entre Leão e Castela, entrando em guerra com Leão em 1196 e 1199. Durante o seu reinado, deterioraram-se as boas relações com a Santa Sé, primeiro por tentar furtar-se ao pagamento do censo anual de dois marcos-ouro, depois por ter entrado em litígio com o bispo do Porto aquando do casamento do herdeiro do trono com D. Urraca, filha de Afonso VIII. O papa Inocêncio III incumbiu o bispo de Samora de anunciar a pena de excomunhão a D. Sancho e àqueles que tinham retido o bispo. O monarca português entrou também em conflito com o bispo de Coimbra, tendo sido por isso admoestado pelo papa. Ao sentir aproximar-se a sua morte, reconciliou-se com os prelados e aceitou as exigências do papa. Segundo o estudioso Jaime Batalha Reis, iniciou-se no reinado de D. Sancho I a amoedação do ouro, que para outros autores terá surgido anteriormente. O trabalho administrativo continuou a fazer-se na Câmara Régia que funcionava no Paço, tal como no reinado anterior, estando todo o trabalho a cargo de um só homem, o chanceler. Neste reinado sabe-se que alguns portugueses frequentaram universidades estrangeiras e que um grupo de juristas conhecia o Direito que se ministrava na escola de Bolonha. Também o rei foi poeta e em 1192 concedeu ao mosteiro de Santa Cruz 400 morabitinos para que se mantivessem em França os monges que lá quisessem estudar. © 2003 Porto Editora, Lda. Jump to:navigation, search This article does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2008) Sancho I King of Portugal 17th century painting of Sancho I Reign 6 December 1185—26 March 1212 Coronation 9 December 1185 Predecessor Afonso I Successor Afonso II Spouse Dulce of Aragon among others... Issue Teresa, Queen of Castile Infanta Sancha Infanta Constança Afonso II Infante Pedro, Count of Urgell Infante Fernando, Count of Flanders Infanta Branca, Lady of Guadalajara Berengária, Queen of Denmark Mafalda, Queen of Castile Father Afonso I Mother Maud of Savoy Born11 November 1154(1154-11-11) Coimbra, Kingdom of Portugal Died 26 March 1212[aged 57] Coimbra, Kingdom of Portugal Burial Santa Cruz Monastery, Coimbra, District of Coimbra, Portugal Portuguese Royalty House of Burgundy PortugueseFlag1185.svg Afonso Henriques (Afonso I)

Children include

* Infanta Mafalda
* Infanta Urraca, Queen of Léon
* Infante Sancho (future Sancho I)
* Infanta Teresa, Countess of Flanders and Duchess of Burgundy

Sancho I

Children include

* Infanta Teresa, Queen of Castile
* Infanta Sancha, Lady of Alenquer
* Infanta Constança
* Infante Afonso (future Afonso II)
* Infante Pedro, Count of Urgell
* Infante Fernando, Count of Flanders
* Infanta Branca, Lady of Guadalajara
* Infanta Berengária, Queen of Denmark
* Infanta Mafalda, Queen of Castile

Afonso II

Children include

* Infante Sancho (future Sancho II)
* Infante Afonso, Count of Boulogne (future Afonso III)
* Infanta Leonor, Queen of Denmark
* Infante Fernando, Lord of Serpa

Sancho II Afonso III

Children include

* Infanta Branca, Viscountess of Huelgas
* Infante Dinis (future Denis I)
* Infante Afonso, Lord of Portalegre
* Infanta Maria
* Infanta Sancha

Denis

Children include

* Infanta Constança, Queen of Castile
* Infante Afonso (future Afonso IV)

Afonso IV

Children include

* Infanta Maria, Queen of Castile
* Infante Pedro (future Peter I)
* Infanta Leonor, Queen of Aragon

Peter I

Children include

* Infanta Maria, Marchioness of Tortosa
* Infante Fernando (future Ferdinand I)
* Infanta Beatriz, Countess of Alburquerque
* Infante João, Duke of Valencia de Campos
* Infante Dinis, Lord of Villar-Dompardo
* John, Grand Master of the Order of Aviz (future John I) (natural son)

Ferdinand I

Children include

* Infanta Beatrice, Queen of Castile and Leon (future Beatrice I of Portugal)

Beatrice (disputed queen)

Children include

* Infante Miguel of Castile and Portugal

Sancho I (Portuguese pronunciation: [ˈsɐʃu]), nicknamed the Populator (Portuguese o Povoador), second monarch of Portugal, was born on 11 November 1154 in Coimbra and died on 26 March 1212 in the same city. He was the second but only surviving legitimate son and fourth child of Afonso I Henriques of Portugal by his wife, Maud of Savoy. Sancho succeeded his father in 1185. He used the title King of the Algarve and/or King of Silves between 1189 and 1191

In 1170, Sancho was knighted by his father, King Afonso I, and from then on he became his second in command, both administratively and militarily. At this time, the independence of Portugal (declared in 1139) was not firmly established. The kings of León and Castile were trying to re-annex the country and the Roman Catholic Church was late in giving its blessing and approval. Due to this situation Afonso I had to search for allies within the Iberian Peninsula. Portugal made an alliance with the Kingdom of Aragon and together they fought Castile and León. To secure the agreement, Infante Sancho of Portugal married, in 1174, Infanta Dulce of Aragon, younger sister of King Alfonso II of Aragon. Aragon was thus the first Iberian kingdom to recognize the independence of Portugal.

With the death of Afonso I in 1185, Sancho I became the second king of Portugal. Coimbra was the centre of his kingdom; Sancho terminated the exhausting and generally pointless wars against his neighbours for control of the Galician borderlands. Instead, he turned all his attentions to the south, towards the Moorish small kingdoms (called taifas) that still thrived. With Crusader help he took Silves in 1191. Silves was an important city of the South, an administrative and commercial town with population estimates around 20,000 people. Sancho ordered the fortification of the city and built a castle which is today an important monument of Portuguese heritage. However, military attention soon had to be turned again to the North, where León and Castile threatened again the Portuguese borders. Silves was again lost to the Moors. It should be noted that the global Muslim population had climbed to about 6 per cent as against the Christian population of 12 per cent by 1200.

Sancho I dedicated much of his reign to political and administrative organization of the new kingdom. He accumulated a national treasure, supported new industries and the middle class of merchants. Moreover, he created several new towns and villages (like Guarda in 1199) and took great care in populating remote areas in the northern Christian regions of Portugal, notably with Flemings and Burgundians – hence the nickname "the Populator". The king was also known for his love of knowledge and literature. Sancho I wrote several books of poems and used the royal treasure to send Portuguese students to European universities. [edit] Ancestors Sancho's ancestors in three generations Sancho I of Portugal Father: Afonso I of Portugal Father's father: Henry, Count of Portugal Father's father's father: Henry of Burgundy Father's father's mother: unknown Father's mother: Theresa, Countess of Portugal Father's mother's father: Alfonso VI of León and Castile Father's mother's mother: Jimena Muñoz Mother: Maud of Savoy Mother's father: Amadeus III of Savoy Mother's father's father: Humbert II of Savoy Mother's father's mother: Gisela of Burgundy Mother's mother: Adelaide Mother's mother's father: unknown Mother's mother's mother: unknown [edit] Marriage and descendants

Sancho married Dulce of Aragon, daughter of Raymond Berengar IV, Count of Barcelona, and Petronilla, Queen of Aragon. Name Birth Death Notes By Dulce of Aragon (1152-1198; married in 1175) Infanta Teresa (Theresa)1181 1250 Queen consort of Castile by marriage to King Alfonso IX of Castile. Infante Raimundo (Raymond) c. 1180 1189 Infanta Sancha a. 1182 13 March 1229 Abbess of Lorvão. Infanta Constança (Constance) c. 1182 3 August 1202 Infante Afonso 23 April 1185 25 March 1223 Succeeded him as Afonso II, 3rd King of Portugal. Infante Pedro (Peter) 23 February 1187 2 June 1258 Consort Count of Urgell, and later titular Count of Urgell and Lord of the Balearic Islands. He lived in León and married Arembiaux Armengel, Countess of Urgell. Infante Fernando (Ferdinand) 24 March 1188 4 March 1233 Consort Count of Flanders. Lived in France and married Jeanne of Flanders. Infante Henrique (Henry) 11891189 Infanta Branca (Blanche) c. 1192 1240 Lady of Guadalajara. Infanta Berengária c. 1195 1221 Queen consort of Denmark by marriage to King Valdemar II of Denmark. Infanta Mafalda c. 1200 1256 Queen consort of Castile by marriage to King Henry I of Castile. By Maria Aires (c. 1180-?) Martim Sanches or Henrique Sanches c. 1200 1229 Natural son and Count of Trastamara. Urraca Sanches c. 1200 1256 Natural daughter. By Maria Pais Ribeira (Ribeirinha) (c. 1170-b. 1258) Rodrigo Sanches c. 1200 1245 Natural son. Gil Sanches c. 1200 1236 Natural son. Nuno Sanches c. 1200 ? Natural son. Teresa Sanches 1205 1230 Natural daughter. Constança Sanches 1210 1269 Natural daughter. Maior Sanches ? ? Natural daughter. Sancho I of Portugal House of Burgundy Cadet branch of the Capetian dynasty Born: 11 November 1154 Died: 26 March 1212 Regnal titles Preceded by Afonso I King of Portugal 1185–1212Succeeded by Afonso II [hide] v • d • e Monarchs of Portugal House of Burgundy Afonso I • Sancho I • Afonso II • Sancho II • Afonso III • Denis • Afonso IV • Peter I • Ferdinand I • Beatrice (disputed) House of Aviz John I • Edward • Afonso V • John II • Afonso V • John II House of Aviz-Beja Manuel I • John III • Sebastian • Henry • Anthony (disputed) House of Habsburg Philip I • Philip II • Philip III House of Braganza John IV • Afonso VI • Peter II • John V • Joseph I • Maria I with Peter III • John VI • Pedro IV • Maria II • Miguel • Maria II with Ferdinand II House of Braganza-Coburg Peter V • Luís • Charles • Manuel II Persondata NAME Sancho I ALTERNATIVE NAMES Sanctius I (English); Infante Sancho of Portugal (earlier title); Infante Sanctius of Portugal (English earlier title); Sancho I, King of Portugal and Algarve (alternative); Sancho I, King of Portugal and of the Algarves (alternative); Sancho I, King of Portugal and Silves (alternative); Sanctius I, King of Portugal and Algarve (alternative); Sanctius I, King of Portugal and of the Algarves (alternative); Sanctius I, King of Portugal and Silves SHORT DESCRIPTION King of Portugal DATE OF BIRTH 11 November 1154 PLACE OF BIRTH Coimbra, Portugal DATE OF DEATH 26 March 1212 PLACE OF DEATHCoimbra, Portugal [show] v • d • e Infantes of Portugal
--------------------
D. Sancho I de Portugal (11 de Novembro de 1154 - 26 de Março de 1211), cognominado 'o Povoador' (pelo estímulo com que apadrinhou o povoamento dos territórios do país - destacando-se a fundação da cidade da Guarda, em 1199, e a atribuição de cartas de foral na Beira e em Trás-os-Montes: Gouveia (1186), Covilhã (1186), Viseu (1187), Bragança (1187), etc, povoando assim áreas remotas do reino, em particular com imigrantes da Flandres e Borgonha.

Quarto filho do monarca Afonso Henriques, foi baptizado com o nome de Martinho, por haver nascido no dia do santo com o mesmo nome, e não estaria preparado para reinar; no entanto, a morte do seu irmão mais velho, D. Henrique, quando contava apenas três anos de idade, levou à alteração da sua onomástica para um nome mais hispânico, ficando desde então Sancho Afonso.

Por sua mulher, Dulce de Barcelona, infanta de Aragão (1152-1198):
#Teresa, infanta de Portugal (1176-1250), casou com o rei Afonso IX de Leão
#Sancha, infanta de Portugal (ca.1180-1229), abadessa do Lorvão
#Raimundo de Portugal (ca.1180-1189)
#Constança de Portugal (1182-1202)
#Afonso II de Portugal (1185-1233)
#Pedro, infante de Portugal (1187-1258), conde de Urgel pelo casamento com Aurembiaix Armengel; foi também Senhor de Maiorca.
#Fernando, infante de Portugal (1188-1233), viveu no estrangeiro, casou com Joana da Flandres
#Henrique de Portugal (1189-?)
#Branca, infanta de Portugal (1192-1240), senhora de Guadalajara
#Berengária, infanta de Portugal (1194-1221), casada com o rei Valdemar II da Dinamarca
#Mafalda, infanta de Portugal (ca.1200-1257), casada com o rei Henrique I de Castela, depois fundadora do mosteiro cisterciense de Arouca e sua primeira abadessa.

Filhos naturais:

Havidos de Maria Aires de Fornelos
#Martim Sanches de Portugal, conde de Trastâmara
#Urraca Sanches

Havidos de Maria Pais Ribeiro, dita a Ribeirinha, filha de Paio Moniz de Ribeira e de Urraca Nunes de Bragança (1150 - ?), filha de Vasco Pires de Bragança.
#Rodrigo Sanches (1200-1246)
#Gil Sanches (1200-1236)
#Nuno Sanches
#Maior Sanches
#Teresa Sanches (1205-1230)
#Constança Sanches (1210-1269)

Em 1170, Sancho foi armado cavaleiro pelo seu pai logo após o acidente de D. Afonso Henriques em Badajoz e tornou-se seu braço direito, quer do ponto de vista militar, quer do ponto de vista administrativo. Nestes primeiros tempos de Portugal enquanto país independente, muitos eram os inimigos da coroa, a começar pelo reino de Castela e Leão que havia controlado Portugal até então. Para além do mais, a Igreja Católica demorava em consagrar a independência de Portugal com a sua bênção. Para compensar estas falhas, Portugal procurou aliados dentro da Península Ibérica, em particular o reino de Aragão, um inimigo tradicional de Castela, que se tornou no primeiro país a reconhecer Portugal. O acordo foi firmado 1174 pelo casamento de Sancho, então príncipe herdeiro, com a infanta Dulce Berenguer, irmã mais nova do rei Afonso II de Aragão.

Com a morte de Afonso Henriques em 1185, Sancho I torna-se no segundo rei de Portugal. Tendo Coimbra como centro do seu reino, Sancho deu por finda as guerras fronteiriças pela posse da Galiza e dedicou-se a guerrear os Mouros localizados a Sul. Aproveitou a passagem pelo porto de Lisboa dos cruzados da terceira cruzada, na primavera de 1189, para conquistar Silves, um importante centro administrativo e económico do Sul, com população estimada em 20.000 pessoas. Sancho ordenou a fortificação da cidade e construção do castelo que ainda hoje pode ser admirado. A posse de Silves foi efémera já que em 1190 Abu Yusuf Ya'qub al-Mansur cercou a cidade de Silves com um exército e com outro atacou Torres Novas, que apenas conseguiu resistir durante dez dias, devido ao rei de Leão e Castela ameaçar de novo o Norte.

--------------------

Han gjorde seg fortjent til sitt tilnavn «Bondevennen» ved sin iver for å forbedre landbruket. Han bidro også til byenes oppkomst ved å gi privilegier og befolke dem med kristne nybyggere. Sanho ble gift i 1174 med Dulcia. Han hadde også konkubinene Maria, datter til Arya Nuñes de Fornelos og Maria Paez de Ribera.64

Sancho I (pronounced [?s??u]; rarely translated to Sanctius I), nicknamed the Populator (Portuguese o Povoador), second monarch of Portugal, was born on November 11, 1154 in Coimbra and died on March 26, 1212 in the same city. He was the second but only surviving legitimate son and fourth child of Afonso I Henriques of Portugal by his wife, Maud of Savoy. Sancho succeeded his father in 1185. He used the title King of the Algarve and/or King of Silves between 1189 and 1191

In 1170, Sancho was knighted by his father, King Afonso I, and from then on he became his second in command, both administratively and militarily. At this time, the independence of Portugal (declared in 1139) was not firmly established. The kings of León and Castile were trying to re-annex the country and the Roman Catholic Church was late in giving its blessing and approval. Due to this situation Afonso I had to search for allies within the Iberian Peninsula. Portugal made an alliance with the Kingdom of Aragon and together they fought Castile and León. To secure the agreement, Infante Sancho of Portugal married, in 1174, Infanta Dulce Berenguer, younger sister of King Alfonso II of Aragon. Aragon was thus the first Iberian kingdom to recognize the independence of Portugal.

With the death of Afonso I in 1185, Sancho I became the second king of Portugal. Coimbra was the centre of his kingdom; Sancho terminated the exhausting and generally pointless wars against his neighbours for control of the Galician borderlands. Instead, he turned all his attentions to the south, towards the Moorish small kingdoms (called taifas) that still thrived. With Crusader help he took Silves in 1191. Silves was an important city of the South, an administrative and commercial town with population estimates around 20,000 people. Sancho ordered the fortification of the city and built a castle which is today an important monument of Portuguese heritage. However, military attention soon had to be turned again to the North, where León and Castile threatened again the Portuguese borders. Silves was again lost to the Moors. It should be noted that the global Muslim population had climbed to about 6 per cent as against the Christian population of 12 per cent by 1200.

Sancho I dedicated much of his reign to political and administrative organization of the new kingdom. He accumulated a national treasure, supported new industries and the middle class of merchants. Moreover, he created several new towns and villages (like Guarda in 1199) and took great care in populating remote areas in the northern Christian regions of Portugal, notably with Flemings and Burgundians – hence the nickname "the Populator". The king was also known for his love of

-------------------- Reference Book: He 156.

Konge Sanco Alfonsosen Portugal was Konge av Portugal. He married Dronning Dulcia (--?--) av Aragon. He was born before 1154 at Portugal. He died in 1211 at Portugal. He 156.

Dronning Dulcia (--?--) av Aragon was born at Aragon. She died at Portugal. She married Konge Sanco I Alfonsosen Portugal, son of Konge Alfonso I Henriksen Portugal and Dronning Mathilde (--?--) av Savoie. -------------------- Portugalin kuningas -------------------- Sancho I gifte sig med Dulcia, dotter till Ramon Berenguer IV. När Sanchos far Alfonso avled av ålderdom 1185, blev Sancho kung, och fortsatte striderna mot muslimerna i Silves (huvudstaden i Algarve). Han invaderade även Leon genom att ta Tuy. Ett par år senare, besökte Rikard Lejonhjärta Lissabon på hans resa till det heliga landet. Rikard avdelade ett av hans skepp för att hjälpa Sancho försvara Silves mot motattacker. Vid samma tidpunkt tvingades en moorisk expedition att lämna en belägring av Santarem. När flottan hade avlägsnat sig, kom en ny muslimsk armé från Afrika och återtog varenda stad söder om Tagus. Under Sanchos regering, slog tempelriddare tillbaka en belägring vid Tomar, vilket bekräftade hur värdefulla de var i kampen mot moorerna. I striderna mot muslimerna, deltog även riddare från Norden, bl.a. Valdemar Sejr som gifte sig med Sanchos dotter Berengaria. Sancho hade andra intressen förutom erövringar. Han uppmuntrade handeln med Flandern, och hans hov var centrum för lyrisk poesi. -------------------- Sancho I of Portugal From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Sancho I (pronounced [ˈsɐʃu]; rarely translated to Sanctius I), nicknamed the Populator (Portuguese o Povoador), second monarch of Portugal, was born on November 11, 1154 in Coimbra and died on March 26, 1212 in the same city. He was the second but only surviving legitimate son and fourth child of Afonso I Henriques of Portugal by his wife, Maud of Savoy. Sancho succeeded his father in 1185. He used the title King of the Algarve and/or King of Silves between 1189 and 1191 In 1170, Sancho was knighted by his father, King Afonso I, and from then on he became his second in command, both administratively and militarily. At this time, the independence of Portugal (declared in 1139) was not firmly established. The kings of León and Castile were trying to re-annex the country and the Roman Catholic Church was late in giving its blessing and approval. Due to this situation Afonso I had to search for allies within the Iberian Peninsula. Portugal made an alliance with the Kingdom of Aragon and together they fought Castile and León. To secure the agreement, Infante Sancho of Portugal married, in 1174, Infanta Dulce Berenguer, younger sister of King Alfonso II of Aragon. Aragon was thus the first Iberian kingdom to recognize the independence of Portugal. With the death of Afonso I in 1185, Sancho I became the second king of Portugal. Coimbra was the centre of his kingdom; Sancho terminated the exhausting and generally pointless wars against his neighbours for control of the Galician borderlands. Instead, he turned all his attentions to the south, towards the Moorish small kingdoms (called taifas) that still thrived. With Crusader help he took Silves in 1191. Silves was an important city of the South, an administrative and commercial town with population estimates around 20,000 people. Sancho ordered the fortification of the city and built a castle which is today an important monument of Portuguese heritage. However, military attention soon had to be turned again to the North, where León and Castile threatened again the Portuguese borders. Silves was again lost to the Moors. It should be noted that the global Muslim population had climbed to about 6 per cent as against the Christian population of 12 per cent by 1200. Sancho I dedicated much of his reign to political and administrative organization of the new kingdom. He accumulated a national treasure, supported new industries and the middle class of merchants. Moreover, he created several new towns and villages (like Guarda in 1199) and took great care in populating remote areas in the northern Christian regions of Portugal, notably with Flemings and Burgundians – hence the nickname "the Populator". The king was also known for his love of knowledge and literature. Sancho I wrote several books of poems and used the royal treasure to send Portuguese students to European universities.

--------------------
D. Sancho I de Portugal (11 de Novembro de 1154 - 26 de Março de 1211), cognominado 'o Povoador' (pelo estímulo com que apadrinhou o povoamento dos territórios do país - destacando-se a fundação da cidade da Guarda, em 1199, e a atribuição de cartas de foral na Beira e em Trás-os-Montes: Gouveia (1186), Covilhã (1186), Viseu (1187), Bragança (1187), etc, povoando assim áreas remotas do reino, em particular com imigrantes da Flandres e Borgonha.

Quarto filho do monarca Afonso Henriques, foi baptizado com o nome de Martinho, por haver nascido no dia do santo com o mesmo nome, e não estaria preparado para reinar; no entanto, a morte do seu irmão mais velho, D. Henrique, quando contava apenas três anos de idade, levou à alteração da sua onomástica para um nome mais hispânico, ficando desde então Sancho Afonso.

Por sua mulher, Dulce de Barcelona, infanta de Aragão (1152-1198):

1.Teresa, infanta de Portugal (1176-1250), casou com o rei Afonso IX de Leão 2.Sancha, infanta de Portugal (ca.1180-1229), abadessa do Lorvão 3.Raimundo de Portugal (ca.1180-1189) 4.Constança de Portugal (1182-1202) 5.Afonso II de Portugal (1185-1233) 6.Pedro, infante de Portugal (1187-1258), conde de Urgel pelo casamento com Aurembiaix Armengel; foi também Senhor de Maiorca. 7.Fernando, infante de Portugal (1188-1233), viveu no estrangeiro, casou com Joana da Flandres 8.Henrique de Portugal (1189-?) 9.Branca, infanta de Portugal (1192-1240), senhora de Guadalajara 10.Berengária, infanta de Portugal (1194-1221), casada com o rei Valdemar II da Dinamarca 11.Mafalda, infanta de Portugal (ca.1200-1257), casada com o rei Henrique I de Castela, depois fundadora do mosteiro cisterciense de Arouca e sua primeira abadessa. Filhos naturais:

Havidos de Maria Aires de Fornelos

1.Martim Sanches de Portugal, conde de Trastâmara 2.Urraca Sanches Havidos de Maria Pais Ribeiro, dita a Ribeirinha, filha de Paio Moniz de Ribeira e de Urraca Nunes de Bragança (1150 - ?), filha de Vasco Pires de Bragança.

1.Rodrigo Sanches (1200-1246) 2.Gil Sanches (1200-1236) 3.Nuno Sanches 4.Maior Sanches 5.Teresa Sanches (1205-1230) 6.Constança Sanches (1210-1269) Em 1170, Sancho foi armado cavaleiro pelo seu pai logo após o acidente de D. Afonso Henriques em Badajoz e tornou-se seu braço direito, quer do ponto de vista militar, quer do ponto de vista administrativo. Nestes primeiros tempos de Portugal enquanto país independente, muitos eram os inimigos da coroa, a começar pelo reino de Castela e Leão que havia controlado Portugal até então. Para além do mais, a Igreja Católica demorava em consagrar a independência de Portugal com a sua bênção. Para compensar estas falhas, Portugal procurou aliados dentro da Península Ibérica, em particular o reino de Aragão, um inimigo tradicional de Castela, que se tornou no primeiro país a reconhecer Portugal. O acordo foi firmado 1174 pelo casamento de Sancho, então príncipe herdeiro, com a infanta Dulce Berenguer, irmã mais nova do rei Afonso II de Aragão.

Com a morte de Afonso Henriques em 1185, Sancho I torna-se no segundo rei de Portugal. Tendo Coimbra como centro do seu reino, Sancho deu por finda as guerras fronteiriças pela posse da Galiza e dedicou-se a guerrear os Mouros localizados a Sul. Aproveitou a passagem pelo porto de Lisboa dos cruzados da terceira cruzada, na primavera de 1189, para conquistar Silves, um importante centro administrativo e económico do Sul, com população estimada em 20.000 pessoas. Sancho ordenou a fortificação da cidade e construção do castelo que ainda hoje pode ser admirado. A posse de Silves foi efémera já que em 1190 Abu Yusuf Ya'qub al-Mansur cercou a cidade de Silves com um exército e com outro atacou Torres Novas, que apenas conseguiu resistir durante dez dias, devido ao rei de Leão e Castela ameaçar de novo o Norte.

--------------------
/Sancho_I_de_Portugal

D. Sancho I de Portugal (11 de Novembro de 1154 - 26 de Março de 1211), cognominado 'o Povoador' (pelo estímulo com que apadrinhou o povoamento dos territórios do país - destacando-se a fundação da cidade da Guarda, em 1199, e a atribuição de cartas de foral na Beira e em Trás-os-Montes: Gouveia (1186), Covilhã (1186), Viseu (1187), Bragança (1187), etc, povoando assim áreas remotas do reino, em particular com imigrantes da Flandres e Borgonha.

Quarto filho do monarca Afonso Henriques, foi baptizado com o nome de Martinho, por haver nascido no dia do santo com o mesmo nome, e não estaria preparado para reinar; no entanto, a morte do seu irmão mais velho, D. Henrique, quando contava apenas três anos de idade, levou à alteração da sua onomástica para um nome mais hispânico, ficando desde então Sancho Afonso.

Por sua mulher, Dulce de Barcelona, infanta de Aragão (1152-1198):
#Teresa, infanta de Portugal (1176-1250), casou com o rei Afonso IX de Leão
#Sancha, infanta de Portugal (ca.1180-1229), abadessa do Lorvão
#Raimundo de Portugal (ca.1180-1189)
#Constança de Portugal (1182-1202)
#Afonso II de Portugal (1185-1233)
#Pedro, infante de Portugal (1187-1258), conde de Urgel pelo casamento com Aurembiaix Armengel; foi também Senhor de Maiorca.
#Fernando, infante de Portugal (1188-1233), viveu no estrangeiro, casou com Joana da Flandres
#Henrique de Portugal (1189-?)
#Branca, infanta de Portugal (1192-1240), senhora de Guadalajara
#Berengária, infanta de Portugal (1194-1221), casada com o rei Valdemar II da Dinamarca
#Mafalda, infanta de Portugal (ca.1200-1257), casada com o rei Henrique I de Castela, depois fundadora do mosteiro cisterciense de Arouca e sua primeira abadessa.

Filhos naturais:

Havidos de Maria Aires de Fornelos
#Martim Sanches de Portugal, conde de Trastâmara
#Urraca Sanches

Havidos de Maria Pais Ribeiro, dita a Ribeirinha, filha de Paio Moniz de Ribeira e de Urraca Nunes de Bragança (1150 - ?), filha de Vasco Pires de Bragança.
#Rodrigo Sanches (1200-1246)
#Gil Sanches (1200-1236)
#Nuno Sanches
#Maior Sanches
#Teresa Sanches (1205-1230)
#Constança Sanches (1210-1269)

Em 1170, Sancho foi armado cavaleiro pelo seu pai logo após o acidente de D. Afonso Henriques em Badajoz e tornou-se seu braço direito, quer do ponto de vista militar, quer do ponto de vista administrativo. Nestes primeiros tempos de Portugal enquanto país independente, muitos eram os inimigos da coroa, a começar pelo reino de Castela e Leão que havia controlado Portugal até então. Para além do mais, a Igreja Católica demorava em consagrar a independência de Portugal com a sua bênção. Para compensar estas falhas, Portugal procurou aliados dentro da Península Ibérica, em particular o reino de Aragão, um inimigo tradicional de Castela, que se tornou no primeiro país a reconhecer Portugal. O acordo foi firmado 1174 pelo casamento de Sancho, então príncipe herdeiro, com a infanta Dulce Berenguer, irmã mais nova do rei Afonso II de Aragão.

Com a morte de Afonso Henriques em 1185, Sancho I torna-se no segundo rei de Portugal. Tendo Coimbra como centro do seu reino, Sancho deu por finda as guerras fronteiriças pela posse da Galiza e dedicou-se a guerrear os Mouros localizados a Sul. Aproveitou a passagem pelo porto de Lisboa dos cruzados da terceira cruzada, na primavera de 1189, para conquistar Silves, um importante centro administrativo e económico do Sul, com população estimada em 20.000 pessoas. Sancho ordenou a fortificação da cidade e construção do castelo que ainda hoje pode ser admirado. A posse de Silves foi efémera já que em 1190 Abu Yusuf Ya'qub al-Mansur cercou a cidade de Silves com um exército e com outro atacou Torres Novas, que apenas conseguiu resistir durante dez dias, devido ao rei de Leão e Castela ameaçar de novo o Norte.

Reign December 6, 1185—March 26, 1212

Coronation December 9, 1185

Consort Dulce Berenguer

Father Afonso I

Mother Maud of Savoy

Born November 11, 1154

Coimbra, Kingdom of Portugal

Died March 26, 1212

Coimbra, Kingdom of Portugal

Burial Santa Cruz Monastery, Coimbra, District of Coimbra, Portugal

Sancho I, nicknamed the Populator, was the second monarch of Portugal, was born on November 11, 1154 in Coimbra and died on March 26, 1212 in the same city. He was the second but only surviving legitimate son and fourth child of Afonso I Henriques of Portugal by his wife, Maud of Savoy. Sancho succeeded his father in 1185. He used the title King of the Algarve and/or King of Silves between 1189 and 1191

In 1170, Sancho was knighted by his father, King Afonso I, and from then on he became his second in command, both administratively and militarily. At this time, the independence of Portugal (declared in 1139) was not firmly established. The kings of León and Castile were trying to re-annex the country and the Roman Catholic Church was late in giving its blessing and approval. Due to this situation Afonso I had to search for allies within the Iberian Peninsula. Portugal made an alliance with the Kingdom of Aragon and together they fought Castile and León. To secure the agreement, Infante Sancho of Portugal married, in 1174, Infanta Dulce Berenguer, younger sister of King Alfonso II of Aragon. Aragon was thus the first Iberian kingdom to recognize the independence of Portugal.

With the death of Afonso I in 1185, Sancho I became the second king of Portugal. Coimbra was the centre of his kingdom; Sancho terminated the exhausting and generally pointless wars against his neighbours for control of the Galician borderlands. Instead, he turned all his attentions to the south, towards the Moorish small kingdoms (called taifas) that still thrived. With Crusader help he took Silves in 1191. Silves was an important city of the South, an administrative and commercial town with population estimates around 20,000 people. Sancho ordered the fortification of the city and built a castle which is today an important monument of Portuguese heritage. However, military attention soon had to be turned again to the North, where León and Castile threatened again the Portuguese borders. Silves was again lost to the Moors. It should be noted that the global Muslim population had climbed to about 6 per cent as against the Christian population of 12 per cent by 1200.

Sancho I dedicated much of his reign to political and administrative organization of the new kingdom. He accumulated a national treasure, supported new industries and the middle class of merchants. Moreover, he created several new towns and villages (like Guarda in 1199) and took great care in populating remote areas in the northern Christian regions of Portugal, notably with Flemings and Burgundians – hence the nickname "the Populator". The king was also known for his love of knowledge and literature. Sancho I wrote several books of poems and used the royal treasure to send Portuguese students to European universities.

--------------------
Sancho I (Portuguese pronunciation: [ˈsɐʃu]), nicknamed the Populator (Portuguese o Povoador), second monarch of Portugal, was born on November 11, 1154 in Coimbra and died on March 26, 1212 in the same city. He was the second but only surviving legitimate son and fourth child of Afonso I Henriques of Portugal by his wife, Maud of Savoy. Sancho succeeded his father in 1185. He used the title King of the Algarve and/or King of Silves between 1189 and 1191

In 1170, Sancho was knighted by his father, King Afonso I, and from then on he became his second in command, both administratively and militarily. At this time, the independence of Portugal (declared in 1139) was not firmly established. The kings of León and Castile were trying to re-annex the country and the Roman Catholic Church was late in giving its blessing and approval. Due to this situation Afonso I had to search for allies within the Iberian Peninsula. Portugal made an alliance with the Kingdom of Aragon and together they fought Castile and León. To secure the agreement, Infante Sancho of Portugal married, in 1174, Infanta Dulce Berenguer, younger sister of King Alfonso II of Aragon. Aragon was thus the first Iberian kingdom to recognize the independence of Portugal.

With the death of Afonso I in 1185, Sancho I became the second king of Portugal. Coimbra was the centre of his kingdom; Sancho terminated the exhausting and generally pointless wars against his neighbours for control of the Galician borderlands. Instead, he turned all his attentions to the south, towards the Moorish small kingdoms (called taifas) that still thrived. With Crusader help he took Silves in 1191. Silves was an important city of the South, an administrative and commercial town with population estimates around 20,000 people. Sancho ordered the fortification of the city and built a castle which is today an important monument of Portuguese heritage. However, military attention soon had to be turned again to the North, where León and Castile threatened again the Portuguese borders. Silves was again lost to the Moors. It should be noted that the global Muslim population had climbed to about 6 per cent as against the Christian population of 12 per cent by 1200.

Sancho I dedicated much of his reign to political and administrative organization of the new kingdom. He accumulated a national treasure, supported new industries and the middle class of merchants. Moreover, he created several new towns and villages (like Guarda in 1199) and took great care in populating remote areas in the northern Christian regions of Portugal, notably with Flemings and Burgundians – hence the nickname "the Populator". The king was also known for his love of knowledge and literature. Sancho I wrote several books of poems and used the royal treasure to send Portuguese students to European universities.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sancho_I_of_Portugal
--------------------
Sancho I gifte sig med Dulcia, dotter till Ramon Berenguer IV. När Sanchos far Alfonso avled av ålderdom 1185, blev Sancho kung, och fortsatte striderna mot muslimerna i Silves (huvudstaden i Algarve). Han invaderade även Leon genom att ta Tuy. Ett par år senare, besökte Rikard Lejonhjärta Lissabon på hans resa till det heliga landet. Rikard avdelade ett av hans skepp för att hjälpa Sancho försvara Silves mot motattacker. Vid samma tidpunkt tvingades en moorisk expedition att lämna en belägring av Santarem. När flottan hade avlägsnat sig, kom en ny muslimsk armé från Afrika och återtog varenda stad söder om Tagus. Under Sanchos regering, slog tempelriddare tillbaka en belägring vid Tomar, vilket bekräftade hur värdefulla de var i kampen mot moorerna. I striderna mot muslimerna, deltog även riddare från Norden, bl.a. Valdemar Sejr som gifte sig med Sanchos dotter Berengaria. Sancho hade andra intressen förutom erövringar. Han uppmuntrade handeln med Flandern, och hans hov var centrum för lyrisk poesi.

Kallades "Bonevännen" eftersom han var mån om böndernas odling och utveckling av odling.
--------------------
House of Burgundy

Birth: Nov. 11, 1154 Coimbra, Portugal Death: Mar. 26, 1212 Coimbra, Portugal

Portugese Monarch. He was the second king of Portugal, reigning from 1185 to 1211. He was the third and only surviving son of Afonso I and Mafalda of Savoy. He married Princess Dulce Berenguer the sister of Alfonso II of Aragon in 1174. They had 11 children. He also had 2 children by Maria Aires and 6 by Maria Pais Ribeira. (bio by: Helaine M. Larina)

Family links:
Parents:
Afonso Henriques (1110 - 1185)
Mafalda de Saboia (1125 - 1157)

Spouse:
Dulce of Aragon (1160 - 1198)*

Children:
Fernando De Portugal (1188 - 1233)*

Siblings:
Urraca Of Portugal (1151 - 1188)*
Urraca Of Portugal (1151 - 1181)*
Urraca Of Portugal (1151 - 1188)**
Sancho I (1154 - 1212)

*Calculated relationship
**Half-sibling

Burial: Monastery of Santa Cruz Coimbra Coimbra Municipality Coimbra, Portugal

Maintained by: Find A Grave Originally Created by: Helaine M. Larina Record added: Mar 28, 2006 Find A Grave Memorial# 13770032

Rey de Portugal (1185-1212)

Rey de Portugal (1185-1212)

ES II:38

Sancho de portugal
http://trees.ancestry.com/rd?f=image&guid=7793d00a-ce05-401a-9f15-d9982ec8e312&tid=6959821&pid=-1168762306

SOURCE NOTES:
LUH6/1828 www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal10144

107468458. Konge Sancho I ALFSONSØN av Portugal(8884) was born on 11 Nov 1154.(8885) He was a Konge in 1185 in Portugal.(8886) He died on 27 Mar 1211.(8887) Han gjorde seg fortjetn til sitt tilnavn "Bondevennen" ved sin iver for å ophjelpe landbruket. Han bidro også til byens oppkomst ved å gi provilegier og befolke dem med kristne inbyggere. He was married to Dronning Dulcia RAIMUNDSØN av Aragon in 1174

AKA, O Povoador, The Populator. Son of Afonso I Hernriques of Portugal
Coronation after his father died, Dec 9, 1185.
Used the title: King of the Algarve and or, King of the Silves between the years, 1189 and 1190. With the help of the Crusaders he took Silves in 1181 a Taifa from the Moors. Silves was an important city of the south. Capetian House of Burgundy.

King of Portugal

Sancho I Martino "o Poblador" Kg av Portugal

Sancho I (Portuguese pronunciation: ['s??u]), nicknamed the Populator (Portuguese o Povoador), second monarch of Portugal, was born on November 11, 1154 in Coimbra and died on March 26, 1212 in the same city. He was the second but only surviving legitimate son and fourth child of Afonso I Henriques of Portugal by his wife, Maud of Savoy. Sancho succeeded his father in 1185. He used the title King of the Algarve and/or King of Silves between 1189 and 1191

In 1170, Sancho was knighted by his father, King Afonso I, and from then on he became his second in command, both administratively and militarily. At this time, the independence of Portugal (declared in 1139) was not firmly established. The kings of León and Castile were trying to re-annex the country and the Roman Catholic Church was late in giving its blessing and approval. Due to this situation Afonso I had to search for allies within the Iberian Peninsula. Portugal made an alliance with the Kingdom of Aragon and together they fought Castile and León. To secure the agreement, Infante Sancho of Portugal married, in 1174, Infanta Dulce Berenguer, younger sister of King Alfonso II of Aragon. Aragon was thus the first Iberian kingdom to recognize the independence of Portugal.

With the death of Afonso I in 1185, Sancho I became the second king of Portugal. Coimbra was the centre of his kingdom; Sancho terminated the exhausting and generally pointless wars against his neighbours for control of the Galician borderlands. Instead, he turned all his attentions to the south, towards the Moorish small kingdoms (called taifas) that still thrived. With Crusader help he took Silves in 1191. Silves was an important city of the South, an administrative and commercial town with population estimates around 20,000 people. Sancho ordered the fortification of the city and built a castle which is today an important monument of Portuguese heritage. However, military attention soon had to be turned again to the North, where León and Castile threatened again the Portuguese borders. Silves was again lost to the Moors. It should be noted that the global Muslim population had climbed to about 6 per cent as against the Christian population of 12 per cent by 1200.

Sancho I dedicated much of his reign to political and administrative organization of the new kingdom. He accumulated a national treasure, supported new industries and the middle class of merchants. Moreover, he created several new towns and villages (like Guarda in 1199) and took great care in populating remote areas in the northern Christian regions of Portugal, notably with Flemings and Burgundians - hence the nickname "the Populator". The king was also known for his love of knowledge and literature. Sancho I wrote several books of poems and used the royal treasure to send Portuguese students to European universities.

D. Sancho I (11 de Novembro de 1154 - 26 de Março de 1211), cognominado o Povoador (pelo estímulo com que apadrinhou o povoamento dos territórios do país - destacando-se a fundação da cidade da Guarda, em 1199, e a atribuição de cartas de foral na Beira e em Trás-os-Montes: Gouveia (1186), Covilhã (1186), Viseu (1187), Bragança (1187), etc, povoando assim áreas remotas do reino, em particular com imigrantes da Flandres e Borgonha.

Quarto filho do monarca Afonso Henriques, foi baptizado com o nome de Martinho, por haver nascido no dia do santo com o mesmo nome, e não estaria preparado para reinar; no entanto, a morte do seu irmão mais velho, D. Henrique, quando contava apenas três anos de idade, levou à alteração da sua onomástica para um nome mais hispânico, ficando desde então Sancho Afonso.

Sancho de portugal
http://trees.ancestry.com/rd?f=image&guid=7793d00a-ce05-401a-9f15-d9982ec8e312&tid=6959821&pid=-1168762306

KNOWN AS "THE COLONIZER"; KING OF PORTUGAL

RESEARCH NOTES:
King of Portugal (1185-1222) & Algarve. "Poblador". Moved capital to Coimbra

(Research):The Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition. 2001. Sancho I, king of Portugal c.1154-1211, king of Portugal (1185-1211), son and successor of Alfonso I. He was associated in his father's government from c.1170. Sancho undertook to restore and repeople the lands devastated in the wars against the Moors; thus he became known as Sancho o Povoador [Sancho the settler or populator]. Early successes against the Moors in Algarve were canceled by new Moorish attacks. He was succeeded by his son Alfonso II. Encyclopedia.com Sancho I Sancho I, c.1154-1211, king of Portugal (1185-1211), son and successor of Alfonso I. He was associated in his father's government from c.1170. Sancho undertook to restore and repeople the lands devastated in the wars against the Moors; thus he became known as Sancho o Povoador [Sancho the settler or populator]. Early successes against the Moors in Algarve were canceled by new Moorish attacks. He was succeeded by his son Alfonso II.

Sancho I of Portugal
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Sancho I of Portugal (pron. IPA /'s?~?u/), Sanctius I in English, nicknamed the Populator (Port. o Povoador), second king of Portugal, was born on November 11, 1154 in Coimbra and died on March 26, 1212 in the same city. He was the third but only surviving son of Afonso I Henriques of Portugal by his wife, Mafalda of Savoy. Sancho succeeded his father in 1185. He used the title King of Algarve and/or Silves between 1189 and 1191

In 1170, Sancho was knighted by his father, King Afonso I, and from that time he became his second in command, both administratively and military. At this time, the independence of Portugal (declared in 1139) was not firmly established. The kings of León and Castile were trying to annex the country and the Catholic church was late in giving its blessing and approval. Due to this Afonso I had to search for allies within the Iberian Peninsula. Portugal made an alliance with the kingdom of Aragon and together they fought Castile and León. To secure the agreement, Prince Sancho of Portugal married, in 1174, princess Dulce Berenguer, younger sister of king Alfonso II of Aragon. Aragon was thus the first Iberian kingdom to recognize the independence of Portugal.

With the death of Afonso I in 1185, Sancho I became the second king of Portugal. Coimbra was the centre of his kingdom; Sancho terminated the exhausting and generally pointless wars against his neighbours for control of the Galician borderlands. Instead, he turned all his attentions to the South, against the Moorish communities that still thrived. With Crusader help he took Silves in 1191. Silves was an important city of the South, an administrative and commercial town with population around 20,000 people. Sancho ordered the fortification of the city and built a castle that is today an important monument of Portuguese heritage. However, military attention soon had to be turned again to the North, where León and Castile threatened again the Portuguese borders. Silves was again lost to the Moors.

Sancho I founded the city of Guarda in 1199.

Sancho I dedicated much of his reign to political and administrative organization of the new kingdom. He accumulated a national treasure, supported new industries and the middle class of merchants. Moreover, he created several new towns and villages and took great care in populating remote areas in the northern Christian regions of Portugal, notably with Flemings and Burgundians – hence the nickname the Populator. The king was also known for his love of knowledge and literature. Sancho I wrote several books of poems and used the royal treasure to send Portuguese boys to study in European Universities.

[edit]
Ancestors
Sancho's ancestors in three generations Sancho I of Portugal Father:
Afonso I of Portugal Father's father:
Henry, Count of Portugal Father's father's father:
Henry, Duke of Burgundy
Father's father's mother:
Sybil (Beatriz) of Barcelona
Father's mother:
Theresa, Countess of Portugal Father's mother's father:
Alfonso VI of Castile
Father's mother's mother:
Jimena Muñoz
Mother:
Maud of Savoy Mother's father:
Amadeus III of Savoy Mother's father's father:
Humbert II of Savoy
Mother's father's mother:
Gisela of Burgundy
Mother's mother:
Mahaut of Albon Mother's mother's father:
Guy II, Count of Albon
Mother's mother's mother:
Inés of Barcelona
[edit]
Marriage and descendants
Sancho married Dulce Berenguer, daughter of Raymond Berengar IV, Count of Barcelona, and Petronilla, Queen of Aragon.

Name Birth Death Notes
By Dulce Berenguer (1152-1198; married in 1175)
Theresa 1181 1250 Married to King Alfonso IX of Castile
Raymond c. 1180 1189
Sancha a. 1182 March 13, 1229 Abbess of Lorvão
Constance c. 1182 August 3, 1202
Afonso II April 23, 1185 March 25, 1223 Succeeded him as 3rd King of Portugal
Peter February 23, 1187 June 2, 1258 Count of Urgell and Lord of the Balearic Islands, lived in León and married Arembiax Armengel, Countess of Urgell
Ferdinand March 24, 1188 March 4, 1233 Lived in France and married Jeanne of Flanders
Henry 1189 1189
Branca (Blanche) c. 1192 1240 Lady of Guadalajara
Berengária c. 1195 1221 Married to King Valdemar II of Denmark
Mafalda c. 1200 1256 Married to King Henry I of Castile
By Maria Aires (c. 1180-?)
Martim Sanches or
Henrique Sanches c. 1200 1229 Natural son and Count of Trastamara
Urraca Sanches c. 1200 1256 Natural daughter
By Maria Pais Ribeira (Ribeirinha) (c. 1170-b. 1258)
Rodrigo Sanches c. 1200 1245 Natural son
Gil Sanches c. 1200 1236 Natural son
Nuno Sanches c. 1200 ? Natural son
Teresa Sanches 1205 1230 Natural daughter
Constança Sanches 1210 1269 Natural daughter
Maior Sanches ? ? Natural daughter
House of Burgundy
Cadet Branch of the House of Capet
Born: 11 November 1154; Died: 26 March 1212
Preceded by:
Afonso I Kings of Portugal
1185–1212 Succeeded by:
Afonso II

His reign was marked by resettlement of the depopulated areas of his country,
by the establishment of new homes, and by the rebuilding of frontier
strongholds and castles, encouraging foreign settlers and enlisting bishops.

His reign was marked by resettlement of the depopulated areas of his country,
by the establishment of new homes, and by the rebuilding of frontier
strongholds and castles, encouraging foreign settlers and enlisting bishops.

His reign was marked by resettlement of the depopulated areas of his country,
by the establishment of new homes, and by the rebuilding of frontier
strongholds and castles, encouraging foreign settlers and enlisting bishops.

His reign was marked by resettlement of the depopulated areas of his country,
by the establishment of new homes, and by the rebuilding of frontier
strongholds and castles, encouraging foreign settlers and enlisting bishops.

Sancho ?Kolonisatoren? var konge av Portugal 1185 - 1211.
Han gjorde seg fortjent til sitt tilnavn ?Bondevennen? ved sin iver for å forbedre
landbruket. Han bidro også til byenes oppkomst ved å gi privilegier og befolke dem med kristne
nybyggere.
Sanho ble gift i 1174 med Dulcia.
Han hadde også konkubinene
Maria, datter til Arya Nuñes de Fornelos og
Maria Paez de Ribera.

BIOGRAPHY: Second King of Portugal, from 6 Dec 1185 to26 Mar 1211.

-- MERGED NOTE ------------

Wikidata: https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q1058544 | Geni: https://www.geni.com/people/6000000001196257237

[[Category:Wikipedia overwrite]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]