== Notes for [[Item:Q85317|Q85317]] ==

Umm Bint Marwan b. 648

Lineage Banu Umayyah

Full name (at birth) Umm Bint Marwan

Parents ♂ # Marwan ibn al-Hakam [Banu Umayyah] b. 28 March 623 d. 7 May 685

♀ Aisha Bint Uthman (Al-Umayyah) [Bani Umayyah] b. 623

Events 648 birth:

child birth: ♂ # Abd Al-Aziz ibn Musa [Banu Umayyah] d. 717

675 child birth: Cairo, Egypt, ♂ Uthman De Cordoba (Ibn Abu-Musa) [Bani Umayyah] b. 675 d. 731

Personal and Family Information Umm was born about 0648 in Damascus (Damas, Dimashq ach-Cham), Syria , the daughter of Marwan ibn al-Hakam (I caliph of Damascus) and A'isha bint Uthman al-Umayyah.

Her husband was Abu-Musá ibn Nusayr. They were married, but the date and place have not been found. Their two known children were Uthman (c0675-?) and Abdul Yazid al-Wallid (c0685-c0717).

N. N. bint Marwân ibn al-Hakam b. circa 659

Father Marwân I ibn al-Hakam al-Qurayshi, 4th Umayyad Caliph b. 623, d. 685

Mother Aisha bint 'Uthman ibn 'Affan b. circa 617. Of the Umayyad.

N. N. bint Marwân ibn al-Hakam was born circa 659.

She was the daughter ofMarwân I ibn al-Hakam al-Qurayshi, 4th Umayyad Caliph and Aisha bint 'Uthman ibn 'Affan.

N. N. bint Marwân ibn al-Hakam married Musa ibn Nuseir el-Bekir al-Makkiyya in 679; Unproven

.1 Family Musa ibn Nuseir el-Bekir al-Makkiyya b. 660, d. 718

Child

'Abd al-Aziz ibn Musa al-Makkiyya+ b. c 680, d. 7172


Citations
[S957] Francisco Antonio Doria (e-mail address), On Muhammad's European descendants (I) in "On Muhammad's European descendants," newsgroup message 1998/05/10.
[S278] DfAdam, online unknown url, The Line of Ishmael, 84.

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]]