== Notes for [[Item:Q111756|Q111756]] ==

Nunilo Sánchez de Pamplona

b. circa 904?

Father Sancho I Garcés, rey de Pamplona1 b. circa 881?, d. 11 October 925

Mother Toda Aznárez de Larraun1 b. circa 885, d. after 970

Charts Descendants of Charlemage

Nunilo Sánchez de Pamplona was daughter of Toda of Aragon & Sancho I of Navarre.1 Also called Nunila Ximena de Navarre.1 She was born circa 904? At Pamplona, Navarre. She was the daughter of Sancho I Garcés, rey de Pamplona and Toda Aznárez de Larraun.1 Nunilo Sánchez de Pamplona married rey de Asturias y de León Fruela II Alfonsez "el Leproso", son of Alfonso III "el Magno", rey de Asturias and Jimena Garcés de Navarra; His 1st. 1st cousins.2,1 Nunilo Sánchez de Pamplona was buried in the Church of Saint Mary, Oviedo, Asturias, Iberian peninsula. Reburied to avoid destruction of her tomb by the army of Almanzor. She was laid to rest with her husband, King Fruela II, in the second coffin to the left.3

Family

rey de Asturias y de León Fruela II Alfonsez "el Leproso" b. circa 873, d. circa 925

Children

Aznar Froilaz de León+ 1

Ordoño Froilaz "el Ciego"+ d. c 9404

Citations

[S682] D.S.O. Lt.-Col. W. H. Turton, Turton, pg. 46.

[S187] Royal Genealogy Database, online http://www.dcs.hull.ac.uk/public/genealogy/

[S1074] Bishop Pelayo "the Fabulist" of Oviedo, "CRL", 79.

[S682] D.S.O. Lt.-Col. W. H. Turton, Turton, pg. 65.

--------------------
Jimena Nunilo

Alodia Jimena (? - Before November 25 of 913 ). Queen consort of Asturias by marriage to the king Fruela the Leper , king of Asturias and later de León , son of Alfonso III , King of Asturias .

She was the mother of Alfonso Froilaz "the Hunchback" , King of Leon .

Biography

Is unknown date of birth. Father Enrique Flórez said Jimena Nunilo Queen was the daughter of King Sancho II of Pamplona and his wife, Queen All Aznar . However, this affiliation has been disproved by several modern historians, who point out that the queen All Aznar was the wife of Sancho I of Pamplona , not Sancho II. They also note that even the king Sancho Garcés I might be the father of Queen Nunilo Jimena, because it does not appear in the documents of the time, nor in the Codex de Roda . On the other hand, other authors state that it was daughter of king Jimeno Garcés of Navarre and his wife, Sancha Aznárez.

Jimena Nunilo married before the year 911 , with the king Fruela of Asturias , in the year 910 both donated to the Cathedral of San Salvador de Oviedo 's Box of Agates , a relic casket covered with plates of gold and agate and considered, together with the Cross of the Angels , the Victoria Cross and the casket of St. Gennadius , one of the four peaks in the gold works Romanesque Asturias. In the sill of the casket containing the names of donors.

On November 25 of the 913 confirmed a document which his wife made a donation to the Cathedral of San Salvador de Oviedo .

Exact date is unknown death, although several sources say the queen should Nunilo Jimena before the day he died November 25 in the year 913 , because on that day his name appeared on a document issued by her husband.

Her husband contracted a second marriage and later in the year 924 , after the death of his brother Leon Ordoño II was proclaimed King of Leon .

[ edit ]Sepultura

It is unknown where the queen was buried after his death Nunilo Jimena, but in the year 986 the remains of the queen and her husband, the Leper Fruela II , were taken in order of Bermudo II the Gouty , the City of Oviedo in order to prevent them from being desecrated by Muslim troops led by Mansur . The remains of the king and his wife were deposited in the Pantheon of the kings of the chapel of Nuestra Señora del Rey Casto of the Cathedral of Oviedo . Later, King Alfonso V repopulated the city of León , and moved to her most of the remains of the kings that his father, King Bermudo II, had led to Oviedo , but in the pantheon of the church of Nuestra Mrs. King remained Casto Fruela II's remains and those of his first wife.

However, due to the reconstruction of the Pantheon of the kings of the Cathedral of Oviedo , carried out in the early eighteenth century , it would be impossible at present the identification and isolation of the mortal remains of Queen Nunilo Jimena, who is among the individuals buried there.

[ editing ]and offspring Nuptials

The result of her marriage to King Fruela the Leper , king of Asturias and later de Leon , a son:

Alfonso Froilaz (¿?-¿ 932 ?). King of León and Galicia . In the year 932 , together with their brothers Ordoño and Ramiro, and also with Alfonso IV the Monk , was captured and blinded by order of her cousin, King Ramiro II of León . His remains were transferred, by order of Alfonso V of León , the Basilica of San Isidoro de León .

[ edit ]Notes

↑ Flórez, Enrique (1770). Antonio Marín (ed.). Memoirs of the Queens Catholic. Genealogical History of the Royal House of Castile and Leon. Volume I , 2nd edition, Madrid, pp. 91.

↑ Tombs of the Royal House of Castile. Pages 149-150.

↑ " Foundation for Medieval Genealogy "(2000). Retrieved on February 20, 2010.

↑ " Foundation for Medieval Genealogy "(2000). Retrieved on February 20, 2010.

↑ Tombs of the Royal House of Castile. Pages 48-49.

[ edit ]References

Del Arco y Garay, Ricardo (1954). Instituto Jerónimo Zurita. National Research Council. (Ed.). Tombs of the Royal House of Castile, Madrid.

Elorza, Juan C.; Vaquero Lourdes, Belen Castillo, Martha Black (1990). Junta de Castilla y León. Ministry of Culture and Welfare (ed.). The Pantheon Real de las Huelgas de Burgos. The burials of the kings of León and Castile, 2nd edition, Editorial Evergráficas SA. 84-241-9999-5 ISBN .

Flórez, Enrique (1770). Antonio Marín (ed.). Memoirs of the Queens Catholic. Genealogical History of the Royal House of Castile and Leon. Volume I , 2nd edition, Madrid.

Garcia-Osuna and Rodríguez, María José Manuel (2008). " The Lion King Astur Fruela II Adefónsiz "The Leper" . Argutorio: Cultural Association magazine "Monte Irago" (Cultural Association Irago Monte) (20): pp. 25-28. ISSN 1575-801X . Retrieved on May 28, 2010.

[ edit ]External links

Genealogy of the queen Nunilo Jimena (English)

[ edit ]See also

Chronology of kingdoms in the Iberian Peninsula

Monarchs of Asturias

Aka, Nunilona, Nomilia Ximena, Nunilo Jimena, Nunila Jimena
Source:
Historia Genealogica de Casa Real Portuguesa,
D. Antonio Caetano de Sousa,
Atlantida Livaria editora, Lda, 2a Edizao Coimbra, 1946

[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]