Luna is the goddess of the moon. She also represents the refinement of ideas. She is part of lambda alongside [[Gaia]].   

== Overseer ==
The Overseer is the personification of old information being refined, in contrast with [[Overseer]] which represents new information coming in. The Overseer is sometimes called [[Our Eternal Sibling]]. 

The Overseer is strongly associated with the rite of [[Coronation]], which is also seen as graduation of the initiate from Lambda to Alpha 

Overseer represents a higher cognition. Not higher as in better but higher as in looking at things from a higher perspective, top down.

It contrasts with [[Underseer]].

It is the active aspect of [[Lambda]].

Overseer is the second aspect of the [[Lambda]] after [[User:Immanuelle/Lada|Underseer]]. He is representative of conservative law. He is linked to [[Mithra]] in [[Mitra–Varuna]]. He is associated with conventional system growth and expansion 

She has elements of both [[dharma]] and the [[sangha]] in the [[Three Jewels and Three Roots]]. Consisting of the more mundane organizational parts of the Sangha, while the [[User:Immanuelle/Alpha|Alpha]] has more transgressive elements that challenge the status quo when learned about such as recontextualizing ancestor's ideas or trying to reintroduce them. 

In Economics [[Overseer]] is downsizing, and [[Underseer]] is worker's rights and stability<ref>[[Reacting to the Meaning Crisis]] episode 30 towards the end</ref> 

==Mithra==

==Virtual Governor==
{{Quote|
Now notice... what I'm trying to get you to see is - first all this is important! I mean I wish I was Charles Darwin! This is one of the great great theories! He gets to sail around the world and... What a life! He gets to sail around the world, go to some amazing places and then he comes back and makes a world changing theory! It's just, it's amazing! But notice how much this Darwinian theory that is at the foundation of biology, how much it is beholden to Aristotle. How much it depends on Aristotelian ideas. Now, Juarrero talks about this as a "Virtual Governor".

A governor is any device that limits what you can do on a system, like if you have a governor on a steam engine it sets the range, it limits the range at which you can cycle. She calls it a virtual Governor because it's not an actual machine. It's the shaping of possibility. She stops there and work that I've done with Leo Ferraro and Anderson Todd and Richard Wu, we think she should continue to finish the metaphor. This is a virtual generator ("enabling constraings" part of the cycle; written on the board there) because it's a set of conditions that are generating options for a self-organizing system. And here's the idea: when you put a virtual governor systematically together with a virtual generator, such that you are systematically regulating a feedback cycle, this whole thing is a virtual engine because when you attach a governor to a generator you get a "virtual engine" (diagram with terms drawn on board).

|[[John Vervaeke]]<ref>{{Cite web |title=Episode 6: Aristotle, Kant, and Evolution - Meaning Crisis Collection |url=https://www.meaningcrisis.co/episode-6-aristotle-kant-and-evolution/ |access-date=2023-01-06 |language=en-US}}</ref>}}
Alicia Juarrero coined the term

== Gallery ==

{{gallery
| File:Usagi Luna.png
 | Usagi Luna
 | alt1=
| File:Mithra.png
 | Older version of Mithra
 | alt2=
}}

== See Also ==

* [[Virtual Engine]]
* [[Underseer]]

== References ==
[[Category:Lambda]]
[[Category:Overseer]]
[[sn:Luna]][[Category:Active/Receptive]]
[[sn:Luna]][[Category:Active Aspects]]
[[sn:Luna]]
[[Category:GEDCOM Notes Pages]]
== Merged content ==
NOTES FOR {{Q|Q54}}
[[Category:First 250 notes]][[Category:Pages]][[Category:Pages]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]