Advancement is a term used to describe advancing through life as opposed to [[Aswerving]].<ref>https://evolution.faith/aswerving/</ref> It is related to [[Apotheosis]], but while Apotheosis refers to a specific [[ascension path]], advancement refers to the general path through life towards apotheosis, civilizationally and for an individual.


As a result advancement includes initially saying the [[Omega Shahada]], followed by [[rehabilitation]], followed by [[apotheosis]], and even including inevitable instances of [[tripping]] and recovery from tripping.
==Anagoge ==
[[Category:Ascension]]
[[sn:Advancing]][[Category:Apotheosis]]
[[sn:Advancing]][[Category:Anagoge]]
[[sn:Advancing]][[Category:Ennoblement]]

'''Anagoge''' (ἀναγωγή), sometimes spelled '''anagogy''', is a Greek word suggesting a "climb" or "ascent" upwards.  The anagogical is a method of [[mystical]] or [[Spirituality|spiritual]] interpretation of statements or events, especially [[Scriptures|scriptural]] [[exegesis]], that detects allusions to the afterlife.<ref>[http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/22340/anagogical-interpretation Encyclopædia Britannica Online, s. v. "anagogical interpretation", accessed October 11, 2012]</ref>

{{Wiktionary|anagoge}}{{Quote|Anagoge is the Greek word for the climb towards the metaphorical light that represents a clearer view of reality.

The word is closely related to Plato’s cave myth. In this myth, the climb towards reality is what we call anagoge.|[[awakeningfromthemeaningcrisis.com]]<ref>https://web.archive.org/web/20210307135915/https://awakeningfromthemeaningcrisis.com/anagoge</ref>}}

It was said to be a different concept from [[ennoblement]] in this video<ref>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jbziEOT2V4c</ref> but that is inaccurate and it is now seen as almost identical to [[Advancement]] and [[ennoblement]], far closer than was said in that video.

[[Category:Nobility]]
[[Category:Ascension]]
[[sn:Advancing]][[Category:John Vervaeke]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]
[[sn:Advancing]]==In scriptural interpretation==
{{Short description|Method of mystical or spiritual interpretation of statements or events}}

Certain medieval theologians describe [[Four Interpretations|four methods of interpreting the scriptures]]: literal, ''[[typology (theology)|typological]]'', ''[[Tropological reading|tropological]]'' and [[anagogical]].. Hugh of St. Victor, in ''De scripturis et scriptoribus sacris'', distinguished anagoge, as a kind of allegory, from simple allegory.<ref>"De Scripturis et Scriptoribus Sacris", in ''Hugonis de S. Victore... Opera Omnia'', I (of 3), [https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=JoXYAAAAMAAJ&pg=PA11#v=onepage&q&f=false ''Patrologia Latina'' Vol. 175] (J.-P. Migne, 1854), columns 9-28, Chapter III: De triplici intelligentia sacrae Scripturae, at Column 12, loc. B.</ref> He differentiated in the following way: in a simple allegory, an invisible action is (simply) ''signified'' or ''represented'' by a visible action; Anagoge is that "reasoning upwards" (''sursum ductio''), when, from the visible, the invisible action is ''disclosed'' or ''revealed''.<ref>"... est simplex allegoria, cum per visibile factum aliud invisibile factum significatur. Anagoge, id est sursum ductio, cum per visibile invisibile factum declaratur."</ref>

The four methods of interpretation point in four different directions: The literal/historical backwards to the past, the allegoric forwards to the future, the tropological downwards to the moral/human, and the anagogic upwards to the spiritual/heavenly.<ref>Charles Cummings, ''Monastic Practices'', CS 75 (Kalamazoo: Cistercian Publications, 1986), 14-15.</ref>

In a letter to his patron Can Grande della Scala, the poet Dante explained that his ''Divine Comedy'' could be read both literally and allegorically; and that the allegorical meaning could be subdivided into the [[Moral reading|moral]] and the [[anagogical]].<ref>{{cite book |title=The Divine Comedy |author=Dante |author-link=Dante |others=Translated by [[Dorothy L. Sayers]] |volume=I: Hell |pages=14–15 |publisher=[[Penguin Classics]] |year=1949}}</ref> [[Immanuelle]] said the same thing about the [[Gaiad]].

==See also==

*[[Katagoge]]
* [[ennoblement]]

* [[Allegorical interpretation of the Bible]]
* [[Biblical hermeneutics]]
* [[Historical-grammatical method]]
* [[Arcs of Descent and Ascent]]

==References==
{{Reflist}}
{{Authority control}}

[[Category:Biblical exegesis]]


{{biblical-studies-stub}}
[[Category:Four Interpretations]]
[[Category:Pages that existed before the Great November Outage]]
[[sn:Advancing]][[sn:Advancing]][[sn:Advancing]]
[[Category:Pages]]