{{Short description|Hypothesized solution to the Fermi paradox}}
{{About|a hypothesized solution to the Fermi paradox||Aestivation (disambiguation)}}
{{Use dmy dates|date=September 2020}}

The '''aestivation hypothesis''' is a hypothesized solution to the [[Fermi paradox]] conceived in 2017 by [[Anders Sandberg]], [[Stuart Armstrong (scientist)|Stuart Armstrong]] and Milan M. Ćirković. The hypothesis, published on 27 April 2017, suggests advanced [[alien civilization]]s may be storing energy and [[Aestivation|aestivating]] (hibernating in times of heat instead of cold), until [[Future of an expanding universe|the universe cools]] to better make use of the stored energy to perform tasks.

As the universe cools, the potential work producible by stored energy can increase by a multiplier of 10<sup>30</sup> per [[Landauer's principle]]. If the goal of an advanced civilization is to maximize the number of calculations done, to generate information processing for tasks like mass-producing simulations, then aestivation would be purposeful to achieve this end.<ref name="arxi_[170">{{cite arXiv|title=That is not dead which can eternal lie: the aestivation hypothesis for resolving Fermi's paradox|date=2017-04-27|eprint=1705.03394|class=physics.pop-ph|last1=Sandberg|first1=Anders|last2=Armstrong|first2=Stuart|last3=Ćirković|first3=Milan M.}}</ref><ref name="gizm_Hibe">{{Cite web| title = Hibernating Aliens Could Explain the Great Silence| last = Dvorsky | first = George| work = Gizmodo| date = 2017-05-31| access-date = 2018-03-29| url = https://gizmodo.com/hibernating-aliens-could-explain-the-great-silence-1795695445}}</ref><ref name="futu_Wher">{{Cite web| title = Where is alien life? Six of the top theories| author = Tangermann, Victor| work = Futurism| date = 2017-12-01| access-date = 2018-03-29| url = https://futurism.com/theories-intelligent-life-fermi-paradox/}}</ref>

==Fermi paradox==
{{Main|Fermi paradox}}
There is no reliable or reproducible evidence that [[Extraterrestrial life|aliens]] have visited [[Earth]].<ref name="ConversationNoUFOs">{{cite news |last1=Tingay |first1=Steven |title=Is there evidence aliens have visited Earth? Here's what's come out of US congress hearings on 'unidentified aerial phenomena' |url=https://theconversation.com/is-there-evidence-aliens-have-visited-earth-heres-whats-come-out-of-us-congress-hearings-on-unidentified-aerial-phenomena-183443 |access-date=27 October 2022 |work=The Conversation |language=en}}</ref><ref name="NewYorkerAliens2021">{{cite news |last1=Kolbert |first1=Elizabeth |title=Have We Already Been Visited by Aliens? |url=https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2021/01/25/have-we-already-been-visited-by-aliens |access-date=27 October 2022 |work=The New Yorker |date=14 January 2021}}</ref> No transmissions or evidence of [[intelligent]] extraterrestrial life have [[SETI|been detected or observed]] anywhere other than [[Earth]] in the [[Universe]]. This runs counter to the knowledge that the Universe is filled with a very large number of planets, some of which likely hold the conditions hospitable for life. Life typically expands until it fills all available niches.<ref name="AreWeAlone">[http://adsabs.harvard.edu/full/1978QJRAS..19..277P "Are We All Alone, or could They be in the Asteroid Belt" by Michael D. Papagiannis, ''Quarterly Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society'', Vol. 19, p.277]</ref> These contradictory facts form the basis for the [[Fermi paradox]], of which the Aestivation hypothesis is one proposed solution.

==Intentions of alien civilizations==
Advanced alien civilizations may have intentions that differ considerably from one another and from humanity. If the intent is creating large amounts of "happiness", then energy resources may be used to generate perfect computer simulations of "the maximal number of maximally happy minds". If the intent is knowledge, resources may be focused on information storage. Such civilizations may go through a time of exploration and then remain [[Dormancy|dormant]] until the conditions of the universe are more energetically favorable to best achieve their objectives.<ref name="arxi_[170"/> While this may not achieve infinite value in terms of their intentions, the upper limit may still be extremely large.<ref>{{cite journal | first1 = David | last1 = Manheim | last2 = Sandberg | first2 = Anders | year = 2022| title = What is the upper limit of value? | url = https://philarchive.org/rec/MANWIT-6 | journal = PhilArchive }}</ref>

==Dispute==
The theory has been disputed by a subsequent paper by [[Charles H. Bennett (computer scientist)|Charles H. Bennett]], [[Robin Hanson]] and Jess Riedel, who claim the notion that more computations could be performed later in the universe's history is based on a misunderstanding of the physics of computation.<ref name="arxi_[180">{{cite journal|title=Comment on 'The aestivation hypothesis for resolving Fermi's paradox'|date=2019-02-18|arxiv=1902.06730|last1=Bennett|first1=Charles|last2=Hanson|first2=Robin|last3=Riedel|first3=Jess|journal=Foundations of Physics|volume=49|issue=8|pages=820–829|doi=10.1007/s10701-019-00289-5|bibcode=2019FoPh...49..820B|s2cid=119045181}}</ref>

==References==
{{Reflist}}

{{Astrobiology}}
{{Extraterrestrial life}}
{{Interstellar messages}}

[[Category:Extraterrestrial life]]
[[Category:Hypotheses]]
[[Category:Fermi paradox]]
[[Category:2017 introductions]][[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Pages]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]