The agent-arena relationship refers to a configuration of organism and environment which makes the individual organism into an “agent” and the environment into an “arena”. Individuals assume identities to become agents, and assign identities to make their environment into an arena. What makes an individual an agent is that it acts intentionally with understanding of the meaningful consequences that such action entails. If an individual’s behaviour does not relate to its environment in a way that is meaningfully intelligible to it, we may say that its behaviour is absurd. <ref name=":1" />

[[Domicide]] disrupts the agent arena relationship<ref name=":0">https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6i8FFH7Wslc</ref>

[[Parasitic processing]] is the agent, and [[reciprocal narrowing]] is the arena<ref name=":0" />

[[Desire synthesis]] is the agent, and [[worldview synthesis]] is the arena<ref name=":0" />

An agent-arena-relationship is characterized by a process of [[co-identification]]:  <ref name="“afmc”">https://web.archive.org/web/20210126113028/https://awakeningfromthemeaningcrisis.com/agent-arena-relationship [[awakeningfromthemeaningcrisis.com]] </ref>

“The identity of the arena is determined by and determines the identity of the agent. And the identity of the agent is determined by and determines the arena.”<ref name="“afmc”" />

== Definition ==
“An Arena is a place that’s organized such that you know how you can act in it. If you are a football player and you go into a football arena, things are organized in such a way that you know intimately how to be involved and how to interact.” <ref name="“afmc”" />

“To be an Agent is to be capable of pursuing your goals. It’s to be able to organize your cognition and your behavior so that your actions fit the situation. They fit the environment. So what you have, when you have a world view, is you’ve got this Agent and Arena coupling.”  <ref name="“afmc”" />

== Football example ==


The example of the football player in the football field is very helpful for clarifying this. The football player’s physical actions are given cultural meaning by the context of the football field as an arena and all of its associated rules and norms. If the football player were to be doing the same things in a tennis court, for instance, their behaviour may be said to be absurd.<ref name=":1" />

To understand this, think about a football player on a football field . The football player’s physical actions are given cultural meaning by the context of the football field as an arena and all of its associated rules and norms. If the football players do the same things in a tennis court, for instance, their behaviour would seem absurd.  <ref name="“afmc”" />

== Zombies and religion ==
Vervaeke et al. coin and use this term as an elaboration of work done by Clifford Geertz, and later on by Brian Walsh and others. See [[Zombies in Western culture]] <ref name=":1" /><ref>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/345718036_Zombies_in_Western_Culture_A_Twenty-First_Century_Crisis</ref>

In his anthropological work, Geertz described the manner in which cultures use a worldview, an account of the nature of the world, to justify an ethos, a particular way of living in the world, the success of which in turn justified the adjoining worldview. <ref name=":1" /><ref name=":2" />

[https://nideffer.net/classes/GCT_RPI_S14/readings/Geertz_Religon_as_a_Cultural_System_.pdf (See “Religion As a Cultural System”, in Essays on The Interpretation of Cultures, Geertz, 1973.)]<ref name=":1" /><ref name=":2"> https://nideffer.net/classes/GCT_RPI_S14/readings/Geertz_Religon_as_a_Cultural_System_.pdf</ref>

== ChatGPT explanation ==
The Agent-Arena Relationship is a concept in the philosophy of John Vervaeke that refers to the dynamic and reciprocal relationship between individuals and the world around them.<ref name=":3">ChatGPT</ref>

According to Vervaeke, individuals are not passive observers of the world, but are actively engaged in shaping and creating it. The relationship between individuals and the world around them is seen as dynamic, with individuals both shaping and being shaped by the world they inhabit.<ref name=":3" />

The agent-arena relationship plays a key role in the development of meaning and understanding. Vervaeke argues that individuals cannot fully understand the world or themselves without taking into account the ways in which they are actively engaged in shaping and creating the world they live in. This relationship is also a factor in the development of individual and collective narratives, as the stories we tell about ourselves and the world around us help to shape our understanding of the world and influence the way that we engage with it.<ref name=":3" />

The agent-arena relationship is seen as a central aspect of Vervaeke's philosophy and a key factor in the development of meaning and understanding in our lives. By recognizing the dynamic and reciprocal relationship between individuals and the world around them, Vervaeke argues that we can gain a deeper understanding of both ourselves and the world we live in.<ref name=":3" />

== See Also ==

* [[Domicide]]<ref name=":1" />

* [[co-identification]]<ref name=":1" />
* [[participatory knowing]]<ref name=":1" />
* [[worldview]]<ref name=":1">{{Cite web |date=2022-10-11 |title=Glossary of Vervekian terms - Google Docs |url=https://web.archive.org/web/20221011000617/https://docs.google.com/document/d/1FWZSdPa996VseFAJFfQ-Xu4RN_2JoK9V7maoFmzXgaE/edit |access-date=2022-11-01 |website=web.archive.org}}</ref>

== References ==
[[Category:John Vervaeke]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]
[[sn:Agent-Arena relationship]][[Category:Domicide]][[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Pages]]