{{short description|Conceptual collapse in behavior which can result from overcrowding}}
"'''Behavioral sink'''" is a term invented by [[ethologist]] [[John B. Calhoun]] to describe a collapse in behavior that can result from [[overpopulation]]. The term and concept derive from a series of over-population experiments Calhoun conducted on [[Norway rat]]s between 1958 and 1962.<ref>{{cite book
 | last = Hall | first = Edward, T.
 | year = 1966
 | title = The Hidden Dimension: An Anthropologist Examines Humans' Use of Space in Public and in Private
 | publisher = Anchor Books
 | id = ASIN B0006BNQW2
 | page = 25
}}</ref>
In the experiments, Calhoun and his researchers created a series of "rat utopias" – enclosed spaces where rats were given unlimited access to food and water, enabling unfettered population growth. Calhoun coined the term "behavioral sink" in a February 1, 1962, ''[[Scientific American]]'' article titled "Population Density and Social Pathology"<ref>{{Cite web|title = Population Density and Social Pathology|url = https://www.gwern.net/docs/sociology/1962-calhoun.pdf|website = Scientific American|access-date = 2015-12-14|archive-date = 2019-11-21|archive-url = https://web.archive.org/web/20191121215538/https://www.gwern.net/docs/sociology/1962-calhoun.pdf|url-status = live}}</ref> on the rat experiment.<ref>{{Cite journal
 | last= Calhoun | first=John B.
 | authorlink=John B. Calhoun
 | year=1962
 | title=Population density and social pathology
 | journal=Scientific American
 | volume=206 | issue=3 | pages=139–148
 | doi=10.1038/scientificamerican0262-139
 | doi-broken-date=31 January 2024
 | pmid= 13875732
}}</ref>
He would later perform similar experiments on [[mice]], from 1968 to 1972.

Calhoun's work became used as an [[animal model]] of [[societal collapse]], and his study has become a touchstone of [[urban sociology]] and [[psychology]] in general.<ref>{{cite book
 | last = Hock
 | first = Roger R.
 | year = 2004
 | title = Forty Studies that Changed Psychology : Explorations into the History of Psychological Research
 | publisher = Prentice Hall
 | isbn = 978-0-13-114729-4
 | url-access = registration
 | url = https://archive.org/details/fortystudiesthat00hock_1
 | edition = 5th
 }}</ref>

== Experiments ==
In the 1962 study, Calhoun described the behavior as follows:
{{bquote|Many [female rats] were unable to carry the pregnancy to full term or to survive delivery of their litters if they did. An even greater number, after successfully giving birth, fell short in their maternal functions. Among the males the behavior disturbances ranged from sexual deviation to cannibalism and from frenetic overactivity to a pathological withdrawal from which individuals would emerge to eat, drink and move about only when other members of the community were asleep. The social organization of the animals showed equal disruption. ...

The common source of these disturbances became most dramatically apparent in the populations of our first series of three experiments, in which we observed the development of what we called a behavioral sink. The animals would crowd together in greatest number in one of the four interconnecting pens in which the colony was maintained. As many as 60 of the 80 rats in each experimental population would assemble in one pen during periods of feeding. Individual rats would rarely eat except in the company of other rats. As a result extreme population densities developed in the pen adopted for eating, leaving the others with sparse populations.

... In the experiments in which the behavioral sink developed, infant mortality ran as high as 96 percent among the most disoriented groups in the population.<ref>{{Cite journal 
| last1 = Calhoun | first1 = J. B. 
| title = Population density and social pathology 
| journal = California Medicine 
| volume = 113 
| issue = 5 
| pages = 54 
| year = 1970 
| pmid = 18730425 
| pmc = 1501789
}}</ref>}}

Calhoun's early experiments with rats were carried out on farmland at [[Rockville, Maryland]], starting in 1947.<ref name="cabinet2011">{{cite web|url=http://www.cabinetmagazine.org/issues/42/wiles.php|title=The Behavioral Sink|publisher=Cabinet Magazine|date=Summer 2011|access-date=2012-08-24|archive-date=2020-02-15|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20200215182949/http://www.cabinetmagazine.org/issues/42/wiles.php|url-status=live}}</ref>

While Calhoun was working at the [[National Institute of Mental Health]] (NIMH) in 1954, he began numerous experiments with rats and mice. During his first tests, he placed around 32 to 56 rats in a {{convert|10|by(x)|14|ft|m|adj=on}} cage in a barn in Montgomery County. He separated the space into four rooms. Every room was specifically created to support a dozen matured brown Norwegian rats. Rats could maneuver between the rooms by using the ramps. Since Calhoun provided unlimited resources, such as water, food, and also protection from predators as well as from disease and weather, the rats were said to be in "rat utopia" or "mouse paradise", another psychologist explained.<ref name="Medical Historian Examines NIMH Experiments in Crowding">[http://nihrecord.od.nih.gov/newsletters/2008/07_25_2008/story1.htm Medical Historian Examines NIMH Experiments in Crowding] {{webarchive|url=https://web.archive.org/web/20130327132421/http://nihrecord.od.nih.gov/newsletters/2008/07_25_2008/story1.htm |date=2013-03-27 }}, nih record, 2013-10-13.</ref>

Following his earlier experiments with rats, Calhoun later created his "Mortality-Inhibiting Environment for Mice" in 1968: a {{convert|101|by(x)|101|in|cm|adj=mid}} cage for [[mice]] with food and water replenished to support any increase in population,<ref name="deathsquared">{{Cite journal|last1=Calhoun|first1=J. B.|year=1973|title=Death squared: The explosive growth and demise of a mouse population|journal=Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine|volume=66|issue=1 Pt 2|pages=80–88|doi=10.1177/00359157730661P202|pmc=1644264|pmid=4734760}}</ref> which took his experimental approach to its limits. In his most famous experiment in the series, "'''Universe 25'''", population peaked at 2,200 mice even though the habitat was built to tolerate a total population of 4000.  Having reached a level of high population density, the mice began exhibiting a variety of abnormal, often destructive, behaviors including refusal to engage in courtship, and females abandoning their young. By the 600th day, the population was on its way to extinction. Though physically able to reproduce, the mice had lost the social skills required to mate.<ref name=cabinet2011/>

Calhoun retired from NIMH in 1984, but continued to work on his research results until his death on September 7, 1995.<ref name="NLM Announces the Public Release of the Papers of John B. Calhoun">[https://www.nlm.nih.gov/news/calhoun_papers_released.html NLM Announces the Public Release of the Papers of John B. Calhoun] {{Webarchive|url=https://web.archive.org/web/20180911191924/https://www.nlm.nih.gov/news/calhoun_papers_released.html |date=2018-09-11 }}, U.S. National Library of Medicine, 2013-10-13.</ref>

==Explanation==

The specific ''voluntary'' crowding of rats to which the term "behavioral sink" refers is thought to have resulted from the earlier ''involuntary'' crowding: individual rats became so used to the proximity of others while eating that they began to associate feeding with the company of other rats. Calhoun eventually found a way to prevent this by changing some of the settings and thereby decreased mortality somewhat, but the overall pathological consequences of overcrowding remained.<ref>Ramsden, Edmund and Jon Adams. 2009. Escaping the Laboratory:The Rodent Experiments of John B. Calhoun & Their Cultural Influence, p.22. [https://eprints.lse.ac.uk/22514/1/2308Ramadams.pdf] {{Webarchive|url=https://web.archive.org/web/20210328100340/http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/22514/1/2308Ramadams.pdf|date=2021-03-28}}</ref>

Further, researchers argued that "Calhoun's work was not simply about density in a physical sense, as number of individuals-per-square-unit-area, but was about degrees of social interaction."<ref>Garnett, Carla. (2008). [https://nihrecord.nih.gov/sites/recordNIH/files/pdf/2008/NIH-Record-2008-07-25.pdf Plumbing the 'Behavioral Sink', Medical Historian Examines NIMH Experiments in Crowding.] {{Webarchive|url=https://web.archive.org/web/20200815000532/https://nihrecord.nih.gov/sites/recordNIH/files/pdf/2008/NIH-Record-2008-07-25.pdf|date=2020-08-15}}. NIH Record. Retrieved 2013-07-07.</ref> '''''Social density''''' appears to be key. 

== Applicability to humans ==
{{see also|Model organism}}
Calhoun had phrased much of his work in [[anthropomorphic]] terms, in a way that made his ideas highly accessible to a lay audience.<ref name="cabinet2011" />

Calhoun himself saw the fate of the population of mice as a metaphor for the potential fate of humankind. He characterized the social breakdown as a "spiritual death",<ref name="deathsquared" /> with reference to bodily death as the "second death" mentioned in the [[Bible|Biblical]] verse {{Bibleverse||Revelation|2:11|NIV}}.<ref name="deathsquared" />

Controversy exists over the implications of the experiment. Psychologist Jonathan Freedman's experiment recruited high school and university students to carry out a series of experiments that measured the effects of density on human behavior. He measured their [[Stress (biology)|stress]], discomfort, [[aggression]], competitiveness, and general unpleasantness. He declared to have found no appreciable negative effects in 1975.<ref>{{cite journal |last1=Freedman |first1=Jonathan |title=Population density and pathology: Is there a relationship? |journal=Journal of Experimental Social Psychology |date=November 1975 |volume=11 |issue=6 |pages=539–552 |doi=10.1016/0022-1031(75)90005-0 |url=https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/0022103175900050}}</ref> 

The 1962 ''Scientific American'' article came at a time when [[human overpopulation|overpopulation]] had become a subject of great public interest, and had a considerable cultural influence.<ref name="ramsdenadams2009">{{Cite journal |last1=Ramsden |first1=Edmund |last2=Adams |first2=Jon |year=2009 |title=Escaping the Laboratory: the rodent experiments of John B. Calhoun & their cultural influence |url=https://www.gwern.net/docs/psychology/2009-ramsden.pdf |url-status=live |journal=Journal of Social History |volume=42 |issue=3 |pages=761–797 |doi=10.1353/jsh/42.3.761 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20191121225450/https://www.gwern.net/docs/psychology/2009-ramsden.pdf |archive-date=2019-11-21 |access-date=2019-08-12}}</ref> However, such discussions often oversimplified the original findings in various ways. It should however be noted that the work has a more differentiated message than, for example, [[Paul R. Ehrlich#Reception|Paul Ehrlich's]] now widely disputed<ref>{{Cite web |last1=Gooderham |first1=Mary |last2=Toronto |first2=University of |title=Debunking the 'population bomb' |url=https://phys.org/news/2018-12-debunking-population.html |access-date=2024-02-21 |website=phys.org |language=en}}</ref><ref>{{Cite web |last=Follett |first=Chelsea |date=January 5, 2023 |title=Defuse the Population Bomb Narrative before It's Too Late |url=https://www.cato.org/commentary/defuse-population-bomb-narrative-its-too-late |access-date=February 21, 2024 |website=Cato Institute}}</ref><ref>{{Cite news |last=Haberman |first=Clyde |date=2015-05-31 |title=The Unrealized Horrors of Population Explosion |url=https://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/01/us/the-unrealized-horrors-of-population-explosion.html |access-date=2024-02-21 |work=The New York Times |language=en-US |issn=0362-4331}}</ref> book [[The Population Bomb|''The Population Bomb.'']] Calhoun's worries primarily concerned a human population surge as an early stage, such as even more so a potentially independent increase in [[urbanization]], soon after rendering much of a given society ''functionally'' sterile. Here, one moves '''from ''some'' modality of over- towards a much more irredeemable ''under''population.''' Now, while urban populations have long been noted to have lower fertility than their rural counterparts,<ref>{{Cite journal |last=Jaffe |first=A. J. |date=1942 |title=Urbanization and Fertility |url=https://www.jstor.org/stable/2769969 |journal=American Journal of Sociology |volume=48 |issue=1 |pages=48–60 |doi=10.1086/219078 |jstor=2769969 |s2cid=144416655 |issn=0002-9602}}</ref> growing use of especially digital media is likely to end up depressing rural population growth as well.<ref>{{Citation |last1=Population |first1=National Research Council (US) Committee on |title=Mass Media and Fertility Change |date=2001 |work=Diffusion Processes and Fertility Transition: Selected Perspectives |url=https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK223858/ |access-date=2024-02-21 |publisher=National Academies Press (US) |language=en |last2=Casterline |first2=John B.}}</ref> And while this, today, still primarily concerns ''elite'' [[population decline]], as some find highly deleterious in itself,<ref>{{Cite web |last=Spandrell |date=March 26, 2013 |title=Lee Kuan Yew drains your brains for short term gain |url=https://bloodyshovel.wordpress.com/2013/03/26/lee-kuan-yew-drains-your-brains-for-short-term-gain/ |url-status=dead |archive-url=https://archive.today/20151011212910/https://bloodyshovel.wordpress.com/2013/03/26/lee-kuan-yew-drains-your-brains-for-short-term-gain/#selection-49.0-85.14 |archive-date=11 October 2015 |access-date=February 21, 2024 |website=Bloody shovel}}</ref> the aforementioned modalities of [[positive feedback]] in social diffusion may have Calhoun's empirical predictions apply to a much wider segment of society as well. For one, all this seems to hold up in the case of [[South Korea]]'s unsustainably low [[total fertility rate]], having already led to societal [[Aging of South Korea|aging]] comparable with Calhoun's final cohort. 

Furthermore, an analogous decline in sexual interest and activity has been observed globally,<ref>{{Cite journal |last1=South |first1=Scott J. |last2=Lei |first2=Lei |date=January 2021 |title=Why Are Fewer Young Adults Having Casual Sex? |url=http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/2378023121996854 |journal=Socius: Sociological Research for a Dynamic World |language=en |volume=7 |pages=237802312199685 |doi=10.1177/2378023121996854 |issn=2378-0231|doi-access=free }}</ref> in particular as a function of [[Socioeconomic status|socio-economic status]] and gender.<ref>{{Cite journal |last1=Beutel |first1=Manfred E. |last2=Burghardt |first2=Juliane |last3=Tibubos |first3=Ana N. |last4=Klein |first4=Eva M. |last5=Schmutzer |first5=Gabriele |last6=Brähler |first6=Elmar |date=2018-05-01 |title=Declining Sexual Activity and Desire in Men—Findings From Representative German Surveys, 2005 and 2016 |url=https://academic.oup.com/jsm/article/15/5/750/6980507 |journal=The Journal of Sexual Medicine |language=en |volume=15 |issue=5 |pages=750–756 |doi=10.1016/j.jsxm.2018.03.010 |pmid=29699759 |issn=1743-6109}}</ref>

== See also ==
* [[Proxemics]]
* [[Decadence]]
* [[Population decline]]
* [[Overpopulation]]
* [[Dysgenics]]
* [[Welfare state]]
* [[Hikikomori]]
* [[Incel]]
* [[Tang ping]]
* [[Rat Park]]
* ''[[Mrs. Frisby and the Rats of NIMH]]''
* ''[[Stand on Zanzibar]]''

== References ==
{{reflist}}

==External links==
*Fessenden, Marissa 2015, [https://web.archive.org/web/20200614091127/https://www.smithsonianmag.com/smart-news/how-mouse-utopias-1960s-led-grim-predictions-humans-180954423/ How 1960s Mouse Utopias Led to Grim Predictions for Future of Humanity], ''Smithsonian Magazine''.
*[https://web.archive.org/web/20200614090726/https://www.victorpest.com/articles/what-humans-can-learn-from-calhouns-rodent-utopia What Humans Can Learn From Calhoun's Rodent Utopia], ''Victor''.
*National Library of Medicine (2018). [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iOFveSUmh9U <nowiki>John B. Calhoun Film 7.1 [edited], (NIMH, 1970-1972)</nowiki>]
*Gwamanda, Paul (May 14, 2021). [https://paul-gwamanda.medium.com/behavioral-sink-the-overpopulation-experiments-of-john-b-calhoun-fa501a03d4d3 ''Behavioral Sink: The Overpopulation Experiments Of John B. Calhoun.''] 
*Adams, J. & Ramsden, E. (2017). [https://medicineonscreen.nlm.nih.gov/2017/12/22/john-b-calhoun-film-7-1/ ''The Falls of 1972: John B Calhoun and Urban Pessimism.''] 
*APEX (4 January 2021). [https://apexsnotes.substack.com/p/oversocialization-an-introduction ''Oversocialization: An Introduction How Socialization Goes Awry and The Jekyll/Hyde Case of Credentials.''] 
*Wiles, Will (2011). [https://www.cabinetmagazine.org/issues/42/wiles.php THE BEHAVIORAL SINK: The mouse universes of John B. Calhoun.] ''Forgetting'', Issue 42. 

{{Ethology}}

[[Category:Crowd psychology]]
[[Category:Ethology]]
[[Category:Population ecology]]
[[Category:1962 introductions]][[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Pages]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]