{{Short description|Expected reproductive success}}

'''Fitness''' (often denoted '''<math>w</math>''' or '''ω''' in [[population genetics]] models) is the [[Numerical data|quantitative]] representation of individual [[reproductive success]]. It is also equal to the average contribution to the [[gene pool]] of the next generation, made by the same individuals of the specified genotype or phenotype. Fitness can be defined either with respect to a [[genotype]] or to a [[phenotype]] in a given environment or time. The fitness of a genotype is manifested through its phenotype, which is also affected by the developmental environment. The fitness of a given phenotype can also be different in different selective environments.<ref name=":0">https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fitness_(biology)&oldid=1104734578</ref>

With [[asexual reproduction]], it is sufficient to assign fitnesses to genotypes. With [[sexual reproduction]], recombination scrambles [[allele]]s into different genotypes every generation; In this case, fitness values can be assigned to [[allele]]s by averaging over possible genetic backgrounds. Natural selection tends to make [[allele]]s with higher fitness more common over time, resulting in [[Darwinism|Darwinian]] evolution.<ref name=":0" />

The term "Darwinian fitness" can be used to make clear the distinction with [[physical fitness]].<ref name=":0" /><ref>Wassersug, J. D., and R. J. Wassersug, 1986. Fitness fallacies. Natural History 3:34–37.</ref> Fitness does not include a measure of survival or life-span; Herbert Spencer's  well-known phrase "[[survival of the fittest]]" should be interpreted as: "Survival of the form (phenotypic or genotypic) that will leave the most copies of itself in successive generations."<ref name=":0" />

[[Inclusive fitness]] differs from individual fitness by including the ability of an allele in one individual to promote the survival and/or reproduction of other individuals that share that allele, in preference to individuals with a different allele. One mechanism of inclusive fitness is [[kin selection]].<ref name=":0" />

[[Spiritual fitness]] is considered a related concept

== References ==

[[Category:Biology]]
[[Category:Genetics]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]
[[sn:Biological fitness]][[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Pages]]