The competence-performance distinction is a fundamental concept in psychology and linguistics that refers to the difference between an individual's underlying abilities and the actual manifestation of those abilities in behavior or performance. The distinction is important because it helps to explain why individuals may appear to be competent in certain areas, but their performance may not reflect their full potential.<ref name=":0">ChatGPT</ref>

Competence refers to an individual's potential to perform a certain task or action, and it includes their knowledge, skills, and cognitive abilities. Competence is considered to be relatively stable and unaffected by temporary factors such as motivation, attention, or anxiety. In other words, competence is a measure of what someone knows how to do, regardless of their current state.<ref name=":0" />

Performance, on the other hand, is the observable manifestation of an individual's competence in a specific situation. Performance is influenced by various factors, including motivation, attention, anxiety, and environmental conditions, and can be subject to variability. In other words, performance is a measure of what someone actually does in a specific situation.<ref name=":0" />

The competence-performance distinction is relevant in many areas of study, including education, psychology, and linguistics. In education, the distinction is important because it highlights the need to assess an individual's competence, rather than their performance, to determine their true potential. In psychology, the distinction is relevant in the study of personality and individual differences, as well as in the assessment and treatment of various psychological disorders. In linguistics, the distinction is important because it helps to explain why an individual may be competent in a language, but their performance in a specific situation may not reflect their full potential.<ref name=":0" />

The competence-performance distinction is also important for the development of assessment and evaluation tools. In order to accurately assess an individual's competence, assessments must be designed to measure their underlying abilities, rather than their performance in a specific situation.<ref name=":0" />

In conclusion, the competence-performance distinction is a fundamental concept that helps to explain why an individual's abilities may not always be reflected in their performance. Understanding the distinction is important for various areas of study and for the development of accurate assessment and evaluation tools.<ref name=":0" />

== Sources ==
Paper talking about it<ref>[https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/0022027870190503?journalCode=tcus20#:~:text=The%20competence%2Dperformance%20distinction%20was,(linguistic)%20acts%20or%20performances. https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/0022027870190503?journalCode=tcus20#:~:text=The%20competence%2Dperformance%20distinction%20was,(linguistic)%20acts%20or%20performances.]</ref>

[[Vervaeke]] references<ref>https://www.meaningcrisis.co/ep-40-awakening-from-the-meaning-crisis-wisdom-and-rationality/</ref><ref>https://www.meaningcrisis.co/ep-41-awakening-from-the-meaning-crisis-what-is-rationality/</ref>

	
Sources to add<ref>[https://psychology.iresearchnet.com/developmental-psychology/education-and-learning/competence-versus-performance/#:~:text=The%20concept%20of%20competence%20versus,they%20actually%20know%20(competence). https://psychology.iresearchnet.com/developmental-psychology/education-and-learning/competence-versus-performance/#:~:text=The%20concept%20of%20competence%20versus,they%20actually%20know%20(competence).]</ref><ref>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/0022027870190503</ref><ref>https://www.jstor.org/stable/20115325</ref><ref>https://www.psychologyinaction.org/psychology-in-action-1/2011/04/15/competence-vs-performance</ref><ref>http://cognitive-science.at/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/2008_The_Competence_Performance_Distinction_and_It%E2%80%99s_Implications_for_Teacher_Education_and_Training.pdf</ref><ref>https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/004839317900900301?icid=int.sj-abstract.similar-articles.2</ref><ref>https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/BF00869555</ref><ref>https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/BF00869555.pdf</ref><ref>https://philpapers.org/rec/KAUTCD</ref><ref>https://philpapers.org/rec/NELTCD</ref>

==References==
<references />
[[Category:John Vervaeke]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]
[[sn:Competence performance distinction]][[Category:Psychology]]
[[Category:Cognition]]
[[Category:Stubs]][[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Pages]]