Coronation is the rite of entering the [[alpha covenant]] proper, sometimes seen as becoming a proper [[noble]].

No coronations have been done yet, although [[Immanuelle Leonhart|Immanuelle]] is considered eligible for a coronation 

== Introduction ==
Coronation is a central rite of Lifeism. It is a rite where after heavy vetting to determine whether someone has made a Protean transformation in adulthood (taken [[Kairos]]) and if they have they may be crowned. The ceremony itself has influences from coronation rites all across the world, particularly the [[Enthronement of the Japanese emperor]], the [[Coronation of the British monarch]], and the [[Coronation of the pharaoh]].  

== Psychological and mythopoetic background ==
{{Main|Ennoblement}}
Coronation is awarded to someone who has achieved their second evolution (sometimes other numbers depending on how its counted), it is awarded almost exclusively to people 25+ because the coronation evolution represents a shift in mode of adulthood, while other evolutions such as the puberty evolution represent different transitions. Resolving a [[quarter-life crisis]] is seen as the archetypal coronation evolution. 

It is usually seen as coming after a [[Dark Night of the Soul]]

== Stages of Development == 
{{Main article|Covenants}}

People progress through four stages of development: childhood (or the outer darkness), Telestial the stage of love, Terrestrial the stage of transformation, and finally Celestial the stage of creativity. Coronation represents reaching the Celestial stage and being able to act on divine creativity for the first time.

== Symbolism ==
The rite actively juxtaposes symbols of royalty in several cultures such as the [[Benkan]] and the [[Seven-Branched Sword]] and the European anointment with oil and European chivalric robes. Crowned members are considered knights of the Order of Life and given such chivalric garb for [[white tie]] events. Most members are unfamiliar with white tie before learning about it in this context

== Second and onward coronations ==
It can be performed multiple times in someone's life if they have made major accomplishments. Most notably entering elected office 

== Heraldry and Genealogy ==
{{Main|Commandment Alpha Omega}}
All crowned individuals are given coats of arms based on Evolutionist heraldry, and will have their genealogies linked to descent from antiquity and the Gaiad, alongside a high level of genetic testing to establish their strengths and weaknesses

== Rights obtained by coronation ==
{{Main|Crowned Nobles}}
Coronation gives one the right to participate in Celestial marriage, and the right to vote in Church proceedings and serve on an ecclesiastical jury, and the right to become a priest. As such it is necessary to teach at an Evolutionist school because teachers are priests.

== See Also ==

* [[Commandment Alpha Omega]]
* [[Crowned Noble]]

[[Category:Alpha Covenant]]
[[sn:Coronation]][[Category:Ancestor Worship]]
[[sn:Coronation]][[Category:Ancestors]]
[[Category:Coronation]]
[[sn:Coronation]][[sn:Coronation]][[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Pages]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]