{{More citations needed|date=May 2017}}
'''Deradicalization''' refers to a process of encouraging a person with extreme political, social or religious views to adopt more moderate positions on the issues.<ref>{{cite web|title=Deradicalization Definition und Bedeutung {{!}} Collins Wörterbuch|url=https://www.collinsdictionary.com/de/worterbuch/englisch/deradicalization|website=www.collinsdictionary.com|access-date=23 May 2017|language=de}}</ref><ref>{{cite web|title=deradicalization - definition of deradicalization in English {{!}} Oxford Dictionaries|url=https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/deradicalization|website=Oxford Dictionaries {{!}} English|access-date=23 May 2017}}{{dead link|date=September 2022|bot=medic}}{{cbignore|bot=medic}}</ref>

==Measures and projects==
{{Expand section|date=May 2017}}
Google's think tank [[Jigsaw (company)|Jigsaw]] has been developing a new program − called the Redirect Method − in which Google's search advertising algorithms and YouTube's video platform are used to target aspiring [[ISIS]] recruits and ultimately dissuade them from joining the group.<ref name=google>{{cite magazine|last1=Greenberg|first1=Andy|title=Google's Clever Plan to Stop Aspiring ISIS Recruits|magazine=Wired|url=https://www.wired.com/2016/09/googles-clever-plan-stop-aspiring-isis-recruits/|publisher=WIRED|access-date=23 May 2017|date=2016-09-07}}</ref>

[[Machine learning]] and [[scientific inquiry]] can be used to find the most effective contents (such as videos) for deradicalization, to learn why people leave terrorist movements and to identify aspiring violent radicals.

Humera Khan, executive director of the Islamic deradicalization group Muflehu, states that deradicalization also needs human interaction and a supportive community backing up the person's decision to turn away from extremism.<ref name=google/>

Renee Garfinkel also notes that personal relationships play a major role in the transformation of involvement in violence to non-violent activity, saying "change often hinges on a relationship with a mentor or friend who supports and affirms peaceful behavior".<ref>{{cite journal|last1=Horgan|first1=John|title=Deradicalization or Disengagement?|issue=4|url=http://www.terrorismanalysts.com/pt/index.php/pot/article/view/32/html|journal=Perspectives on Terrorism|volume=2|access-date=23 May 2017|date=19 November 2010}}</ref>

Many nations and universities are engaging in deradicalization efforts.<ref name=wash1/><ref name=wired1>{{cite magazine|last1=Koerner|first1=Brendan I.|title=A Judge May Send Men Guilty of Terrorism to Anti-Extremism Therapy Instead of Prison|magazine=Wired|url=https://www.wired.com/2016/11/u-s-judge-may-sentence-wannabe-terrorists-deradicalization/|publisher=WIRED|access-date=23 May 2017|date=2016-11-13}}</ref><ref>{{cite news|last1=Koehler|first1=Daniel|title=The NYC Bombing Highlights Our Urgent Need for Deradicalization Programs|url=http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/nyc-bombing-deradicalization-programs_us_57e00bfee4b04a1497b5a1d5|work=Huffington Post|access-date=23 May 2017|date=22 September 2016}}</ref>

== Deradicalization programmes in Western Europe ==
Multiple Western Europe countries have implemented deradicalization programs in a variety of forms, specifically after September 11, 2001.<ref name=":0">{{Cite journal|last1=Samaan|first1=Jean-Loup|last2=Jacobs|first2=Andreas|date=7 February 2018|title=Countering Jihadist Terrorism: A Comparative Analysis of French and German Experiences|journal=Terrorism and Political Violence|volume=32|issue=2|pages=401–415|doi=10.1080/09546553.2017.1415891|s2cid=149040793}}</ref> In more recent years, some countries saw a drastic  increases in the number of jihadists attacks, especially France. In September 2016, France opened its first deradicalization centre in Pontourny. The original plan was to have the Pontourny center the first of multiple in the country, however, the Pontourny centre turned out to be failure. Less than a year after it opened, the deradicalization centre in Pontourny had no residents.<ref name=":0" />  Spain launched its prison deradicalization program for jihadists in 2016, and suspended it in 2022, as only four inmates had signed up for it.<ref>{{cite news |author1=Enrique Recio |title=Interior cancela el programa para desradicalizar yihadistas en prisión tras su fracaso |url=https://theobjective.com/espana/2022-11-07/interior-programa-yihadistas/ |access-date=7 November 2022 |work=[[The Objective (journal)|The Objective]] |date=7 November 2022 |language=es}}</ref>

==Criticism==
Sociologist Gérald Bronner calls the notion of "deradicalization" flawed, saying "It means that you can take an idea or a belief out of the brain, and I think that’s just impossible" and instead suggests "not a kind of mental manipulation but the opposite — mind liberation, a strengthening of their intellectual immune systems".<ref name=wash1>{{cite news|title=France to open first of 12 'deradicalization' centers for at-risk youths|url=https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/europe/france-to-open-first-of-12-deradicalization-centers-for-at-risk-youths/2016/09/14/d596d7fe-7a78-11e6-8064-c1ddc8a724bb_story.html|newspaper=Washington Post|access-date=23 May 2017}}</ref>

One study found that Islamic State supporters responded to counter-radicalization efforts by censoring expression of pro-IS views and moving their activity from public social media to Telegram, a non publicly viewable medium.<ref>{{cite journal |last1=Mitts |first1=Tamar |title=Countering Violent Extremism and Radical Rhetoric |journal=International Organization |date=2021 |volume=76 |pages=251–272 |doi=10.1017/S0020818321000242 |s2cid=235560623 |url= |issn=0020-8183}}</ref>

==Relationship with Lifeism==

[[The Church]] has criticized many [[deradicalization]] attempts as failing to provide people the necessary community to live after extremism. The Church also offers a means for proper deradicalization and integration.

==See also==
* [[Global Community Engagement and Resilience Fund]]
* [[Targeted advertising]]
* [[Filter bubble]]
* [[Education in the Middle East and North Africa]]

== Bibliography ==

* Ramakrishna, Kumar. Extremist Islam: Recognition and Response in Southeast Asia. United States, Oxford University Press, 2022.

==References==
{{reflist}}

[[Category:Counterterrorism]]
[[Category:Propaganda]]
[[Category:Prevention]]
[[Category:Radicalization]][[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Pages]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]