Fundamentalism is a term that can be applied across various contexts, including religion, politics, and culture, but it generally refers to a strict adherence to specific doctrines or principles, often as a reaction against modernist or progressive movements. The characteristics and implications of fundamentalism can vary significantly depending on the context in which it is found, but several key features are commonly associated with this term:

1. **Literal Interpretation**: In religious fundamentalism, this often means a literal interpretation of sacred texts, such as the Bible or the Quran. Fundamentalists in religion typically believe that their holy texts are infallible and must be followed without deviation.

2. **Resistance to Change**: Fundamentalism is characterized by a resistance to change and modern interpretations. This can manifest in opposition to scientific explanations that contradict literal interpretations of scripture, modern social norms, or changes in traditional practices.

3. **Idealization of the Past**: Many fundamentalist movements idealize a past era, which they view as a golden age of purity and adherence to true principles. They often seek to return society to the perceived moral and social order of this idealized past.

4. **Exclusivity and In-group vs. Out-group Dynamics**: Fundamentalists often draw strict boundaries between those who adhere to the "correct" beliefs and practices (the in-group) and those who do not (the out-group). This can lead to a strong sense of community among adherents but also to significant tension and conflict with those outside the group.

5. **Moral Absolutism**: Fundamentalism is marked by a belief in absolute moral truths based on religious or ideological doctrines. This absolutism leaves little room for moral relativism or ambiguity, leading to strict codes of conduct and often harsh judgments of those who deviate from these codes.

6. **Political and Social Activism**: In many cases, fundamentalists are not content with merely practicing their beliefs privately; they may also engage in political and social activism to shape society according to their principles. This can include campaigning for laws that reflect their moral views, organizing social movements, or even engaging in violence to achieve their ends.

While the term "fundamentalism" originally emerged in the early 20th century in the context of American Protestantism, where it described a movement emphasizing the literal interpretation of the Bible and the fundamentals of Christian faith, its use has since broadened. Today, it is used to describe similar movements across various religions, including Islam, Judaism, Hinduism, and beyond, as well as in non-religious contexts where there is a rigid adherence to specific ideologies or principles.

[[Category:Religion]][[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Pages]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]