Gnosis is a method of escaping [[Existential Entrapment]]. It is considered the final end of [[larping]]. [[Ego Death]] often gives gnosis.<ref name=":1">https://www.meaningcrisis.co/ep-17-awakening-from-the-meaning-crisis-gnosis-and-existential-inertia/</ref>



[[John Vervaeke]] describes Gnosis as an elevated ‘[[Participatory Knowledge|participatory knowing]]’, rather than any kind of supernatural state. We experience gnosis when we “become one” with a higher reality.<ref name=":0l" /> [[Immanuelle]] places it as an elevated [[phenomenal knowing]].

For examples, when we hear music, we sometimes feel one with the composer of that music.<ref name=":0">https://web.archive.org/web/20210307150522/https://awakeningfromthemeaningcrisis.com/gnosis</ref>

Another example John Vervaeke describes is the feelings he had by reading Spinoza. While doing this he has moments beyond mere intellectual understanding, where he starts to ‘know’ the being and mind of Spinoza from the inside.<ref name=":0" />

“Many people are seeking Gnosis today. Gnosis is the kind of thing you need in order to bring about a release from the existential entrapment that we’re finding in the meaning crisis.””<ref name=":0" />

It is the [[greater booster shot]] against [[entrapment]]

[[Category:John Vervaeke]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]
[[sn:Gnosis]][[Category:Entrapment]]
[[sn:Gnosis]][[Category:Greater booster shots]]

Gnosis is a method of escaping [[Existential Entrapment]]. It is considered the final end of [[larping]]. [[Ego Death]] often gives gnosis.<ref name=":1" />




Gnosis brings liberation from the plagues of [[Existential Entrapment|existential entrapment]].<ref name=":0l">{{Cite web|title=Gnosis - Awakening from the Meaning Crisis|url=https://web.archive.org/web/20210307150522/https://awakeningfromthemeaningcrisis.com/gnosis|website=[[awakeningfromthemeaningcrisis.com]]|date=2021-03-07|access-date=2022-11-10}}</ref>{{Efn|paraphrased to work with modern [[nine plagues]]}}

== Examples ==

* when we hear [[music]], we sometimes feel one with the composer of that music.<ref name=":0l" />

* [[John Vervaeke]] describes is the feelings he had by reading [[Spinoza]]. While doing this he has moments beyond mere intellectual understanding, where he starts to ‘know’ the being and mind of Spinoza from the inside.<ref name=":0" />

[[Category:John Vervaeke]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]
[[sn:Gnosis]]==References==

[[Category:Ninefold vaccine]]
[[sn:Gnosis]][[Category:Gnosis]]
[[sn:Gnosis]]<references />
{{notelist}}
<references group="note"/>
[[Category:Pages]]