{{short description|American philosopher (born 1968)}}
{{Infobox philosopher
| image = Graham Harman at MACBA.jpg
| caption = Graham Harman
| region           = [[Western philosophy]]
| era              = [[Contemporary philosophy]]
| name             = Graham Harman
| birth_date       = {{Birth date and age|1968|5|9}}
| birth_place      = [[Iowa City]], [[Iowa]]
| nationality      = [[Americans|American]]
| alma_mater       = [[DePaul University]] (PhD, 1999)<ref>{{Cite web |url=http://www.aucegypt.edu/fac/graham |title=Graham – The American University in Cairo |access-date=2016-04-05 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20160426035512/http://www.aucegypt.edu/fac/graham |archive-date=2016-04-26 |url-status=dead }}</ref>
| school_tradition = [[Continental philosophy]]<br />[[Speculative realism]]<br />[[object-oriented ontology]]
| main_interests   = [[Metaphysics]]
| notable_ideas    = [[Object-oriented ontology]], vicarious causation
| influences       = [[Socrates]], [[Aristotle]], [[Immanuel Kant]], [[Alfred North Whitehead]], [[Martin Heidegger]], [[Edmund Husserl]], [[Bruno Latour]], [[Xavier Zubiri]] 
| influenced       = [[Steven Shaviro]],<ref>Levi Bryant, Nick Srnicek, Graham Harman (eds.), [https://books.google.com/books?id=coBDqJQeAQYC&dq= ''The Speculative Turn: Continental Materialism and Realism''], repress, 2011, p. 279.</ref> [[Levi Bryant]], [[Timothy Morton]]
| institutions     =  [[American University in Cairo]]<br />[[Southern California Institute of Architecture]]
| thesis_title     = Tool-being: Elements in a Theory of Objects
| thesis_year      = 1999
| thesis_url       = https://www.learntechlib.org/p/123532/
| doctoral_advisor = [[William McNeill (philosopher)|William McNeill]]
}}

'''Graham Harman''' (born May 9, 1968) is an American [[philosopher]]. He is Distinguished Professor of Philosophy at the [[Southern California Institute of Architecture]] in Los Angeles.<ref>{{Cite web|url=https://sciarc.edu/news/2016/philosopher-graham-harman-to-join-sci-arc/|title = Philosopher Graham Harman to Join SCI-Arc - SCI-Arc}}</ref> His work on the [[metaphysics]] of objects led to the development of [[object-oriented ontology]]. He is a central figure in the [[speculative realism]] trend in contemporary philosophy.<ref>[http://www.urbanomic.com/Publications/Collapse-3/PDFs/C3_Spec_Real.pdf Brassier, Ray, Iain Hamilton Grant, Graham Harman, and Quentin Meillassoux. 2007. "Speculative Realism" in ''Collapse III: Unknown Deleuze''. London: Urbanomic.] {{webarchive|url=https://web.archive.org/web/20110519231522/http://www.urbanomic.com/Publications/Collapse-3/PDFs/C3_Spec_Real.pdf |date=2011-05-19 }}</ref>

==Biography==
Harman was born in [[Iowa City]] and raised in [[Mount Vernon, Iowa]]. His maternal grandparents were of [[Luxembourgers|Luxembourgian]] and [[Czechs|Czech]] descent.<ref>{{Cite web |date=2006-12-29 |title=The Gazette from Cedar Rapids, Iowa |url=https://www.newspapers.com/newspage/549614375/ |access-date=2023-06-26 |website=Newspapers.com |language=en}}</ref><ref>{{Cite web |last=Feiereisen |date=1920 |title=United States Census, 1920 |url=https://www.familysearch.org/ark:/61903/1:1:M81V-HLG |website=FamilySearch}}</ref><ref>{{Cite web |last=Zitek |date=1930 |title=United States Census, 1930 |url=https://www.familysearch.org/ark:/61903/1:1:XMJB-LY8 |website=FamilySearch}}</ref> He received a B.A. from [[St. John's College (Annapolis/Santa Fe)|St. John's College]] in [[Annapolis, Maryland]] in 1990 and went on to graduate school at [[Penn State University]] to earn a master's degree, studying under philosopher [[Alphonso Lingis]], in 1991. While pursuing a Ph.D. at [[DePaul University]], Harman worked as an online sports reporter, an experience which he credits for developing his writing style and productivity. After finishing his degree in 1999 he joined the Department of Philosophy at the American University in Cairo, where he taught from 2000-2016, leaving at the rank of Distinguished University Professor.<ref>{{cite web|author=Paul J. Ennis |url=http://anotherheideggerblog.blogspot.com/2009/07/interview-with-graham-harman.html |title=ahb: Interview with Graham Harman |publisher=Anotherheideggerblog.blogspot.com |date=2009-07-21 |access-date=2011-09-21}}</ref><ref>{{cite web |url=http://www.aucegypt.edu/fac/profiles/pages/harmangraham.aspx |title=Archived copy |access-date=2010-12-23 |url-status=dead |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20101223154834/http://www.aucegypt.edu/fac/Profiles/Pages/HarmanGraham.aspx |archive-date=2010-12-23 }}</ref> He has also been a visiting faculty member at the [[University of Amsterdam]], [[University of Innsbruck]], [[University of Turin]], and [[Yale University]]. Since 2013 he has been a faculty member at the [[European Graduate School]].<ref>{{Cite web|url=https://egs.edu/faculty/graham-harman|title = Graham Harman}}</ref>

==Philosophical work==
Harman starts the development of his work with [[Martin Heidegger]]'s concept of "tool-analysis" from ''[[Being and Time]]''. To Harman, tool-analysis was a key discovery which establishes the groundwork for taking seriously the autonomous existence of objects and, in doing so, highlights deficiencies in [[phenomenology (philosophy)|phenomenology]] due to its subordination of objects to their use by or relationship with humans.

Harman is considered part of the [[speculative realism]] trend, a nebulous grouping of philosophers united by two perspectives: a rejection of [[anthropocentrism|anthropocentric]] "philosophies of access" which privilege the perspective of humans in relation to objects, and a support of [[metaphysical realism]] via rejection of "correlationism", an assumption in [[Post-Kantian philosophy]] that fellow speculative realist [[Quentin Meillassoux]] defines as "the idea according to which we only ever have access to the correlation between thinking and being, and never to either term considered apart from the other."<ref>Quentin Meillassoux, ''After Finitude'', 5.</ref> Harman's object-oriented approach considers the life of objects to be fertile ground for a metaphysics that works to overcome anthropocentrism and correlationism.

According to Harman, everything is an object, whether it be a mailbox, a [[shadow]], [[spacetime]], a fictional character, or the [[Commonwealth of Nations]]. However, drawing on [[Phenomenology (philosophy)|phenomenology]], he does distinguish between two categories of objects: real objects and sensual objects (or [[intentional object]]s), which sets his philosophy apart from the flat ontology of [[Bruno Latour]].<ref>Harman, G. (2009) [http://www.re-press.org/book-files/OA_Version_780980544060_Prince_of_Networks.pdf Prince of Networks: Bruno Latour and Metaphysics. Melbourne: re.press.]</ref>

Harman defines real objects as inaccessible and infinitely withdrawn from all relations and then puzzles over how such objects can be accessed or enter into relations: "by definition, there is no direct access to real objects. Real objects are incommensurable with our knowledge, untranslatable into any relational access of any sort, cognitive or otherwise. Objects can only be known indirectly. And this is not just the fate of humans — it’s the fate of everything."<ref name="skepoet">{{cite web|url=http://skepoet.wordpress.com/2012/06/01/marginalia-on-radical-thinking-an-interview-with-graham-harman/|title=Marginalia on Radical Thinking: An Interview with Graham Harman|date=1 June 2012|author=El Mono Liso|work=The (Dis)Loyal Opposition to Modernity|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20140716094547/http://skepoet.wordpress.com/2012/06/01/marginalia-on-radical-thinking-an-interview-with-graham-harman/|archive-date=2014-07-16|url-status=unfit}}</ref>

Central to Harman's philosophy is the idea that real objects are inexhaustible: "A police officer eating a banana reduces this fruit to a present-at-hand profile of its elusive depth, as do a monkey eating the same banana, a parasite infecting it, or a gust of wind blowing it from a tree. Banana-being is a genuine reality in the world, a reality never exhausted by any relation to it by humans or other entities." (Harman 2005: 74). Because of this inexhaustibility, claims Harman, there is a metaphysical problem regarding how two objects can ever interact. His solution is to introduce the notion of "vicarious causation", according to which objects can only ever interact on the inside of an "intention" (which is also an object).<ref>{{Cite web |url=http://faculty.virginia.edu/theorygroup/docs/harman=vicarious-causation.pdf |title=Archived copy |access-date=2012-03-07 |archive-date=2016-03-03 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20160303233346/http://faculty.virginia.edu/theorygroup/docs/harman=vicarious-causation.pdf |url-status=dead }}</ref>

Cutting across the phenomenological tradition, and especially its [[linguistic turn]], Harman deploys a brand of metaphysical realism that attempts to extricate objects from their human captivity and metaphorically allude to a strange subterranean world of "vacuum-sealed" objects-in-themselves: "The comet itself, the monkey itself, Coca-Cola itself, resonate in cellars of being where no relation reaches."<ref>{{Cite web |url=https://www.scribd.com/doc/27861685/Harm-an-Graham |title=Harm an Graham |access-date=2017-09-09 |archive-date=2010-03-24 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20100324034139/http://www.scribd.com/doc/27861685/Harm-an-Graham |url-status=dead }}</ref>

Strongly sympathetic to [[panpsychism]], Harman proposes a new philosophical discipline called "speculative psychology" dedicated to investigating the "cosmic layers of psyche" and "ferreting out the specific psychic reality of earthworms, dust, armies, chalk, and stone."<ref>Graham Harman, ''Prince of Networks'', 213.</ref> Harman does not, however, unreservedly endorse an all-encompassing panpsychism and instead proposes a sort of 'polypsychism' that nonetheless must "balloon beyond all previous limits, but without quite extending to all entities".<ref name="quadruple">Graham Harman 2011, ''The Quadruple Object''</ref> He continues by stating that "perceiving" and "non-perceiving" are not different kinds of objects, but can be found in the same entity at different times:  "The important point is that objects do not perceive insofar as they exist, as panpsychism proclaims. Instead they perceive insofar as they relate."<ref name="quadruple"/>

Harman rejects [[scientism]] on account of its [[anthropocentrism]]: "For them, raindrops know nothing and lizards know very little, and some humans are more knowledgeable than others."<ref>{{Cite web|url=http://ecologywithoutnature.blogspot.com/2011/10/harman-on-anthropocentrism.html|title = ECOLOGY WITHOUT NATURE: Harman on Anthropocentrism|date = 17 October 2011}}</ref>

==Bibliography==
===Authored works===
* 2002. ''Tool-Being: Heidegger and the Metaphysics of Objects'' ([[Open Court Publishing]])
* 2005. ''Guerrilla Metaphysics: Phenomenology and the Carpentry of Things'' (Open Court Publishing)
* 2007. ''Heidegger Explained: From Phenomenon to Thing'' (Open Court Publishing)
* 2009. [http://www.re-press.org/book-files/OA_Version_780980544060_Prince_of_Networks.pdf ''Prince of Networks: Bruno Latour and Metaphysics''] ([[re.press]])
* 2010. ''Towards Speculative Realism: Essays and Lectures'' ([[John Hunt Publishing|Zero Books]])
* 2010. ''Circus Philosophicus'' ([[John Hunt Publishing|Zero Books]])
* 2010. ''L'objet quadruple'' ([[Presses Universitaires de France]]; republished in English as ''The Quadruple Object'', 2011, Zero Books).   
* 2011. ''The Prince and the Wolf: Latour and Harman at the LSE'' (Zero Books, with [[Bruno Latour]] and Peter Erdélyi)
* 2011. ''Quentin Meillassoux: Philosophy in the Making'' ([[Edinburgh University Press]])
* 2012. ''Weird Realism: Lovecraft and Philosophy'' (Zero Books) 
* 2013. ''Bells and Whistles: More Speculative Realism'' (Zero Books)
* 2014. ''Bruno Latour: Reassembling the Political'' ([[Pluto Press]])  
* 2016. ''Immaterialism: Objects and Social Theory'' ([[Polity Press]])  
* 2016. ''Dante's Broken Hammer: The Ethics, Aesthetics, and Metaphysics of Love'' ([[Repeater Books]])  
* 2017. ''The Rise of Realism'' (Polity Press, with [[Manuel DeLanda]]) 
* 2018. ''Object-Oriented Ontology: A New Theory of Everything'' ([[Pelican Books]])  
* 2018. ''Speculative Realism: An Introduction'' (Polity Press)
* 2020. ''Art and Objects'' (Polity Press)
* 2020. ''Is There an Object-Oriented Architecture? Engaging Graham Harman ([[Bloomsbury]])
* 2020. [https://library.oapen.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.12657/43001/0293.1.00.pdf ''Skirmishes: With Friends, Enemies, and Neutrals''] ([[Punctum Books]])
* 2021. ''Artful Objects: Graham Harman on Art and the Business of Speculative Realism'' ([[Sternberg Press]])
* 2022. ''Architecture and Objects'' ([[University of Minnesota Press]])
* 2023. ''The Graham Harman Reader'' (Zero Books, edited by Jon Cogburn & Niki Young)
* 2023. ''Objects Untimely: Object-Oriented Philosophy and Archaeology'' (Polity Press, with [[Christopher Witmore]])

===Edited works===
* [http://www.re-press.org/book-files/OA_Version_Speculative_Turn_9780980668346.pdf ''The Speculative Turn: Continental Materialism and Realism''] (2011, re.press, with co-editors Levi Bryant and Nick Srnicek)
* Editor of the "Speculative Realism" series, published by Edinburgh University Press
* Co-editor of the "New Metaphysics" series, with Bruno Latour, published by [[Open Humanities Press]]
* Editor-in-Chief of ''Open Philosophy'', published by [[De Gruyter]]

==See also==
{{Portal|Biography}}
* [[Speculative Realism]]
* [[Object-oriented ontology]]
* [[Ian Bogost]]
* [[Levi Bryant]]
* [[Timothy Morton]]

==References==
{{Reflist}}

==External links==
* [https://sciarc.edu/people/faculty/graham-harman/ New home page 2016 at Southern California Institute of Architecture (SCI-Arc)]
* [https://web.archive.org/web/20150630122920/http://www.aucegypt.edu/fac/grahamharman Home page 2016 at the American University in Cairo (AUC)] and [https://web.archive.org/web/20130810114850/http://www.aucegypt.edu/fac/profiles/pages/harmangraham.aspx versions (with a few extra links) at an older URL]
* [http://doctorzamalek2.wordpress.com/ Object-Oriented Philosophy]
* [https://web.archive.org/web/20080820113031/http://www.anthem-group.net/category/graham-harman/ numerous posts and links of Harman's talks, abstracts etc.]
* [https://web.archive.org/web/20110511025031/http://anthem-group.net/graham-harman-audio/ Audio recordings of Harman's talks]
* [https://web.archive.org/web/20080830073306/http://www.frieze.com/comment/article/clearing_the_air1 Frieze on Graham Harman]
* [https://web.archive.org/web/20080129111238/http://blog.urbanomic.com/urbanomic/ Webpage for ''Collapse'' journal featuring contributions by Graham Harman and other "speculative realists"]
* [http://speculativeheresy.wordpress.com/resources/ 16 unpublished articles]
* [https://archive.today/20130131151420/http://www.omaha.com/article/20110105/NEWS01/701059931/1087 Robert Nelson: Philosopher]
* [https://web.archive.org/web/20100614001523/http://dar.aucegypt.edu:8080/jspui/handle/10526/253 On the Horror of Phenomenology: Lovecraft and Husserl]
* [http://rwm.macba.cat/en/specials/objecthood1_graham_harman_luciana_parisi/capsula Interview/podcast with Graham Harman (2013)]
* [http://figureground.org/interview-with-graham-harman/ Figure/Ground interview]
* [https://www.academia.edu/36279771/ On the Ontology of Aesthetic Objects: Graham Harman's Dante's Broken Hammer--by Rolando Pérez]
{{Authority control}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:Harman, Graham}}
[[Category:1968 births]]
[[Category:Living people]]
[[Category:DePaul University alumni]]
[[Category:Pennsylvania State University alumni]]
[[Category:Ontologists]]
[[Category:21st-century American philosophers]]
[[Category:Panpsychism]]
[[Category:People from Mount Vernon, Iowa]]
[[Category:American expatriates in Egypt]]
[[Category:American people of Czech descent]]
[[sn:Graham Harman]]
[[Category:Pages]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]