{{Infobox YouTube personality|name=Immanuelle|channel_name=Immanuelle|website=https://evolution.faith|URL=https://www.youtube.com/c/Immanuelle|subscribers=200|subscriber_date=12-25-2022}}Immanuelle made a YouTube channel in 2022. It has many videos on it, most notably the series [[Reacting to the Meaning Crisis]]
__noindex__
== Timeline ==
Immanuelle is pursuing a path of monthly content development goals

Their first video was on April 9 2022 on [[gay mice babies]]<ref>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FitceY9yO0o</ref>. This was before adopting the process

=== August 2022 ===
On August 20, 2022 Immanuelle did the stream "Reacting to Kraut on society meritocracy and clan structures"<ref>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fdx52S6Zc_8</ref> which marked a transition towards streaming reaction content. They then started [[Reacting to the Meaning Crisis]] and completed it rapidly. 

=== September 2022 ===
September 2022 was daily uploads. 

=== October 2022 ===
October 2022 was data driven weekly uploads. Didn't work that well but culminated with an understanding of what content got views

=== November 2022 ===
With the release of the [[A Systems-Oriented Theory of Everything|Lifeism Documentary]] November 2022 will be focusing on developing the [[video path]].

All videos had end cards added to them. The video path was formalized with most videos linking to the [[A Systems-Oriented Theory of Everything|Lifeism Documentary]].

Also working on enhancing visuals with gameplay in a similar way to what was established with the [[A Systems-Oriented Theory of Everything|Lifeism Documentary]] with no gameplay footage and built on with [[Reflecting on the Meaning Crisis]] which reincorporated gameplay footage, this time prerecorded for being visually interesting.{{Original Research}}

=== December 2022 ===
December looks like it will be an attempt to upload a short a day, but I am not visually skilled enough to do it yet. Will attempt to enhance visual skills in November{{Original Research}}

Attempted the [[Catgirl Manifesto]] project for a while but it didn't do well.

Did a few [[whatifalthist]] reactions, and some of them mildly blew up.

Working on being more of a [[vtuber]] than I was before.

== Audience ==
Current audience is unclear. Need to teach the algorithm about it more and explore more

* Likely male or transfem

=== Sub-audiences ===

* future priests
** [[Reacting to the Meaning Crisis]] is aimed at them
** Going down the video chain will filter out these future people, and they can be reached out to and pointed towards 

=== Future ===
In the future my channel will be a lot more generally focused. I can make videos specifically aimed at trans people, women, self improvement, etc now, but in the future it will be more general

* generalize content to all Evolutionists
** Should be kind of like religious MrBeast videos ten years from now
* release technical content on an ecclesiastical channel. 
* Translations of my content should have their versions of Reacting to the Meaning Crisis on an ecclesiastical channel, while only my mainstream MrBeast-esque content in the mainstream
* Make side channels and promote different creators for different audiences
** I am the best person to talk to incels and trans women now, in five years we will have a better creator for this and I can focus on general stuff

== Limiting factors ==

* low amount of impressions
* viewer retention
* ctr debatable (~6%)

== Data driven video ideas ==

* [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r_PfE9LwV_w Karen apocalypse] (3 impressions on nov 8 and 66% ctr)
* [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=37_pz-YNavg Hive Mind] 

== Videos I need to establish concepts ==
I attempted this before but imo the videos were not well made and need to be remade

* [[Evolutionist Politics]]
* [[Why I started Lifeism]]
* [[Importance of family]]

== Future videos which may help ==

* [[How I stopped being an incel|My journey with sex and sexuality]]
[[Category:Immanuelle's Youtube Channel]]
==History==

Started with livestreams. Didn't get many viewers so didn't work but got over a bit of anxiety

In late August started Kraut and whatifalthist reaction and then [[Reacting to the Meaning Crisis]]

On August 30 released [[Why robots will need religion]] which was my first video that was not in the meaning crisis series and it was a minor hit.

In September continued the series and did daily uploads

In October at first tried to do videos based on [[What is the Ritual Music System]], but saw it failed and moved onto imitating [[Intelligence is overrated]]

In November started with the [[A Systems-Oriented Theory of Everything|Lifeism Documentary]] and moved onto developing the [[video path]] so that all the popular videos eventually led to it. 

In mid november made the [[future video series]] and made the intro. Released the intro as a short as [[2014 Gamer Intro]] and found it was a success, so found a way to make successful shorts. 

Released two expected dud videos of [[Reflecting on the Meaning Crisis|Reflecting on the Meaning crisis]]  and [[Making religion customer-centric]], and an unexpected hit of [[Willpower is a trap]]

Released an unexpected dud video of [[Elon Musk wants you to die]], likely that way because it was too current events focused and not philosophically focused enough. However in that video and [[Making religion customer-centric]] I introduced 

Going to make a video called [[Why debate is pointless]] and no expected dud video this week. Unsure which video it will link to. 

In order to complete the planned [[video path]] I will make a video called [[How I stopped being an incel]], 

===Vidiq discord excerpt===

August was streaming, Streaming turned midway through august into streams that were basically reaction videos because I had no live viewers, so I cut them up as reaction videos, then I switched to doing reaction videos proper, then I switched to daily commentary uploads in September (with some reaction videos I had planned already), then I switched to long form lecture style content in October (planned all of october to be that) and saw how badly it tanked and how well one of my commentary videos did, so I spent October with weekly uploads trying to precisely emulate the success of that one video, then I made a long form documentary that was a success at the end of October, then went to commentary and found a video I put no effort into blew up, focused on session time in November, now I'm getting into shorts and think I mastered session time.

===Future plans===

Shorts are doing decent, think I have the hang of what makes a good short, but am not able to consistently make ones that get good view counts
Looking into basically copying the content of [[Beluga]], but with [[Elon Musk wants you to die]] doing well I might want to do more Elon Musk videos and link them into the [[video path]] until they stop getting views, and then pivot to the Beluga stuff

Looking into basically copying the content of [[Beluga]], but with [[Elon Musk wants you to die]] doing well I might want to do more Elon Musk videos and link them into the [[video path]] until they stop getting views, and then pivot to the Beluga stuff

Beluga stuff might be still over my head


Elon Musk video didn’t do very well later so I’m convinced Redditors drove the growth and it didn’t do well with YouTube viewers

== Competitors ==
*[[Exurbia]]
*[[Jreg]]
*[[Adam something]]
*[[kidology]]
*[[Vaush]]
*[[The Power Analysis]]
*[[Luna]]
*[[Lucy Haze]]

==See Also==
* [[videos]]


== References ==
[[Category:Evolutionist Online Infrastructure]]
[[sn:Immanuelle&#39;s YouTube Channel]][[Category:Immanuelle's Youtube Channel]]
[[Category:YouTube]]
[[Category:Pages]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]