{{Hatnote|Not to be confused with [[memes]]}}<!-- start content from Wikipedia
 -->

An '''Internet meme''', more commonly known simply as a '''meme''' (), is an idea, behavior, image, or style that is spread via the Internet, often through social media platforms. What is considered a meme may vary across different communities on the Internet and is subject to change over time. Traditionally, they were a concept or catchphrase, but the concept has since become broader and more multi-faceted, evolving to include more elaborate structures such as challenges, GIFs, videos, and viral sensations.<ref name=":02">https://www.academia.edu/3649116</ref><ref name=":0">https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_meme</ref>

Internet memes are considered a part of Internet culture.<ref name=":02" /><ref name=":0" /> They can spread from person to person via social networks, blogs, direct email, or news sources. Instant communication on the Internet facilitates word of mouth transmission, resulting in fads and sensations that tend to grow rapidly. An example of such a fad is that of planking (lying down in public places); posting a photo of someone planking online brings attention to the fad and allows it to reach many people in little time. The Internet also facilitates the rapid evolution of memes.<ref name=":0" />

One hallmark of Internet memes is the appropriation of a part of broader culture. In particular, many memes use popular culture (especially in image macros of other media), which can sometimes lead to issues with copyright. '''Dank memes''' have emerged as a new form of image-macros, and many modern memes take on inclusion of surreal, nonsensical, and non-sequitur themes.<ref>{{cite web | last=Huntington | first=Heidi E. | title=Subversive Memes: Internet Memes as a Form of Visual Rhetoric | website=Academia.edu | date=December 13, 2013 | url=https://www.academia.edu/5415739 | access-date=April 16, 2022}}</ref><ref name=":0" /> Colloquially, the terms ''meme'' and ''Internet meme'' are used more loosely, having become umbrella terms for any piece of quickly-consumed comedic content that may not necessarily be intended to spread or evolve.<ref name=":0" /><!-- End content from Wikipedia  -->

Internet memes can be used to spread the message of [[Lifeism]].

[[Memeology]] is the study of internet memes.

Platforms such as [[Discord]] and [[tiktok]] and [[Reddit]] offer a lot of potential to spread ideas by memes. 

== References ==

[[Category:Memeology]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]
[[sn:Internet memes]][[Category:Social networks]]
[[Category:Pages]]