'''Jeepform''' is a style of small, focused larp which evolved from the Danish freeform roleplaying and [https://larpwiki.labcats.org/index.php?title=Nordic_larp Nordic larp] traditions. It differs from Danish freeform in that it is done "standing up" rather than around a table. It differs from [https://larpwiki.labcats.org/index.php?title=Theatre-style theatre-style] larp in that it explicitly adopts a [[narrativist]] stance and discourages [https://larpwiki.labcats.org/index.php?title=Immersion immersion].<ref>[http://jeepen.org/dict/#immersion Jeep Dictionary: Immersion], ''Vi åker jeep''. Retrieved 25 June 2015.</ref><ref name=":1" />

A typical Jeepform has between 3 and 8 players and a pre-defined story, typically a kitchen-sink or domestic drama. The story is often told using scenes or an act structure, with defined outcomes. There is usually extensive use of [[metatechnique]]s, including [[flashback]]s, [https://larpwiki.labcats.org/index.php?title=Monologue monologues], and repetition. <ref name=":1">https://larpwiki.labcats.org/index.php?title=Jeepform&action=edit</ref>

[[John Vervaeke]] talks about it as a way to escape from [[Existential Inertia]], and references it as a modern parallel to the development of religious rituals.<ref>https://www.meaningcrisis.co/ep-17-awakening-from-the-meaning-crisis-gnosis-and-existential-inertia/</ref><ref>https://markmulvey.medium.com/awakening-from-the-meaning-crisis-by-john-vervaeke-ep-17-e9c8ab9715c3</ref><ref>https://www.meaningcrisis.co/ep-37-awakening-from-the-meaning-crisis-reverse-engineering-enlightenment-part-2/</ref>
[[category:Glossary]]
[[Category:Styles]]
==Overview==
Jeepform is a style of freeform role-playing game that originated from the Nordic larp (live-action role-playing) tradition, particularly influenced by the Danish freeform scene. Developed by the Swedish larpwright collective "Vi åker jeep," Jeepform emphasizes structured, experimental, and often emotionally intense gameplay. 

Unlike traditional tabletop role-playing games, Jeepform involves players physically acting out scenes, similar to larp, but within a more controlled environment. Games typically involve 3 to 8 players and focus on realistic, often domestic or interpersonal scenarios. They utilize various metatechniques, such as monologues, flashbacks, and scene repetitions, to explore complex narratives and character emotions. 

A key aspect of Jeepform is "playing close to home," where players draw upon their personal experiences to inform their characters, potentially leading to emotional bleed—the blending of player and character emotions. This approach aims to create a more immersive and introspective gaming experience. <ref name=":0" />

== Getting started ==
For those interested in exploring Jeepform games, the Vi åker jeep website offers a collection of documented scenarios available for download, allowing groups to experience these unique games firsthand. 

==Example games==
* [[Fat Man Down]]
* [[GR]]
* [[Drunk]]

==References==
<references />

==External links==
* [http://jeepen.org/ Vi åker jeep] ("We go by jeep")
* [http://nordiclarp.org/wiki/Jeepform Jeepform] at the Nordic Larp Wiki

[[category:Glossary]]
[[Category:Styles]]


[[Category:Larping]]
[[sn:Jeepform]][[sn:Jeepform]][[sn:Jeepform]]
[[Category:Pages]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]