John Vervaeke is a Canadian cognitive scientist most notable for his work on religion and his youtube series [[Awakening from the Meaning crisis]].

He created the concept of [[religion that's not a religion]] and the [[three orders]].

The [[Seven Plagues]] are based on his idea of reverse engineering enlightenment and the perrenial problems

== Criticism ==
John Vervaeke's worldview, which he refers to as the "Awakening from the Meaning Crisis," has received both praise and criticism from scholars and commentators. While many people find his ideas to be insightful and thought-provoking, there are also some criticisms that have been raised about his views.<ref name=":0">ChatGPT</ref>

One of the main criticisms of Vervaeke's worldview is that it oversimplifies complex philosophical and psychological issues. Some people argue that his views reduce complex issues to simple, binary concepts, and that this oversimplification fails to capture the full complexity of the human experience.<ref name=":0" />

Another criticism of Vervaeke's worldview is that it relies too heavily on a subjective, individualistic perspective. Some people argue that his views are overly focused on the individual and their personal journey, and that this perspective fails to take into account the larger social and cultural forces that shape our experiences and perspectives.<ref name=":0" />

A third criticism of Vervaeke's worldview is that it lacks a clear ethical framework. Some people argue that while Vervaeke's views provide an interesting perspective on the meaning crisis, they lack a clear ethical framework that can guide individuals towards meaningful and fulfilling lives.<ref name=":0" />

Finally, some people have criticized Vervaeke's worldview for being too eclectic and eclectic, drawing on ideas and concepts from a wide range of sources without a clear and consistent framework for integrating these ideas.<ref name=":0" />

It is important to note that these criticisms are not universally held and that many people continue to find Vervaeke's ideas to be insightful and thought-provoking. Ultimately, the validity and usefulness of Vervaeke's worldview will depend on the individual and their own perspectives and experiences.<ref name=":0" />

== References ==
[[Category:People]]
[[Category:John Vervaeke]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]
[[sn:John Vervaeke]][[Category:Philosophers]]
[[Category:Pages]]