{{Infobox website
| name = Lifeism Wiki
| language = English
| owner = [[Church of Evolution]]
| url = https://lifeism.miraheze.org
| registration = Optional
}}

The Lifeism Wiki is the wiki of Lifeism. While [[evolution.faith]] is designed to convey the message to a general audience, the wiki is aimed at clergy and people trying to get a deeper understanding of Lifeism and participate in its development

[[Category:Evolutionist Online Infrastructure]]
[[sn:Lifeism Wiki]]This is not a wiki on [[John Vervaeke]], but unfortunately it may very well be the largest wiki on him and his work. This is due to many of the older wikis in his community being improperly archived.

== History ==
[[A brief treatise of the soul]] is considered the predecessor to the Wiki, it was created on July 5 2022 as an interactive shared document, but it got too unwieldy.

The original wiki was created by [[Immanuelle Leonhart]] On August 13 2022 on Fandom<ref name=":0">https://lifeism.miraheze.org/w/index.php?title=Lifeism_Wiki&oldid=995</ref> before being migrated to Miraheze on October 6 2022<ref>https://lifeism.miraheze.org/w/index.php?title=Lifeism_Wiki&oldid=1002</ref><ref>https://lifeism.miraheze.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=1</ref>. A good portion of the content also comes from their userspace on Wikipedia.{{Efn|
Main articles which are still actively used or have large content
* [[User:Immanuelle/Lifeism|Lifeism]]
* [[User:Immanuelle/Template:Syzygies|Syzygies]]
* [[User:Immanuelle/Epistemology|My Epistemology]]
* [[User:Immanuelle/Epistemology/Childrearing|Childrearing]]
* [[User:Immanuelle/Epistemology/Psychology|Antisociality and Prosociality]]
* [[User:Immanuelle/Five Ancestors|Three Ancestors]]
* [[User:Immanuelle/Lada|Underseer]]
*[[user:Immanuelle/Mithra|Overseer]]
}}

On November 7 2022 the [[Lifeism Dictionary]] was introduced.<ref>https://lifeism.miraheze.org/w/index.php?title=Lifeism_Dictionary&oldid=30325</ref>

From November 16 to present it has been dealing with the [[Great November Outage]] which had previously threatened much of its content. It is recovering but far from complete in its recovery. As of December 29 2022 pages created over the outage are inaccessible but in the process of being merged. Some pages such as [[videos]] were independently remerged in. Some were overwritten and will have to have page history audited to see if information was lost, other pages are strictly better in one version or the other, or already had their histories practically merged in the current article such as [[Immanuelle's YouTube Channel]]. 

In 2023 and 2024 it was not used as much. 

On 10 August 2025 we started uploading the [[Gaiad]] content to the wikibase, starting with making the entry {{q|q1}} <ref>https://lifeism.miraheze.org/wiki/Item:Q1?oldid=175474</ref> This involved much more edits than I could have ever anticipated and it led to the wiki becoming the second largest wiki in edit count after the Shinto Wiki which Immanuelle Leonhart also made.<ref>https://web.archive.org/web/20250827090926/https://wikistats.wmcloud.org/display.php?t=mh</ref> 

== Trivia ==
This page was originally the main page on the fandom Wiki, but got transformed during the host migration, since fandom uses the wiki name as the main page and miraheze uses [[Main Page]].<ref name=":0" /> Now it serves as the page about the wiki.

== See also ==
* [[Evolution.faith]]

== Annotations ==
=== Notes ===
<references group="note"/>
<references group="lower-alpha"/>

=== References ===
[[Category:{{SITENAME}}]]
[[Category:Lifeism]]
[[sn:Lifeism Wiki]][[Category:Lifeism Wiki]]
[[Category:Gospel]]
[[Category:Newest pages before the refresh]]
<references />
[[Category:Pages]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]