Seems to be a predecessor to [[process theology]], Erasmus had an idea that the human and God together were working for salvation<ref>https://oxfordre.com/religion/view/10.1093/acrefore/9780199340378.001.0001/acrefore-9780199340378-e-505</ref><ref>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rELAwGR72hY</ref>

{{Quote|Now, what does that mean? That means that you have to… you radically, radically have to accept is there's absolutely nothing you can do. And even your affirmation of the propositions of the creeds of Christianity is something that has to be given to you. And what does that mean from God's side of this equation? It means that God's act of saving you is completely arbitrary! There is not[hing]... since there is nothing you do, there is no thought, word or deed that you perform that in any way earns or has any causal effect upon God's behaviour! And I'm not over representing this! Look at the debate between Luther and Erasmus! Erasmus tried to propose what he called “Synergy”: that the human being and God were working together in a participatory fashion for salvation — with God, of course, having the bulk of the work — and Luther rejects that utterly! God’s saving of an individual is completely arbitrary.|[[John Vervaeke]]<ref>https://www.meaningcrisis.co/ep-21-awakening-from-the-meaning-crisis-martin-luther-and-descartes/</ref>}}

== References ==

[[Category:John Vervaeke]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]
[[sn:Martin Luther Erasmus Debate]][[Category:History]]
[[sn:Martin Luther Erasmus Debate]][[Category:Christianity]]
[[Category:Stubs]]
[[Category:Pages]]