{{other uses|Melchizedek priesthood}}<!--returning to this version-->

In [[Mormonism]], the '''Melchizedek priesthood''' ({{IPAc-en|pron|m|ɛ|l|ˈ|k|ɪ|z|ᵻ|d|ɛ|k}})<ref>[http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/melchizedek Dictionary.com – Melchizedek] {{retrieved|accessdate=2015-08-22}}</ref><ref>[https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/scriptures/bofm/pronunciation?lang=eng "Book of Mormon Pronunciation Guide"]; {{Retrieved | accessdate=2015-08-22}}</ref> is the greater of the two orders of [[W:Priesthood (Latter Day Saints)|priesthood]], the other being the [[Aaronic priesthood (LDS Church)|Aaronic priesthood]]. The [[Patriarchal priesthood]] which is sometimes confused as a separate priesthood was explained by [[W:Boyd K. Packer|Boyd K. Packer]], an [[W:Apostle (LDS Church)|apostle]] in the largest denomination in Mormonism, [[W:The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints|The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints]] (LDS Church), as:

It is considered a predecessor to the [[Lambda covenant]]
{{quote|The patriarchal order is not a third, separate priesthood. Whatever relates to the patriarchal order is embraced in the Melchizedek Priesthood. "All other authorities or offices in the church are appendages to [the Melchizedek] priesthood." (D&C 107:5.) The patriarchal order is a part of the Melchizedek Priesthood which enables endowed and worthy men to preside over their posterity in time and eternity.<ref>Joseph Smith, Joseph Fielding Smith (ed.), ''Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith'', p.323.</ref>}}
The Melchizedek priesthood is also referred to as the '''high priesthood of the holy order of God'''<ref>[[Book of Alma|Alma]] 4:20, 13:8</ref> and the '''Holy Priesthood, after the Order of the Son of God''',<ref>[[Doctrine and Covenants|D&C]] 107:3</ref> or simply as the '''high priesthood'''.

In Mormonism, unlike some other Christian denominations, the Melchizedek priesthood is thought to be held by common mortals and not solely by either pre-Aaronic priests such as [[Melchizedek]], or [[Jesus]] alone, as most protestants interpret the [[Epistle to the Hebrews]]. According to [[Joseph Smith]], the name of this priesthood became [[Melchizedek]] "because Melchizedek was such a great high priest" and "to avoid the too frequent repetition" of the "name of the Supreme Being".<ref>D&C 107:2-4</ref> Smith taught that this priesthood was on the earth since [[Adam]] received it and conferred it upon his sons [[Cain and Abel|Abel]] and [[Seth]], and it was conferred successively upon the early biblical patriarchs. Through it [[Enoch (ancestor of Noah)|Enoch]] led his people to become so righteous and obedient that they qualified to be [[Translation (Mormonism)|translated]] as the [[City of Enoch]]. [[Noah]] held this priesthood, as did [[Abraham]], [[Isaac]], and [[Jacob]]. It remained on earth until the time of [[Moses]], who received it "under the hand of his father-in-law, Jethro"<ref>D&C 84:6</ref> and it would have been given to the [[Israelites]] if they had been worthy of it and had not "hardened their hearts".<ref>D&C 84:24; see also Exodus 19:5-6; Hebrews 12:20.</ref>

==Restoration account==
Joseph Smith and [[Oliver Cowdery]] said they were visited by [[John the Baptist]], who laid his hands on their head and gave them the Aaronic priesthood; Smith described the event in detail and gave an exact date when it happened. In contrast, he never gave a description of any vision in which he saw an angel separately confer the Melchizedek priesthood.  However, by the turn of the 20th century, Latter Day Saint theologians believed that such a separate ordination by angels had occurred prior to the organization of the [[Church of Christ (Latter Day Saints)|Church of Christ]] on April 6, 1830.<ref>{{harvtxt|Roberts|1902|p=176}}.</ref> This was largely because the early church organization contained the office of [[elder (Latter Day Saints)|elder]], which at least by 1835 was considered an office of the Melchizedek priesthood.  As evidence for such a pre-organization angelic conferral, writers referred to a revelation in which Smith said he heard "The voice of Peter, James, and John in the wilderness between Harmony, Susquehanna county, and Colesville, Broome county, on the Susquehanna river, declaring themselves as possessing the keys of the kingdom, and of the dispensation of the fulness of times!"<ref>{{sourcetext|source=The Doctrine and Covenants|book=Covenant 128|verse=20|range=-21}}</ref> Smith and Cowdery were visited by the three angels in 1829 and that they conferred the Melchizedek priesthood in the same way John the Baptist had conferred the Aaronic priesthood. However, the official church history, supervised or written by Smith, states that "the authority of the Melchizedek priesthood was manifested and conferred for the first time upon several of the Elders" during a [[W:General conference (Latter Day Saints)|General Conference]] in early June 1831.<ref>{{harv|Roberts|1902|pp=175–76}}.</ref> When Smith's official history was first published in 1902, the compiler [[W:B.H. Roberts|B.H. Roberts]] thought that this was a mistake, because it would not be consistent with the common Mormon belief that the priesthood had been conferred prior to the church's founding in 1830.<ref>{{harv|Roberts|1902|p=176}}.</ref>

On the other hand, some recent Mormon historians accept Smith's history as correct and consistent with other historical records showing that other Mormons present at the conference dated the restoration of the Melchizedek priesthood to 1831.<ref name="Quinn, OoP">Quinn, Mormon Hierarchy: Origins of Power.</ref> This conference had been a very significant event in the early church history, coming soon after the conversion of [[W:Sidney Rigdon|Sidney Rigdon]], who believed that Mormon missionaries lacked the necessary power to adequately preach the gospel.<ref>{{harvtxt|Prince|1995|p=116}}.</ref> Thus, in January 1831, Smith issued a revelation where he wrote that after Mormons relocated to [[W:Kirtland, Ohio|Kirtland]], [[W:Ohio|Ohio]], they would "be endowed with power from on high" and "sent forth".<ref>{{harvtxt|Phelps|1833|p=84}} ([[s:The Doctrine and Covenants/Section 38|D&C 38:32]])</ref> In a revelation  given to an individual, Smith assured the man that "at the conference meeting he [would] be ordained unto power from on high".<ref>Kirtland Revelation Book, p. 91.</ref> One of Smith's associates that was present at the conference expressed the view that this ordination "consisted [of] the endowment--it being a new order--and bestowed authority",<ref>Corrill, 18</ref> and later that year, an early convert who had left the church claimed that many of the Saints "have been ordained to the High Priesthood, or the order of Melchizedek; and profess to be endowed with the same power as the ancient apostles were".<ref>{{Harv|Booth|1831}}</ref> In 1835, the historical record was muddled a bit when the first edition of the [[Doctrine and Covenants]] altered pre-1831 revelations to make a distinction between the Aaronic and Melchizedek priesthoods, and to classify the offices of elder and apostle as part of the Melchizedek priesthood.<ref name="Quinn, OoP" />

==In the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints==
In the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the largest [[Latter Day Saint movement|Latter Day Saint]] denomination, the Melchizedek priesthood is one of two governing priesthoods, which is typically given as a matter of course to worthy male members 18 years and older. No exact rule exists about how much time a man must be a member first; he may receive this priesthood as soon as local church leaders feel he is prepared. Ordination is based on the recipient's age and worthiness and does not require any specific training or aptitude. A candidate for this ordination is interviewed and often counseled to study the 84th, 107th, and 121st sections of the [[Doctrine and Covenants]] to begin to understand the ''oath and covenant of the priesthood'', the [[Covenant (Latter Day Saints)|covenant]] a person makes with God when he receives the Melchizedek priesthood. The candidate is also usually asked to stand in a gathering of the members of the church to be publicly accepted as being worthy of ordination. For male [[Latter-day Saints]], receiving the Melchizedek priesthood is considered to be a [[Ordinance (Latter Day Saints)|saving ordinance]] of the gospel.

Shortly after the establishment of the church, the ordination of [[Black people|blacks]] to the priesthood was prohibited. Following a revelation to then-Church president [[Spencer W. Kimball]], the church lifted the prohibition in 1978.<ref>[http://fairwiki.org/index.php/Blacks_and_the_priesthood Foundation for Apologetic Information and Research (FAIR) wiki]</ref>

An important purpose of giving the Melchizedek priesthood to every adult Latter-day Saint man is to allow fathers and husbands to be able to give [[priesthood blessing]]s of healing, comfort, counsel, and strength to their children and wife, and to preside over the family unit in a righteous manner.<ref>See D&C 121:36-46</ref> Many LDS fathers give a priesthood blessing to their children before the start of each new school year or before an important life event such as marriage. Each Melchizedek priesthood bearer, regardless of priesthood office, is encouraged to give priesthood blessings when called upon by others.

===Offices===
In the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, there are five offices within the Melchizedek priesthood. Although the holders of the different priesthood offices hold the same Melchizedek priesthood, their assigned rights and responsibilities vary according to their priesthood office.

{| border="1" cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0"
|- bgcolor=#DCDCFF
! Office
! Minimum requirement to be ordained to office
! Rights and responsibilities
|-
| '''[[Apostle (Latter Day Saints)|Apostle]]'''
| Married holder of the Melchizedek priesthood
| "Special witnesses" of [[Jesus|Jesus Christ]] who hold the rights to officiate in all responsibilities and duties of the priesthood, including the [[sealing power]]. Apostles direct the calling of [[Patriarch (Latter Day Saints)|patriarchs]] and may ordain persons to all other offices and callings in the church. The President of the Church must be an apostle.
|-
| '''[[Seventy (LDS Church)|Seventy]]'''
| Holder of the Melchizedek priesthood
| "Especial witnesses" of [[Jesus|Jesus Christ]]; called to preach the gospel to the world; work under the direction of [[Apostle (Latter Day Saints)|apostles]]; may be [[General authority|general authorities]] or [[List of area seventies|area seventies]].
|-
| '''[[Patriarch (Latter Day Saints)|Patriarch]]'''
| Married high priest; normally at least 55 years old<ref>''[[Church Handbook of Instructions]], Book 1: Bishoprics and Stake Presidencies'', Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 2006, p. 6.</ref>
| Gives [[patriarchal blessing]]s to Latter-day Saints
|-
| '''[[High priest (Latter Day Saints)|High Priest]]'''
| Holder of the Melchizedek priesthood
| Responsible for the spiritual welfare of the Latter-day Saints; may serve in a [[Bishop (Latter Day Saints)|bishopric]], [[stake president|stake presidency]], [[High council (Latter Day Saints)|high council]], or [[temple president|temple presidency]] and may serve as a [[mission president]]; may ordain other High Priests and Elders
|-
| '''[[Elder (Latter Day Saints)|Elder]]'''
| [[Priest (Latter Day Saints)|Priest]] in the [[Aaronic priesthood (LDS Church)|Aaronic priesthood]]; at least 18 years old
| Confer the [[Confirmation (Latter Day Saints)|gift of the Holy Ghost]]; give blessings by the [[laying on of hands]]; ordain other Elders; holds all the rights of the [[Aaronic priesthood (LDS Church)|Aaronic priesthood]]
|-
|}

===Quorums===
Holders of priesthood offices are organized into [[Quorum (Latter Day Saints)|quorums]]. The quorums are a brotherhood where members of the quorum assist each other, teach one another, and delegate particular responsibilities to individuals or committees.

{| border="1" cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0"
|- bgcolor=#DCDCFF
! Priesthood office
! Name of quorum
! Maximum number in quorum and notes
|-
| [[Apostle (Latter Day Saints)|Apostle]]
| '''[[Quorum of the Twelve Apostles (LDS Church)|Quorum of the Twelve Apostles]]'''
| '''12'''; other apostles may be in the '''[[First Presidency (LDS Church)|Quorum of the First Presidency]]''' or in no quorum
|-
| [[Seventy (LDS Church)|Seventy]]
| '''[[Seventy (LDS Church)|Quorums of the Seventy]]'''<br />(currently numbered First through Eighth)
| '''70'''; some are quorums of [[general authorities]]; others are quorums of area authorities
|-
| [[Patriarch (Latter Day Saints)|Patriarch]]
| '''No quorum organization'''
| Note that a patriarch meets together with fellow members of his stake's high priests quorum in its annual meeting
|-
| [[High priest (Latter Day Saints)|High Priest]]
| '''High Priests Quorum''' ([[Stake (Latter Day Saints)|stake]])
| '''No maximum'''; no quorum exists in [[District (LDS Church)|districts]] of the church
|-
| [[Elder (Latter Day Saints)|Elder]]
| '''Elders Quorums'''
| '''96'''; adult male members without the priesthood, adult holders of the [[Aaronic priesthood (LDS Church)|Aaronic priesthood]], holders of the Melchizedek priesthood not in the high priest quorum, and members of the high priest quorum for the moment not occupied with work from their respective callings, should attend the elders quorum's meetings
Adult men who are not members of the church, and holders of the priesthood who do not maintain the standards, are generally invited to participate in the quorum to enjoy the brotherhood and support.
|-
|}

In order to be called to the [[Aaronic priesthood (LDS Church)|Aaronic priesthood]] office of [[Bishop (Latter Day Saints)|bishop]], a man must either be a literal descendant of Aaron or, more commonly, be "a [[High priest (Latter Day Saints)|high priest]] of the Melchizedek Priesthood".<ref>[https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/scriptures/dc-testament/dc/107.17?lang=eng Doctrine & Covenants 107:17]</ref>

===Presidencies===
Each quorum and organizational unit in the church has a presidency attached to it. A presidency is usually composed of three members: the president and two counselors. Typically, a president is selected and he chooses the two counselors whom he would like to serve with him. On very rare occasions there may be only one counselor or three counselors. Usually, a secretary is also called by the president to serve, but he is not considered a part of the presidency. Each of the counselors is given a precedence, for instance, "first counselor" and "second counselor".

The two exceptions to these general rules are the [[Quorum of the Twelve Apostles (LDS Church)|Quorum of the Twelve Apostles]], which is presided by a single [[President of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles|president]]; and the Presidency of the [[Quorums of the Seventy|Seventy]], which consists of seven presidents equal in authority.

The counselors serve under the direction of the president and share in his responsibilities. The president may assign each counselor to handle certain areas of responsibility. The president bears the sole burden of being the final arbiter of decisions, but he is advised to receive advice from his counselors and pay close attention to their opinions and insights.

When the president is released, the counselors are also released.

===Priesthood leadership callings===
In addition to the regular offices of the Aaronic or Melchizedek priesthood, there are other leadership callings within the priesthood. The table below lists these other priesthood leadership callings, with the table below it showing the organization of various callings within the church's hierarchy.

{| border="1" cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0"
|- bgcolor=#DCDCFF
! Leadership calling
! Minimum qualifications
! Rights and responsibilities
|-
| '''[[President of the Church (LDS Church)|President of the Church]]''' and<br />'''counselor in the [[First Presidency (LDS Church)|First Presidency]]'''
| President must be an [[Apostle (Latter Day Saints)|apostle]];<br />counselors must be [[High priest (Latter Day Saints)|high priest]]s
| Preside over and direct the entire church
|-
| '''Area President''' and '''counselors'''
| All must be [[Seventy (LDS Church)|seventies]] or [[Apostle (Latter Day Saints)|apostles]]
| Preside over and direct a geographical region ("area") of the church
|-
| '''[[Stake President]]''' and '''counselors'''
| All must be [[High priest (Latter Day Saints)|high priests]]
| Preside over and direct a [[Stake (Mormonism)|stake]] of the church
|-
| '''[[Stake (Latter Day Saints)|Stake]] high councilors'''
| All must be [[High priest (Latter Day Saints)|high priest]]s
| Assist the [[Stake president|stake presidency]] in governing the [[Stake (Mormonism)|stake]]
|-
| '''[[Ward (LDS Church)|Ward]] [[Bishop (Latter Day Saints)|Bishop]]''' and '''counselors'''
| All must be [[High priest (Latter Day Saints)|high priests]]
| Preside over and direct a [[Ward (LDS Church)|ward]] of a [[Stake (Latter Day Saints)|stake]]
|-
| '''[[Mission president]]''' and '''counselors'''
| [[Mission president]] must be [[High priest (Latter Day Saints)|high priest]];<br />counselors must hold Melchizedek priesthood
| Preside over and direct a [[Mission (LDS Church)|mission]] of the church and the [[Mormon missionary|full-time missionaries]] in the mission
|-
| '''District President''' and '''counselors'''
| All must hold Melchizedek priesthood
| Preside over and direct a district of a [[Mission (LDS Church)|mission]]
|-
| '''Branch President''' and '''counselors'''
| All must hold Melchizedek priesthood
| Preside over and direct a branch of a [[District (LDS Church)|district]] or [[Stake (Latter Day Saints)|stake]]
|-
| '''[[Temple president]]''' and '''counselors'''
| All must be [[High priest (Latter Day Saints)|high priest]]s
| Preside over and direct the operation of a [[Temple (LDS Church)|temple]]
|}

===Hierarchy summary===
{| style="background:#efefef;" width="650px" border="1"
|-
! colspan="3" align="center" | General Authorities
|-
| colspan="3" align="center" | The [[First Presidency (LDS Church)|First Presidency]]:<br />The President (Prophet) of the church, 1st Counselor and 2nd Counselor
|-
| colspan="3" align="center" | The [[Quorum of the Twelve Apostles (LDS Church)|Quorum of the Twelve Apostles]]:<br />Twelve ordained apostles, one of whom may be the [[President of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles (LDS Church)|President of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles]] 
|-
| colspan="3" align="center" | The [[Presiding Bishop (LDS Church)|Presiding Bishopric]]
|-
| colspan="3" align="center" | [[Quorums of the Seventy]]<br />The Seven [[Presidency of the Seventy|Presidents of the Seventy]] and several dozen Seventies
|-
| colspan="3" align="center" | Area Presidencies:<br />Presidents, 1st and 2nd Counselors are typically filled by Seventies
|-
! colspan="3" style="background:#ffdead;" align="center" | Local Authorities
|-
| colspan="3" style="background:#ffdead;" align="center" | Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, and Eighth Quorums of the Seventy (Area Seventies)
|-
| colspan="3" style="background:#ffdead;" align="center" |Patriarchs
|- style="background:#ffdead;"
| align="center" | Stake Presidencies and High Councils or District Presidencies
| rowspan="6" align="center" | Mission Presidencies
| rowspan="6" align="center" | Temple Presidencies
|- style="background:#ffdead;"
| align="center" | Ward Bishoprics or Branch Presidencies
|- style="background:#ffdead;"
| align="center" |Elders Quorums (high priests, elders, and prospective elders)
|- style="background:#ffdead;"
| align="center" | Priests Quorums
|- style="background:#ffdead;"
| align="center" | Teachers Quorums
|- style="background:#ffdead;"
| align="center" | Deacons Quorums
|}

==References==
{{reflist|30em}}
{{refbegin|30em}}
*{{Citation
 | editor-last = Phelps
 | editor-first = W.W.
 | editor-link = W. W. Phelps (Mormon)
 | title = A Book of Commandments, for the Government of the Church of Christ
 | place = [[Independence, Missouri|Zion]]
 | publisher = [[William Wines Phelps]] & Co.
 | year = 1833
 | lccn = 08025600
 | oclc = 29133525
 | url = http://josephsmithpapers.org/paperSummary/book-of-commandments-1833?locale=eng&p=1
 }}.
*{{Citation
 | last=Prince
 | first=Gregory A
 | author-link=Gregory Prince
 | year=1995
 | title=Power From On High: The Development of Mormon Priesthood
 | publisher=Signature Books
 | publication-place=Salt Lake City
 | isbn=1-56085-071-X
 | url=http://signaturebookslibrary.org/?p=4986
 }}.
*{{Citation
 | editor-last=Roberts
 | editor-first=B. H.
 | editor-link=B. H. Roberts
 | title=History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
 | volume=1
 | publisher=Deseret News
 | place=Salt Lake City
 | year=1902
 | url=https://books.google.com/books?id=EylEIEiOmZAC
 }}.
{{refend}}
{{Portal|Latter Day Saint movement}}

{{LDSpriesthood}}
{{Authority control}}

{{Priestly Lineages}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:Melchizedek Priesthood (Latter Day Saints)}}
[[Category:Latter Day Saint hierarchy]]
[[Category:Priesthood offices of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints]]
[[Category:1829 establishments in the United States]]
[[Category:1829 in Christianity]]
[[Category:Latter Day Saint terms]]
[[Category:Melchizedek]]
[[Category:Pages that existed before the Great November Outage]]
[[sn:Melchizedek Priesthood]][[sn:Melchizedek Priesthood]][[sn:Melchizedek Priesthood]]
[[Category:Pages]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]