{{short description|Group of memes often found in the same individual}}

{{anthropology|concepts}}

Much of the study of [[meme]]s focuses on groups of memes called '''meme complexes''', or '''memeplexes'''. Like the [[gene complex]]es found in biology, memeplexes are groups of memes that are often found present in the same individual. Applying the theory of [[Universal Darwinism]], memeplexes exist because memes copy themselves more successfully when they are "teamed up".

Examples include:
; <nowiki>Belief Systems and Ideologies:</nowiki>:[[Religion|Religions]], philosophies, political alignments, worldviews.
; <nowiki>Organizations and Groups:</nowiki>:Churches, businesses, political parties, clubs.
; <nowiki>Behavioral Patterns:</nowiki>:Musical practices, [[ceremonies]], [[marriage]]s, festivities, hunting techniques, sports.

Compared to inherited gene complexes, memeplexes have comparatively less [[Evolutionary pressure|pressure]] to benefit the individuals expressing them in order to replicate. Because memes and memeplexes replicate virally (i.e., by [[Transmission (medicine)|horizontal transmission]]), they are not entirely dependent on the success of their hosts in order to succeed. Memes and memeplexes do not have to be useful or true, physically or mathematically, to replicate. For example, [[Geocentric model|geocentrism]] was at one point an extremely successful idea (in terms of widespread acceptance), but is today not considered to be accurate, having been almost entirely replaced with more modern theories.

Philosopher [[Daniel C. Dennett]], evolutionary biologist [[Richard Dawkins]], and consciousness researcher [[Susan Blackmore]] (author of ''[[The Meme Machine]]'') are proponents of [[memetics]].<ref>{{cite web|url=http://www.ted.com/index.php/talks/dan_dennett_on_dangerous_memes.html|title=Dan Dennett: Dangerous memes - TED Talk - TED.com|author=Dan Dennett|work=ted.com}}</ref><ref>{{cite web|url=http://www.richarddawkins.net/article,3001,QampA-with-Richard-Dawkins-after-lecture-at-UC-Berkeley,RichardDawkinsnet |title='Q&A with Richard Dawkins after lecture at UC Berkeley' by RichardDawkins.net - RichardDawkins.net |accessdate=August 21, 2008 |url-status=dead |archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20080822192817/http://richarddawkins.net/article%2C3001%2CQampA-with-Richard-Dawkins-after-lecture-at-UC-Berkeley%2CRichardDawkinsnet |archivedate=August 22, 2008 }}</ref>

==See also==
* [[Metameme]]
* ''[[The Selfish Gene]]''
* ''[[The Meme Machine]]''
* ''[[Darwin's Dangerous Idea]]''

==References==
{{reflist}}
* [http://www.susanblackmore.co.uk/journalism/NSmeme%201999.htm Susan Blackmore, "Meme, Myself And I"]
* [http://www.ted.com/index.php/talks/dan_dennett_on_dangerous_memes.html Daniel C. Dennett, "Ants, Terrorism, and the Awesome Power of Memes"; TED lecture, February, 2002]
* [https://web.archive.org/web/20080822192817/http://richarddawkins.net/article%2C3001%2CQampA-with-Richard-Dawkins-after-lecture-at-UC-Berkeley%2CRichardDawkinsnet Richard Dawkins, question and answer session at the University of California at Berkeley, March 8, 2008]

{{World view}}

[[Category:Philosophy of mind]]
[[Category:Memetics]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]
[[sn:Memeplex]][[Category:MGS-plexes]]
[[sn:Memeplex]]{{biology-stub}}
{{philosophy-stub}}

[[de:Memplex]]
[[Category:Pages]]