{{Short description|Meme about a meme}}
{{refimprove|date=July 2008}}
{{Editorial|date=April 2011}}

In the field of [[memetics]], a '''metameme''' (or '''meta-meme''') is defined as a [[meme]] about a meme. A [[metaphor]] or the idea of [[memetic engineering]] are, thus, metamemes. The concept of memes has been referred to as "The Metameme".<ref>Glenn Grant. [http://reoxy.org/memelex.htm A Memetic Lexicon]</ref>  Some other metamemes of interest include the [[meme tolerance]] and [[memeplex]]es.

Initial definitions of meta memes and the lingo surrounding the phenomenon have seen a recent overhaul, as a new perspective is beginning to emerge due to heightened interest from researchers and companies alike.

==Measuring social evolution==
Metamemes may be used to measure the evolution of a given society. It has been proposed that the degree of [[consciousness]] a society has about the very [[meme]]s that form it is correlated with how evolved that society is. The difficulties associated with measuring the "metamemetic content" of a given society, however, render that proposition impractical.

This can be viewed (to some extent) as a memetic approach to the American sociologist [[Gerhard Lenski]]'s view that the more information a given society has, the more advanced it is.{{cn|date=May 2011}}

==See also==
*[[Meme]]
*[[Memetics]]

==References==
<references/>

==External links==
*[http://metameme.org/definition.html Definition] - MetaMeme.org

[[Category:Memetics|*]]
[[Category:Git synced pages|*]]
[[sn:Metameme]][[Category:Philosophy of mind]][[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Pages]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]