

The narrative order is a concept developed by [[John Vervaeke]] and added to by [[Kamidere]]. It is one of the [[Three Orders]] 

The Nomological Order is the Order that links the [[Narrative Order]] and the [[Normative Order]]

{{Quote|The first of these connections was cradled by the Aristotelean worldview, where there existed a powerful affinity between objective reality and subjective perception. This worldview had two components: an account of how the mind viewed the world, and an account of how that world was structured. For Aristotle, these accounts were integrated and mutually supporting. To know something was to understand its form, but “form” didn’t primarily mean the shape of a thing. It meant the deep structure that governed its organization. A bird, for instance, was not constituted by features and anatomy (feathers, talons, beak, flight, etc.) but from the underlying structure by which these features were cohered and animated. And just as hand conforms to the spatial organization of an object when grasping it, so does the mind conform to the structural organization of the world when it notionally grasps its structure. This was the Aristotelean knowing, a deep, structural conformity between mind and world.<br>

One of the most fortifying elements of Aristotle’s worldview was that it allowed criteria for falsification, a checklist for reliably determining whether or not something in the world was real: 
# ensure the perceiving organ was not malfunctioning (i. e. the quality of our eyesight), 
# that the intervening medium was not distorted (clarity of day or night) and 
# that the perception had consensus with others. Perception that passes these tests imbues ''information''―it possesses the perceiving individual of the ''form'' of the thing perceived.

Aristotle’s affinity between mind and world extended and reflected the mind’s intentionality into the properties of the universe. Everything moved with purpose in this worldview, and an intrinsic sense of belonging coordinated the natural direction of all actions and objects (smoke to clouds, objects to earth, etc.). The earth was at the centre of a purposeful cosmos, an inherently beautiful and ordered place that made sense to us, resonated with our experience and gave us the sense of understanding the world and our place within it. Since it has to do with the fundamental principles by which knowledge and reality co-operate, we call this worldview the ''Nomological Order'' (“nomos” means law or rule).|[[John Vervaeke]]<ref>https://books.openedition.org/obp/4274?lang=en</ref>}}It is references in episode 7 of [[Awakening from the Meaning crisis]].<ref>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6i8FFH7Wslc</ref>

{{Quote|I wanted to propose to you a term for talking about this set of things where you have a worldview that is demonstrating, on an ongoing reliable fashion, worldview attunement and so that it is constantly affording existential modes in which Agent: Arena relationships are unfolding and blossoming naturally so that the person is not experiencing absurdity. And so the person is constantly experiencing a deep connectedness between their intellectual projects of making sense of the world and their existential projects of finding meaning and belonging and fitedness (placement) within it. I'm going to call that a "Nomological Order". Nomological Order comes from no "Nomos(*****)", Law. This is what makes the universe law-like, not just in our current sense of scientific law but in the sense that it is a cosmos for us. It's a cosmos in which there is deep convergence and consonance between our best attempts to scientifically explain the world and our deepest endeavours to existentially dwell within it. When we have that, when we have those two together, we have a Nomological Order. As the Nomological order breaks down, of course, then we start to confront absurdity and we start to lose a sense of how we fit in and how we belong.

So, Part of what we can take from.../ part of how we can understand the Axial-Age heritage..../ part of the way we can understand what [this] is telling us about meaning, is this idea of a Nomological Order. To have a meaningful life is to have a life that is situated within a Nomological Order: an attuned world view that is reliably generating existential modes that are consonant with our best scientific understanding.

|John Vervaeke<ref>https://www.meaningcrisis.co/episode-7-aristotles-world-view-and-erich-fromm/</ref>}}

==See Also==

* [[narrative order]]
* [[normative order]]

==References==

[[Category:John Vervaeke]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]
[[sn:Nomological order]][[Category:Lambda]][[Category:Nonduality]]
[[sn:Nomological order]][[Category:Three Orders]]
[[sn:Nomological order]]
[[Category:Pages]]