The Old Gaiad is the older version of the [[Gaiad]]. 

== Flaws ==
Being unfinished one cannot make as much of a critique of the Old Gaiad as one could with the [[New Gaiad]]

Opening is hard to follow, goes too hard on genealogy to the expense of themes. 

Sources of things were a bit too eclectic and plot points were lost. 

Sutras tended to be overly genealogical without interesting myths. 

Many things were set up but didn't end up ever happening. The reason for this is that the task was too long and arduous to get from the opening to the point where a lot of set up things started to have impact

For this reason I dislike certain elements of the Old Gaiad. For instance the usage of the name [[Shiva]] was for the god of genetic engineering, in reference to the [[Twin Nuclei Problem]] of [[Eric Weinstein]], as a complement to [[Adonai]] which represented the atomic nucleus. But both deities showed up billions of years (and dozens of sutras) before their usefulness. This can at times give an impression of [[cultural appropriation]] which was really just the product of the incompleteness of the text.  

== State of the current Gaiad ==
The current Gaiad is written at a faster pace and is currently at Sutra 13. 

== Archive ==
It can be found here in subpages. Images need to be worked on, no proper archives exist but email me if you want to set up your own hosting
# [[Old Gaiad/1|Sutra 1]]
# [[Old Gaiad/2|Sutra 2]]
# [[Old Gaiad/3|Sutra 3]]
# [[Old Gaiad/4|Sutra 4]]
# [[Old Gaiad/5|Sutra 5]]
# [[Old Gaiad/6|Sutra 6]][[Category:Pages that existed before the Great November Outage]]
[[sn:Old Gaiad]][[sn:Old Gaiad]]# [[Old Gaiad/7|Sutra 7]]
# [[Old Gaiad/8|Sutra 8]]
# [[Old Gaiad/9|Sutra 9]]
# [[Old Gaiad/10|Sutra 10]]
# [[Old Gaiad/11|Sutra 11]]
# [[Old Gaiad/12|Sutra 12]]
# [[Old Gaiad/13|Sutra 13]]
# [[Old Gaiad/14|Sutra 14]]
# [[Old Gaiad/15|Sutra 15]]
# [[Old Gaiad/16|Sutra 16]]
# [[Old Gaiad/17|Sutra 17]]
# [[Old Gaiad/18|Sutra 18]]
# [[Old Gaiad/19|Sutra 19]]
# [[Old Gaiad/20|Sutra 20]]
# [[Old Gaiad/21|Sutra 21]]
# [[Old Gaiad/22|Sutra 22]]
# [[Old Gaiad/23|Sutra 23]]
# [[Old Gaiad/24|Sutra 24]]
# [[Old Gaiad/25|Sutra 25]]
# [[Old Gaiad/26|Sutra 26]]
# [[Old Gaiad/27|Sutra 27]]
# [[Old Gaiad/28|Sutra 28]]
# [[Old Gaiad/29|Sutra 29]]
# [[Old Gaiad/30|Sutra 30]]
# [[Old Gaiad/31|Sutra 31]]
# [[Old Gaiad/32|Sutra 32]]
# [[Old Gaiad/33|Sutra 33]]
# [[Old Gaiad/34|Sutra 34]]
# [[Old Gaiad/35|Sutra 35]]
# [[Old Gaiad/36|Sutra 36]]
# [[Old Gaiad/37|Sutra 37]]
# [[Old Gaiad/38|Sutra 38]]
# [[Old Gaiad/39|Sutra 39]]
# [[Old Gaiad/40|Sutra 40]]
# [[Old Gaiad/41|Sutra 41]]
# [[Old Gaiad/42|Sutra 42]]
# [[Old Gaiad/43|Sutra 43]]
# [[Old Gaiad/44|Sutra 44]]
# [[Old Gaiad/45|Sutra 45]]
# [[Old Gaiad/46|Sutra 46]]
# [[Old Gaiad/47|Sutra 47]]
# [[Old Gaiad/48|Sutra 48]]
# [[Old Gaiad/49|Sutra 49]]
# [[Old Gaiad/50|Sutra 50]]
# [[Old Gaiad/51|Sutra 51]]
# [[Old Gaiad/52|Sutra 52]]
# [[Old Gaiad/53|Sutra 53]]

[[Category:Gaiad]]
[[Category:Old Gaiad|001]]
[[Category:Historical Documents]]
[[sn:Old Gaiad]]
[[Category:Pages]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]