This is moved into [[Phenomenal knowing]] now

== Quotes ==
''Participatory knowing'' refers to knowing how to act in the “agent-arena” environment. It is simultaneously one of the most basic and most profound kinds of knowing. One way to think about participatory knowledge is to consider the difference between being in a state of confusion versus a state of flow. Flow is when you are in a groove and feel a natural “dance” between your actions and the environment, and an example of participatory knowledge.<ref name=":0">https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/theory-knowledge/202101/john-vervaeke-s-brilliant-4p3r-metatheory-cognition</ref>

This concerns a shared, symbiotic, identity-based knowing. There is an inherent degree of internalisation (rather than mere ownership) of object by subject. It is money becoming part of the same pool of a human’s resources, as their intelligence, network, bodily abilities, life expectancy, etc. – one of many resources all aimed at a single goal. The classic example is the knowledge of what it is like to be a parent. It is a transformative experience<ref name=":1">https://book.moneyblind.net/the-book/1/1.3/1.3.2</ref><ref>To borrow the language of L.A. Paul, from ''Transformative Experience''</ref>, that cannot be known in advance by any amount of propositions, mastery of any procedure, nor even understanding of a parental worldview from either the parent’s or the world’s perspective. Because the act of becoming a parent changes the person doing the knowing, the only way to know what it’s like is to be, or rather become, one.<ref name=":1" />

More crudely, a pen takes on a use only when there is a human hand there to pick it up and write with it, and a human-pen hybrid is fundamentally different to a human and a pen side by side; the act of writing with the pen is fundamental to neither human nor pen. Our participatory relationship with money is incessant. Our interactions with it are constantly shaping our identity and the environment in which that identity is finding its way. And the money-environment in turn shapes us.<ref name=":1" />


{{Quote|Participatory knowledge (gnosis) is knowing by sharing a fundamental identity with something, a knowing by becoming, which also comes with a certain degree of imitation and internalisation. It’s the knowing you get by binding your identity to something and letting your identity being transformed in conjunction with how that thing is transforming. For example, knowing how to coordinate with your team to win the NBA Championship or how to be a parent by participating in parenthood or how you know a person you love. You don’t just have beliefs about a person you love, or some particular skill that allows you to “work” with them. You know them by how differently you know yourself and the world in knowing them.

 
|[[awakeningfromthemeaningcrisis.com]]<ref>https://web.archive.org/web/20210307151807/https://awakeningfromthemeaningcrisis.com/participatory-knowledge</ref>}}[[Category:John Vervaeke]]
[[sn:Participatory Knowledge]]==References==
[[Category:Knowledge]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]
[[sn:Participatory Knowledge]]
[[Category:Pages]]