#redirect[[Participatory Knowledge]]
{{Quote|Participatory knowledge (gnosis) is knowing by sharing a fundamental identity with something, a knowing by becoming, which also comes with a certain degree of imitation and internalisation. It’s the knowing you get by binding your identity to something and letting your identity being transformed in conjunction with how that thing is transforming. For example, knowing how to coordinate with your team to win the NBA Championship or how to be a parent by participating in parenthood or how you know a person you love. You don’t just have beliefs about a person you love, or some particular skill that allows you to “work” with them. You know them by how differently you know yourself and the world in knowing them.|<ref>https://web.archive.org/web/20210307151807/https://awakeningfromthemeaningcrisis.com/participatory-knowledge</ref>}}

This concerns a shared, symbiotic, identity-based knowing. There is an inherent degree of internalisation (rather than mere ownership) of object by subject. It is money becoming part of the same pool of a human’s resources, as their intelligence, network, bodily abilities, life expectancy, etc. – one of many resources all aimed at a single goal. The classic example is the knowledge of what it is like to be a parent. It is a transformative experience[2], that cannot be known in advance by any amount of propositions, mastery of any procedure, nor even understanding of a parental worldview from either the parent’s or the world’s perspective. Because the act of becoming a parent changes the person doing the knowing, the only way to know what it’s like is to be, or rather become, one.<ref>https://book.moneyblind.net/the-book/1/1.3/1.3.2</ref>


==References==

[[Category:John Vervaeke]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]
[[sn:Participatory Knowing]]
[[Category:Pages]]