This is moved into [[Phenomenal knowing]] now

==Quotes==
[[Category:Knowledge]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]
[[sn:Perspectival knowing]]=== psychology today ===
''Perspectival knowing'' refers to knowing via embodied perception. It consists of seeing the world and one’s place in it via a specific point of view, and understanding (or not) the key aspects of a situation.<ref>https://www.psychologytoday.com/ca/blog/theory-knowledge/202101/john-vervaeke-s-brilliant-4p3r-metatheory-cognition</ref>

=== Money ===
This concerns awareness and perception in context. It is knowing what is relevant right now, in your current circumstances. Right now, these words are (hopefully) standing out for you, but the feel of your clothes on your skin is likely not (at least before you read that). In the world of money, perspectival knowing is about awareness of opportunity costs. Every time you do anything with money, you are not doing another thing. This is too-easily and too-often forgotten when we’re blinded by the shininess of short-term super-salient things thrust into our faces by sales tactics.<ref name=":0">https://book.moneyblind.net/the-book/1/1.3/1.3.2</ref>

Intention is important here. Just as the same chat-up line can bomb if delivered from a place of desperation where it would successfully woo if delivered with confidence, so can the same purchase action work if the intention is to live aligned with a personal version of the Good Life, rather than one borrowed from an advert. Society will solve neither the opioid crisis nor its web of individual meaning crises when it thinks the solution is for sale.<ref name=":0" />

Perspectival knowing is to know money by knowing what it is like to be a person that has some, to see it in the context of a universe of opportunity costs. It is the knowledge of what it is like to be something, i.e. a human in a particular time, place, and situation. This makes it closely linked to the next type of knowing. Because to be that human is a snapshot, but that human is also always becoming another human.<ref name=":0" />
==See Also==

* [[Participatory Knowledge]]

==References==


[[Category:Knowledge]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]
[[sn:Perspectival knowing]]If you’re going to cultivate a skill you need to have what you have right here, right now. You need to have a situational awareness, what’s going on here and now. This is your perspectival knowing, knowing what it’s like to be here right now. It’s to have a salience landscape. I’m standing out for you. You left big toe was not very salient to you, until I said that. That which is salient and standing out and what you’re focusing on is relevant and what you’re ignoring is irrelevant. That’s all happening in a highly textured, dynamic fashion right now. This perspectival knowing really matters because we’re having to study it when people are going into virtual reality because it only feels real when things are present to them, when that perspectival landscaping is working properly. It really matters, for example, when you’re doing work like remote scientific work on Mars with rovers. So, this perspectival knowing is ultimately is dependent on your participatory knowing. All the time, and Stoicism really gets at the heart of this, you are doing this in a coordinated fashion. You’re assuming an identity and assigning identities. I am the lecturer you are the audience. There’s an agent-arena relationship that is constantly going on in the basement, the foundations of your cognition. This process of co-identification, that’s your participatory knowing. Who am I? Who are you? What is that? All of these questions are co-defining. For example, this glass is graspable to me but the fact that is graspable is not a property of it. It’s not graspable by a snail. It’s not a feature just of my hand, it’s how my hand and the glass co-identify and fit together that makes me aware of it in a situational awareness, and then I can cultivate skills of how to use it. Once I can use it, then I can make propositions about it.<ref>https://modernstoicism.com/the-view-from-above-a-transformation-of-perspectival-and-participatory-knowing-by-john-vervaeke/</ref>

Perspectival knowing refers to knowing via embodied perception. It consists of seeing the world and one’s place in it via a specific point of view, and understanding (or not) the key aspects of a situation.<ref>https://www.psychologytoday.com/ca/blog/theory-knowledge/202101/john-vervaeke-s-brilliant-4p3r-metatheory-cognition</ref>

This concerns awareness and perception in context. It is knowing what is relevant right now, in your current circumstances. Right now, these words are (hopefully) standing out for you, but the feel of your clothes on your skin is likely not (at least before you read that). In the world of money, perspectival knowing is about awareness of opportunity costs. Every time you do anything with money, you are not doing another thing. This is too-easily and too-often forgotten when we’re blinded by the shininess of short-term super-salient things thrust into our faces by sales tactics.<ref>https://book.moneyblind.net/the-book/1/1.3/1.3.2</ref>

== Early usage ==
Unsure if relevant<ref>https://academic.oup.com/book/12449/chapter-abstract/276518924?redirectedFrom=fulltext</ref>

== See Also ==

* [[Participatory Knowing]]
* [[phenomenal knowing]]

== References ==
[[Category:Pages]]