[[Category:Knowledge]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]
[[sn:Phenomenal knowing]]Phenomenal knowledge is a model of knowing


It is also known as [[Grokking]]

# [[Participatory knowing]] == [[Relevance realization]], or [[self organizing criticality]] forming [[small world networks]]
# [[Perspectival knowing]]

It is a combination of [[Participatory knowing]] and [[Perspectival knowing]] as these are not worthy of being separated

== In Lifeism ==
In Lifeism phenomenal knowing is most linked to family relationships and values
[[Category:Phenomenal knowing]]
==Kairos==


{{Quote|Kairos is perspectival participatory knowing, knowing exactly the right time to shift the course of events.

In the New Testament, kairos means the time when God acts. Jesus embodies kairos.

The importance of the concept for Christianity was stressed by [[Paul Tillich]].
 
|[[awakeningfromthemeaningcrisis.com]]<ref>https://web.archive.org/web/20210307151407/https://awakeningfromthemeaningcrisis.com/kairos</ref>}}[[Category:John Vervaeke]]
[[sn:Phenomenal knowing]]
==Qoute about both==

{{Quote|
* Perspectival knowledge (noesis): For example, knowing what it’s like to see Earth from the Moon or what it is like to be a human living in the post-World War Two Germany..
* Participatory knowledge (gnosis): knowing by sharing a fundamental identity with something, a knowing by becoming, which also comes with a certain degree of imitation and internalisation. It’s the knowing you get by binding your identity to something and letting your identity being transformed in conjunction with how that thing is transforming. For example, knowing how to coordinate with your team to win the NBA Championship or how to be a parent by participating in parenthood or how you know a person you love. You don’t just have beliefs about a person you love, or some particular skill that allows you to “work” with them. You know them by how differently you know yourself and the world in knowing them.
 
|[[awakeningfromthemeaningcrisis.com]]<ref>https://web.archive.org/web/20210307142111/https://awakeningfromthemeaningcrisis.com/knowledge</ref>}}[[Category:John Vervaeke]]
[[sn:Phenomenal knowing]]
== Participatory Quotes ==
''Participatory knowing'' refers to knowing how to act in the “agent-arena” environment. It is simultaneously one of the most basic and most profound kinds of knowing. One way to think about participatory knowledge is to consider the difference between being in a state of confusion versus a state of flow. Flow is when you are in a groove and feel a natural “dance” between your actions and the environment, and an example of participatory knowledge.<ref name=":0">https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/theory-knowledge/202101/john-vervaeke-s-brilliant-4p3r-metatheory-cognition</ref>

This concerns a shared, symbiotic, identity-based knowing. There is an inherent degree of internalisation (rather than mere ownership) of object by subject. It is money becoming part of the same pool of a human’s resources, as their intelligence, network, bodily abilities, life expectancy, etc. – one of many resources all aimed at a single goal. The classic example is the knowledge of what it is like to be a parent. It is a transformative experience<ref name=":1">https://book.moneyblind.net/the-book/1/1.3/1.3.2</ref><ref>To borrow the language of L.A. Paul, from ''Transformative Experience''</ref>, that cannot be known in advance by any amount of propositions, mastery of any procedure, nor even understanding of a parental worldview from either the parent’s or the world’s perspective. Because the act of becoming a parent changes the person doing the knowing, the only way to know what it’s like is to be, or rather become, one.<ref name=":1" />

More crudely, a pen takes on a use only when there is a human hand there to pick it up and write with it, and a human-pen hybrid is fundamentally different to a human and a pen side by side; the act of writing with the pen is fundamental to neither human nor pen. Our participatory relationship with money is incessant. Our interactions with it are constantly shaping our identity and the environment in which that identity is finding its way. And the money-environment in turn shapes us.<ref name=":1" />


{{Quote|Participatory knowledge (gnosis) is knowing by sharing a fundamental identity with something, a knowing by becoming, which also comes with a certain degree of imitation and internalisation. It’s the knowing you get by binding your identity to something and letting your identity being transformed in conjunction with how that thing is transforming. For example, knowing how to coordinate with your team to win the NBA Championship or how to be a parent by participating in parenthood or how you know a person you love. You don’t just have beliefs about a person you love, or some particular skill that allows you to “work” with them. You know them by how differently you know yourself and the world in knowing them.

 
|[[awakeningfromthemeaningcrisis.com]]<ref>https://web.archive.org/web/20210307151807/https://awakeningfromthemeaningcrisis.com/participatory-knowledge</ref>}}

==Perspectival Quotes==
[[Category:Knowledge]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]
[[sn:Phenomenal knowing]][[Category:Phenomenology]]
=== psychology today ===
''Perspectival knowing'' refers to knowing via embodied perception. It consists of seeing the world and one’s place in it via a specific point of view, and understanding (or not) the key aspects of a situation.<ref>https://www.psychologytoday.com/ca/blog/theory-knowledge/202101/john-vervaeke-s-brilliant-4p3r-metatheory-cognition</ref>

=== Money ===
This concerns awareness and perception in context. It is knowing what is relevant right now, in your current circumstances. Right now, these words are (hopefully) standing out for you, but the feel of your clothes on your skin is likely not (at least before you read that). In the world of money, perspectival knowing is about awareness of opportunity costs. Every time you do anything with money, you are not doing another thing. This is too-easily and too-often forgotten when we’re blinded by the shininess of short-term super-salient things thrust into our faces by sales tactics.<ref name=":0k">https://book.moneyblind.net/the-book/1/1.3/1.3.2</ref>

Intention is important here. Just as the same chat-up line can bomb if delivered from a place of desperation where it would successfully woo if delivered with confidence, so can the same purchase action work if the intention is to live aligned with a personal version of the Good Life, rather than one borrowed from an advert. Society will solve neither the opioid crisis nor its web of individual meaning crises when it thinks the solution is for sale.<ref name=":0k" />

Perspectival knowing is to know money by knowing what it is like to be a person that has some, to see it in the context of a universe of opportunity costs. It is the knowledge of what it is like to be something, i.e. a human in a particular time, place, and situation. This makes it closely linked to the next type of knowing. Because to be that human is a snapshot, but that human is also always becoming another human.<ref name=":0k" />
==[[Great November Outage]] content==
[[Category:Phenomenal knowledge]]
[[sn:Phenomenal knowing]][[Category:Phenomenology]]
Phenomenal knowing is a fusion of [[Perspectival knowing]] and [[Participatory Knowledge]]. I think [[John Vervaeke]] unnecessarily separated them

==Participatory==
{{Quote|Participatory knowledge (gnosis) is knowing by sharing a fundamental identity with something, a knowing by becoming, which also comes with a certain degree of imitation and internalisation. It’s the knowing you get by binding your identity to something and letting your identity being transformed in conjunction with how that thing is transforming. For example, knowing how to coordinate with your team to win the NBA Championship or how to be a parent by participating in parenthood or how you know a person you love. You don’t just have beliefs about a person you love, or some particular skill that allows you to “work” with them. You know them by how differently you know yourself and the world in knowing them.|<ref>https://web.archive.org/web/20210307151807/https://awakeningfromthemeaningcrisis.com/participatory-knowledge</ref>}}
==ChatGPT ==

=== attempting to compare and contrast participatory and perspectival ===
From this article<ref>https://modernstoicism.com/the-view-from-above-a-transformation-of-perspectival-and-participatory-knowing-by-john-vervaeke/</ref>

Participatory knowing refers to the way in which we construct and define our own identities and the identities of others within a social context. It is the process by which we co-identify with others and participate in the creation of shared meaning and understanding. This type of knowing involves the negotiation of roles and relationships within a social group or community, and it is closely tied to our sense of agency and our ability to act and make decisions.

Perspectival knowing, on the other hand, refers to our subjective experience of the world and our understanding of the context in which we find ourselves. It is the way in which we pay attention to and interpret our surroundings, and it is shaped by our values, goals, and priorities. Perspectival knowing involves the construction of a "salience landscape," which is a dynamic, textured representation of the things that are most relevant and meaningful to us in a given moment.

Both participatory and perspectival knowing are important for understanding how we navigate the world and make sense of our experiences. They are closely related, as our participatory knowing shapes our perspectival knowing, and our perspectival knowing influences the way we participate in social interactions and make decisions. Together, these forms of knowing help us to construct our identities and make meaning of our experiences in the world.

=== Arguing for the integration of the two ===
Phenomenal knowing is a model that combines participatory and perspectival knowing, recognizing that both are important for understanding our experiences in the world. In this essay, I will argue that combining these two forms of knowing can provide a more comprehensive and nuanced understanding of how we navigate the world and make sense of our experiences.

Participatory knowing refers to the way in which we construct and define our own identities and the identities of others within a social context. It is the process by which we co-identify with others and participate in the creation of shared meaning and understanding. This type of knowing involves the negotiation of roles and relationships within a social group or community, and it is closely tied to our sense of agency and our ability to act and make decisions.

Perspectival knowing, on the other hand, refers to our subjective experience of the world and our understanding of the context in which we find ourselves. It is the way in which we pay attention to and interpret our surroundings, and it is shaped by our values, goals, and priorities. Perspectival knowing involves the construction of a "salience landscape," which is a dynamic, textured representation of the things that are most relevant and meaningful to us in a given moment.

By combining participatory and perspectival knowing, we can gain a more complete understanding of how we interact with the world and the experiences that shape our understanding of it. For example, consider the act of eating a meal with friends. Participatory knowing would help us to understand the social norms and expectations surrounding the meal, such as the roles that each person plays in preparing and serving the food. Perspectival knowing would help us to understand the subjective experience of eating the food, such as the flavors, textures, and emotions that are evoked. By combining these two forms of knowing, we can gain a more comprehensive understanding of the meal as a whole, including both the social and personal aspects of the experience.

Another reason to combine participatory and perspectival knowing is that they are closely related and often influence one another. Our participatory knowing shapes our perspectival knowing, as the roles and relationships that we adopt in social situations influence the way that we perceive and interpret our surroundings. Similarly, our perspectival knowing influences the way we participate in social interactions and make decisions. By combining these two forms of knowing, we can better understand the complex interplay between our social identities and our subjective experiences of the world.

In conclusion, combining participatory and perspectival knowing can provide a more comprehensive and nuanced understanding of our experiences in the world. By recognizing the interconnectedness of these two forms of knowing, we can gain a deeper understanding of how we interact with the world and the experiences that shape our understanding of it.

=== Ninth grade summary ===
There are three main types of knowing: phenomenal, procedural, and propositional.

Phenomenal knowing refers to the understanding and knowledge that we gain through our direct experience or perception of the world around us. This type of knowing is based on our subjective experience and is often closely tied to our emotions and values. For example, if you have a positive experience of eating a certain type of food, you may have a strong desire to continue eating that food because it brings you pleasure.

Procedural knowing refers to the knowledge and skills that we acquire through practice and repetition. It is the understanding of how to do things, rather than just knowing about them. For example, learning how to ride a bike or play a musical instrument requires procedural knowledge.

Propositional knowing is knowledge that is derived from abstract principles or generalizable information. It is the understanding of facts and ideas that can be expressed in a proposition or statement. For example, knowing that the earth is round and orbits the sun is propositional knowledge.

Overall, these three types of knowing are all important for understanding and navigating the world around us. Phenomenal knowing helps us to make decisions based on our own experiences and values, procedural knowing allows us to acquire skills and perform tasks, and propositional knowing helps us to understand the world through abstract principles and generalizable information.
[[Category:John Vervaeke]]
[[sn:Phenomenal knowing]][[Category:Knowledge]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]
[[sn:Phenomenal knowing]]==Kairos==
{{Quote|Kairos is perspectival participatory knowing, knowing exactly the right time to shift the course of events.

In the New Testament, kairos means the time when God acts. Jesus embodies kairos.

The importance of the concept for Christianity was stressed by Paul Tillich.|[[John Vervaeke]]<ref>https://web.archive.org/web/20210307151407/https://awakeningfromthemeaningcrisis.com/kairos</ref>}}[[Category:John Vervaeke]]
[[sn:Phenomenal knowing]]
==References==
[[Category:Pages]]