A quick way into [https://discord.gg/TDbpwzz The Portal Group Discord server] is contribution. Here are things we need help with.

== Quests ==
<section begin=quest-boxes /><div class="flex-container">
    <div class="flex-item">
{{GenericBox
|header=
===Helpful Tasks===
|content=This is the spot for those who don't have expertise in STEM, or are busy with life, but still want to help us. Whether you have only 5 minutes or unlimited time and energy, you can help us and the community.

====Explore and Catalog====
* Eric has a lot in his mind. Help us find and collect [[Riffs_to_Animate|riffs]], references, [[Portal Concepts|concepts]], and [[Ericisms|neologisms that Eric creates]], or that come up in relation to The Portal.

====Transcript Editing====
* Some [[All_Episodes|Portal episodes]] and many [[Content_by_Eric_Weinstein|Eric Appearances]] are still in need of a transcript, or have transcripts that need further editing. 
* Have a look at our [https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1lFYnK-Z_eDAp_6D7SAZvCrcw3LxoLdBcEHzzVs9oztI/ Portal Media spreadsheet] to find the current status of any transcript. 
* Let [https://twitter.com/brookedallas Brooke] or [https://twitter.com/AardvarkLaurant Aardvark] know which you'd like to work on. They will provide you with the necessary materials. 
* Follow our [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1m_nCPXVSFfTw7asW7oMUoINwVoHxKz78Wqeiss_DrM0/ Transcript Style Guide].

===== Wiki Editing =====
* Write a strong, one-sentence description of ideas on their wiki pages
* Rewrite disorganized pages on the wiki
* Build out pages that are [[:Category:Stub|stubs (underdeveloped)]].
}}
    </div>
    <div class="flex-item">
{{GenericBox
|header=
===Praxis===
|content=Help to retell the story of our sciences to new generations of students
* '''[[Read]]'''
* Make a visualization from calculations in what you've [[Read|read]]
====Mathematics====
* Request visualizations of principles or constructions
* Outline sequences of thought to reach a particular idea
====Physics====
* Write pages on hard physical problems independent of mathematics

====Engineering====
* Onboarding to CAD for mechanical engineering
* Contribute to realizable engineering challenge ideas to improve our world
}}
    </div>
    <div class="flex-item">
{{GenericBox
|header=
===Programming===
|content= Build a useful piece of software.
==== Data Visualization (d3-js, chart-js, p5-js) ====
* [https://discord.com/channels/674958932938195015/686176298820698160/788058007580704798 Make visualizations with the users.theportal.wiki data]

==== Discord Bots (JavaScript) ====
* Discord Pin Archive + Management Bot
* Bot that cross posts from Eric's Instagram to the server
* Bot that relays messages across servers

==== Instragram Bots ====
* Bot that cross posts from Eric's Instagram to the server

==== Three-js ====
* Make our [https://theportal.group/physical-portals/ Portal Map] work similar to the [https://www.spacex.com/launches/index.html "Follow Dragon" section] on SpaceX's website.

==== Twitter Bots ====
* Twitter Archival Bot
* Twitter Bot that responds to tweets from Eric containing keywords with wiki articles.
}}
    </div>
    <div class="flex-item">
{{GenericBox
|header=
=== Be Creative ===
|content=Show us what you got!
==== Music ====
* Learn a silly or fun [[Tribal_Drinking_Songs|drinking song]], and record yourself playing or singing it, preferably with friends from The Portal
* Make a song that incorporates the podcast's music
==== Visual Art ====
* Are you an artist inspired by The Portal? Show us what you've made!
* Help us make visualizations and animations to go along with [[Riffs_to_Animate|Eric's riffs]] and [https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLOOcZuT-uqD5_J0DwXHRT7vqs8WRg4qSX mathematical concepts] of interest
* See what others have created on our [https://theportal.group/featured-artists/ Featured Artists] page
====Writing====
* Write an essay, blog post, or [https://twitter.com/z3nblack/status/1009243719298502656 twitter thread] on a topic covered on The Portal.
}}
    </div>
</div><section end=quest-boxes />
__NOTOC__
[[Category:Community]][[Category:Pages]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]