The Portal Group Discord server is structured to privilege projects and focused discussion. New members automatically receive the "Newb" role upon joining, restricting their ability to post to the ''#lobby-and-introductions'' channel and the Open Discussion channels. Access to project and focused discussion channels is given when a member's "Newb" role is removed. This usually happens when a member contributes or otherwise shows interest in the community.

== Voice Channels ==
There are different permissions for different voice channels.

=== Newb Voice ===
Anyone can chat in Newb Voice. The associated text channel is ''#newb-voice-text''.

=== Office Hours ===
Office Hours is for meetings and focused discussion. The associated text channel is ''#office-hours''. "Newb" members can schedule meetings with High Rollers to talk about projects, or join and listen, but by default they cannot speak unless given temporary access.

=== Roller Voice ===
Roller Voice is for de-newbed users who have found the "Roller" role. The associated text channel is ''#roller-voice-text''.

== Moderation Roles ==
* Newb - Every new user gets this role. It is removed when a user contributes to or otherwise shows interest in the community.
* Acting Spammy
* A Bit Too Much
* Squeaky Wheel
* Lobby - This role restricts users to only posting in the ''#lobby-and-introductions'' channel.

== Roles and Command ==
<div class="projects-container">
    <div class="grid-column">
{{GenericBox
|header=
===Discord Server Roles===
|content=Roles on the Discord server identify users' project interests and capabilities, and also restrict or enable permissions. <!-- They are granted by those with the "Roller" or "High Roller" roles or by users reacting to certain messages. -->
====Moderation Roles====
* Newb - Every new user gets this role. It will be removed once you start contributing to the community.
* Announcements - If you'd like to be notified of Announcements or Office Hours sessions, this is a good role to give yourself. (This is one of the few roles that users can add and remove themselves.)
* Welcoming Committee
* Acting Spammy
* A Bit Too Much
* Squeaky Wheel
* Lobby
====Project Roles====
* Climbing the Cliff
* Convex Hull
* GWT
* Mobile App
* Portal Blog
* Portal Book Club Organizers
* Portal Clips
* Portal Merch
* Portal Visualizations
* Riffs to Animate
* Russell Conjugation
* Transcripts
* Wiki Maintenance
}}
    </div>
    <div class="grid-column">
{{GenericBox
|header=
===Discord Bot Commands===
|content=We've configured a bot with several helpful commands. Also, several less-than-helpful commands.

* '''!commands''' - Shows a link to this wiki page listing all the commands.
* '''!faq''' - Questions that have been frequently asked, here are.
* '''!rules''' - Lists our extensive set of strict and burdensome rules.
* '''!show''' - Provides an animated GIF kindly asking you to share your work.
* '''!chitchat''' - Gives a reminder that the projects server isn't for idle chitchat. Provides a link to [[The Portal Discord Servers]].
* '''!reiterate''' - Gives a re-reminder that the projects server isn't for idle chitchat. Provides another link to [[The Portal Discord Servers]].
* '''!startup''' - Oh. You don't want to make a project. You want to make a startup company. Let's dig into ramifications.
* '''!gu''' - It's fun to consider how demanding the [[Theory of Geometric Unity]] truly is.
* '''!graph'''
* '''!wall'''
* '''!tome'''}}
    </div>
    <div class="grid-column">
{{GenericBox
|header=
===Other Commands===
|content=You want commands? We got all the commands.
* !coffee
* !tea
* !calm
* !zen
* !numberwang
* !laugh
* !yada
* !bla
* !memes
* !intro
* !net
* !lobby
* !quest
* !shedding
}}
    </div>
</div>

[[Category:Community]]
[[Category:The Portal Group]][[Category:Pages]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]