The intention of this page is to consolidate a list of important events surrounding the Portal, the associated Discord server and this wiki.

==Categories==


:*<font color="blue">'''Blue''':</font> Events related to the podcast, "The Portal".

:*<font color="green">'''Green''':</font> Events related to "The Portal - Unofficial Discord"

:*<font color="red">'''Red''':</font> Real world events related to the Portal. 

==Notable Portal-relevant Events==

===2019===
*<font color="blue">'''6/24/2019'''</font> - "The Portal" podcast is launched on iTunes, Spotify, and several other podcasts.

*<font color="blue">'''7/17/2019'''</font> - [[1:_Peter_Thiel|The Portal Episode 01: Peter Thiel]] is released.

*<font color="blue">'''7/19/2019'''</font> - [[2: What is The Portal|The Portal Episode 02: What is The Portal?]] is released.

*<font color="blue">'''7/25/2019'''</font> - [[3: Werner Herzog|The Portal Episode 03: Werner Herzog]] is released.

*<font color="blue">'''8/20/2019'''</font> - [[4: Timur Kuran - The Economics of Revolution and Mass Deception|The Portal Episode 04: The Economics of Revolution and Mass Deception]] is released.

*<font color="blue">'''8/30/2019'''</font> - [[5: Rabbi Wolpe - “So a Rabbi and an atheist walk into a podcast...”|The Portal Episode 05: “So a Rabbi and an atheist walk into a podcast...”]] is released.

*<font color="blue">'''9/7/2019'''</font> - [[6: Jocko Willink - The Way of the Violent Intellectual|The Portal Episode 06: Jocko Willink - The Way of the Violent Intellectual]] is released.

*<font color="blue">'''9/29/2019'''</font> - [[7: Bret Easton Ellis - The Dark Laureate of Generation X|The Portal Episode 07: Bret Easton Ellis - The Dark Laureate of Generation X]] is released.

*<font color="blue">'''10/2/2019'''</font> - [[8: Andrew Yang - The Dangerously Different Candidate the Media Wants You to Ignore|The Portal Episode 08: Andrew Yang - The Dangerously Different Candidate The Media Wants You To Ignore]] is released.

*<font color="blue">'''10/30/2019'''</font> - [[9: Bryan Callen - Cracking Wise|The Portal Episode 09: Bryan Callen - Cracking Wise]] is released.

*<font color="blue">'''10/31/2019'''</font> - [[10: Julie Lindahl: Shaking the poisoned fruit of shame out of the family tree|The Portal Episode 10: Julie Lindahl: Shaking the poisoned fruit of shame out of the family tree]] is released.

*<font color="blue">'''11/15/2019'''</font> - [[11: Sam Harris - Fighting with Friends|The Portal Episode 11: Sam Harris - Fighting with Friends]] is released.

*<font color="blue">'''11/21/2019'''</font> - [[12: Vitalik Buterin - The Ethereal Prince and His Virtual Machine|The Portal Episode 12: Vitalik Buterin - The Ethereal Prince and His Virtual Machine]] is released.

*<font color="blue">'''11/23/2019'''</font> - [[13: Garry Kasparov - Avoiding Zugzwang in AI and Politics|The Portal Episode 13: Garry Kasparov - Avoiding Zugzwang in AI and Politics]] is released.

*<font color="blue">'''11/30/2019'''</font> - [[14: London Tsai - The Reclusive Dean of The New Escherians|The Portal Episode 14: London Tsai - The Reclusive Dean of The New Escherians]] is released.

*<font color="blue">'''12/6/2019'''</font> - [[15: Garrett Lisi - My Arch-nemesis, Myself|The Portal Episode 15: Garrett Lisi - My Arch-nemesis, Myself]] is released.

*<font color="blue">'''12/16/2019'''</font> - [[16: Tyler Cowen - The Revolution Will Not Be Marginalized|The Portal Episode 16: Tyler Cowen - The Revolution Will Not Be Marginalized]] is released.

*<font color="blue">'''12/20/2019'''</font> - [[17: Anna Khachiyan - Reconstructing The Mystical Feminine From The Ashes Of “The Feminine Mystique”|The Portal Episode 17: Anna Khachiyan - Reconstructing The Mystical Feminine From The Ashes Of “The Feminine Mystique”]] is released.

===2020===

*<font color="red">'''1/09/2020'''</font> - Eric hosted the first Live Portal show at The Ice House Comedy Club.
*<font color="blue">'''1/15/2020'''</font> - [[18: Slipping the DISC: State of The Portal & Chapter 2020|The Portal Episode 18: Slipping the DISC: State of The Portal & Chapter 2020]] is released.

*<font color="blue">'''1/17/2020'''</font> - [[19: Bret Weinstein - The Prediction and the DISC|The Portal Episode 19: Bret Weinstein - The Prediction and the DISC]] is released.

*<font color="green">'''1/20/2020'''</font> - The Unofficial Portal Discord is created.

*<font color="blue">'''1/24/2020'''</font> - [[20: Sir Roger Penrose - Plotting the Twist of Einstein’s Legacy|The Portal Episode 20: Sir Roger Penrose - Plotting the Twist of Einstein’s Legacy]] is released.
*'''1/27/2020''' - This wiki was born. Yay!
*<font color="blue">'''1/31/2020'''</font> - [[21: Ashley Mathews (aka Riley Reid) - The mogul and brains behind America's Sweetheart|The Portal Episode 21: Ashley Mathews (aka Riley Reid) - The mogul and brains behind America's Sweetheart]] is released.
*<font color="blue">'''02/15/2020'''</font> - [[22: Ben Greenfield - Wheat From Chaff in Human Fitness|The Portal Episode 22: Ben Greenfield - Wheat From Chaff in Human Fitness]] is released.
*<font color="blue">'''02/24/2020'''</font> - [[23: Agnes Callard - Courage, Meta-cognitive detachment and their limits|The Portal Episode 23: Agnes Callard - Courage, Meta-cognitive detachment and their limits]] is released.
*<font color="blue">'''02/28/2020'''</font> - [[24: Kai Lenny - To Play and Flirt with Giants|The Portal Episode 24: Kai Lenny - To Play and Flirt with Giants]] is released.
*<font color="blue">'''03/07/2020'''</font> - [[25: The Construct: Jeffrey Epstein|The Portal Episode 25: The Construct: Jeffrey Epstein]] is released.
*<font color="green">'''3/15/2020'''</font> - The Unofficial Portal Discord holds its first project presentation.
*<font color="blue">'''03/19/2020'''</font> - [[26: James O’Keefe: What is (and isn't) Journalism in the 21st century]] is released.
*<font color="blue">'''03/27/2020'''</font> - [[27: Daniel Schmachtenberger - On Avoiding Apocalypses]] is released.
*<font color="blue">'''03/28/2020'''</font> - [[28: Eric Lewis - The Singular Genius of Elew]] is released.
*<font color="blue">'''04/02/2020'''</font> - [[A Portal Special Presentation- Geometric Unity: A First Look]] is released.
*<font color="blue">'''04/12/2020'''</font> - [[29: Jamie Metzl - The Bio-Hacker will see you now, Ready or Not]] is released.
*<font color="blue">'''04/16/2020'''</font> - [[30: Ross Douthat - The Rave Before the Fall]] is released.
[[Category:Community]][[Category:Pages]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]