{{Short description|Latin word for "profane"}}
{{Redirect|Unholy|other uses}}
{{Anthropology of religion |Basic concepts}}
{{italic title}}
'''''Profanum''''' is the [[Latin language|Latin]] word for "profane".  The state of being profane, or "profanity," refers to a lack of respect for things that are held to be [[sacred]], which implies anything inspiring or deserving of [[Reverence (emotion)|reverence]], as well as [[Desecration|behaviour showing similar disrespect]] or causing [[religious offense]].<ref name="Longman - profanity">{{cite web|url=http://www.ldoceonline.com/dictionary/profanity|title=Definition of profanity|publisher=[[Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English]] – online|access-date=11 September 2014}}</ref>

The distinction between the sacred and the profane was considered by [[Émile Durkheim]] to be central to the social reality of human [[religion]].<ref>Durkheim, Émile (1976). ''The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life'', p. 37. London: George Allen & Unwin (originally published 1915, English translation 1915).</ref>

== Etymology ==
The term ''profane'' originates from classical Latin ''profanus'', literally "before (outside) the temple", "pro" being outside and "fanum" being temple or sanctuary. It carried the meaning of either "desecrating what is holy" or "with a secular purpose" as early as the 1450s.<ref>Oxford English Dictionary Online, "profane", retrieved 2012-02-14</ref><ref>{{OEtymD|profane}}</ref> Profanity represented secular indifference to religion or religious figures, while [[blasphemy]] was a more offensive attack on religion and religious figures, considered [[sin]]ful, and a direct violation of [[The Ten Commandments]]. Moreover, many [[Bible verses]] speak against swearing.<ref name=swearingisbad>{{cite web|url=http://www.openbible.info/topics/bad_words|title=Bad Words [in the Bible]|publisher=OpenBible.info|access-date=30 April 2015}}</ref> In some countries, profanity words often have [[Pagan]] roots that after [[Christianity|Christian]] influence were turned from names of deities and spirits to profanity and used as such, like famous [[Finnish profanity]] word ''[[perkele]]'', which was believed to be an original name of the thunder god [[Ukko]], the chief god of the [[Finnish paganism|Finnish pagan]] pantheon.<ref>{{cite book|last=Siikala|first=Anna-Leena|title=Itämerensuomalaisten mytologia|publisher=SKS|year=2013|location=Helsinki}}</ref><ref>{{cite book|last=Salo|first=Unto|title=Agricola's Ukko in the light of archeology. A chronological and interpretative study of ancient Finnish religion: Old Norse and Finnish religions and cultic place-names. |year=1990|location=Turku|isbn=951-649-695-4}}</ref><ref>{{cite web|title=Miten suomalaiset kiroilivat ennen kristinuskoa?|url=http://www.kielikello.fi/index.php?mid=2&pid=11&aid=784|access-date=2015-12-25}}</ref><ref>{{cite book|title=Suomen kielen etymologinen sanakirja. 3.|publisher=Suomalais-ugrilainen seura|year=1976|location=Helsinki|isbn=951-9019-16-2}}</ref>

Profanities, in the original meaning of ''blasphemous profanity'', are part of the ancient tradition of the comic cults which laughed and scoffed at the deity or deities: an example of this would be Lucian's ''[[Dialogues of the Gods]]'' satire.<ref>[[Eleazar M. Meletinskii|Meletinsky, Eleazar Moiseevich]] ''[https://books.google.com/books?id=E5oa-sE8FzYC The Poetics of Myth]'' (Translated by Guy Lanoue and Alexandre Sadetsky) 2000 Routledge {{ISBN|0-415-92898-2}} p.110</ref>

== Sacred-profane dichotomy ==
{{Main|Sacred-profane dichotomy}}
The sacred-profane dichotomy is a concept posited by the French [[sociologist]] [[Émile Durkheim]], who considered it to be the central characteristic of [[religion]]: "religion is a unified system of beliefs and practices relative to ''sacred things'', that is to say, things set apart and forbidden."<ref>Emile Durkheim. [1912] 1995. ''[[The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life|The Elementary Forms of Religious Life]]'', edited and translated by K. E. Fields. New York: The Free Press. [https://web.archive.org/web/20190920140646/http://home.ku.edu.tr/~mbaker/cshs503/durkheimreligiouslife.pdf p. 35].</ref> In Durkheim's theory, the [[sacred]] represents the interests of the group, especially unity, which were embodied in sacred group symbols, or [[totems]]. The profane, however, involves mundane individual concerns. Durkheim explicitly stated that the sacred–profane dichotomy is not equivalent to [[good and evil|good-evil]], as the sacred could be either good or evil, and the profane could be either as well.<ref>Pals, Daniel. 1996. ''Seven Theories of Religion''. New York: Oxford University Press. US {{ISBN|0-19-508725-9}} (pbk). p. 99.</ref>

Durkheim's claim of the universality of this dichotomy for all religions and [[cult]]s has been criticized by scholars such as the British [[anthropologist]] [[Jack Goody]].<ref>{{cite web|url=http://press-files.anu.edu.au/downloads/press/p35161/mobile/ch06s03.html|title=The sacred-profane distinction is not universal|access-date=2007-07-10}} quote: "neither do the [[Lo Dagaa]] [group in Gonja, ''editor note''] appear to have any concepts at all equivalent to the vaguer and not unrelated dichotomy between the sacred and the profane"</ref> Goody also noted that "many societies have no words that translate as sacred or profane and that ultimately, just like the distinction between natural and supernatural, it was very much a product of European religious thought rather than a universally applicable criterion."{{cn|date=August 2022}} According to [[Tomoko Masuzawa]] any [[cosmology]] without a sacred–profane binary was rendered invisible by the field of [[religious studies]], privileging [[Christianity]] at the expense of non-Christian systems because the binary was supposed to be "universal",{{citation needed|date=December 2022}}

The profane world consists of all that people can know through their senses; it is the natural world of everyday life that people experience as either comprehensible or at least ultimately knowable — the ''[[Lebenswelt]]'' or lifeworld.<ref>Peter Berger, ''A Rumour of Angels'' (1973) p. 15</ref>

In contrast, the sacred, or ''sacrum'' in Latin, encompasses all that exists beyond the everyday, natural world that people experience with their senses. As such, the sacred or [[numinous]] can inspire feelings of awe, because it is regarded as ultimately unknowable and beyond limited human abilities to perceive and comprehend. Durkheim pointed out however that there are degrees of sacredness, so that an [[amulet]] for example may be sacred yet little respected.<ref>Durkheim, p. 38</ref>

==Transitions==

[[Rites of passage]] represent movements from one state — the profane – to the other, the sacred; or back again to the profanum.<ref>Durkheim, pp. 39–40</ref>

Religion is organized primarily around the sacred elements of human life and provides a collective attempt to bridge the gap between the sacred and the profane.{{citation needed|date=December 2022}}

==Profane progress==
Modernization and the [[Enlightenment era|Enlightenment]] project have led to a [[secularisation]] of culture over the past few centuries – an extension of the profanum at the (often explicit) expense of the sacred.<ref>[[Fredric Jameson]], ''The Jameson Reader'' (2005) p. 180-1</ref> The predominant 21st-century global worldview is as a result empirical, sensate, contractual, this-worldly – in short profane.<ref>Berger, pp. 13–14</ref>

[[Carl Jung]] expressed the same thought more subjectively when he wrote that "I know – and here I am expressing what countless other people know – that the present time is the time of God's disappearance and death".<ref>C. G. Jung, ''Man and his Symbols'' (1978) p. 295</ref>

==Counter reaction==

The advance of the profane has led to several countermovements, attempting to limit the scope of the profanum. [[Modernism]] set out to bring [[Mythology|myth]] and a sense of the sacred back into secular reality<ref>Jameson, p. 180-2</ref> — [[Wallace Stevens]] speaking for much of the movement when he wrote that "if nothing was divine then all things were, the world itself".<ref>Wallace Stevens, ''Collected Poems'' (1984) p. 412</ref>

[[Fundamentalism]] – Christian, Muslim, or other – set its face against the profanum with a return to sacred writ.<ref>Umberto Eco. ''Turning Back the Clock'' (2007) pp. 218–20</ref>

[[Psychology]] too has set out to protect the [[Personal boundaries|boundaries]] of the individual self from profane intrusion,<ref>Eric Berne, ''The Psychology of Human Destiny'' (1974) p. 130</ref> establishing ritual places for inward work<ref>Robert Bly, ''Iron John'' (1991) p. 194 and p. 128</ref> in opposition to the [[Postmodernity|postmodern]] loss of privacy.<ref>Eco, p. 77-88</ref>

==Cultural examples==
[[Seamus Heaney]] considered that "the desacralizing of space is something that my generation experienced in all kinds of ways".<ref>Denis O'Driscoll, ''Stepping Stones'' (2008) p. 309</ref>

==See also==
{{Columns-list|colwidth=22em|
* [[Carnival]] and [[Carnivalesque]]
* [[Deconsecrate]]
* [[Desecrate]]
* [[Grotesque body]]
* [[Kegare]]
* [[Sacred site]]
* [[Sacrilege]]
* [[Secular religion]]
* [[Secular state]]
* [[Symbolic boundaries]]
* [[Wickedness]]
}}

==References==
{{Reflist|2|}}

==Further reading==
{{Portal|Religion|Society
}}
*[[Ernest Gellner]], ''Postmodernism, Reason and Religion'' (1992)
*[[Mircea Eliade]], ''Patterns in Comparative Religion'' (1993)
* Acquaviva, S. S., and Patricia Lipscomb. ''The Decline of the Sacred in Industrial Society''. (Review: {{jstor|1202830}}).
* [[Mikhail Bakhtin|Bakhtin, Mikhail]]. [1941] 1993 ''[[Rabelais and His World]]'', translated by [[Hélène Iswolsky|H. Iswolsky]]. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
* Barber, C. Renate. 1965. "Sacred and Profane: Some Thoughts on the Folk-Urban Continuum of This Dichotomy." ''[[Man (journal)|Man]]'' 65:45–46. {{doi|10.2307/2797525}} {{jstor|2797525}}
* Colpe, Carsten. "[http://www.encyclopedia.com/environment/encyclopedias-almanacs-transcripts-and-maps/sacred-and-profane The Sacred and the Profane]," translated by R. M. Stockman. In the ''Encyclopedia of Religion''. via Encyclopedia.com.
* [[Emile Durkheim|Durkheim, Emile]]. 1912. ''[[The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life]]'', 
** [1915] 1965, translated by [[Joseph Swain (academic)|Joseph Swain]]. The Free Press: {{ISBN|0-02-908010-X}}
** 1995, translated by Karen E. Fields. The Free Press: {{ISBN|0-02-907937-3}}
* [[Mircea Eliade|Eliade, Mircea]]. 1957. ''[https://monoskop.org/images/b/b1/Eliade_Mircea_The_Sacred_and_The_profane_1963.pdf The Sacred and the Profane: The Nature of Religion]'', translated by W. R. Trask. New York: [[Harcourt Brace & World]].
* Pals, Daniel. 1996. ''Seven Theories of Religion.'' New York: Oxford University Press. {{ISBN|0-19-508725-9}} (pbk).

{{Émile Durkheim}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:Sacred-profane dichotomy}}
[[Category:Sociology of religion]]
[[Category:Dichotomies]]
[[Category:Émile Durkheim]]
[[Category:Sociological theories]]
[[Category:Sacredness]][[Category:Old pages]][[Category:Old pages]][[Category:Old pages]][[Category:Old pages]][[Category:Old pages]]
[[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Pages]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]