Redressing was a proposed practice from 2021-early 2022, it may be implemented, but needs to be done so within the context of [[Sangha Democracy]]

== Redressing ==
Redressing is an institution similar to confession performed by priests. It differs primarily in that it is actively initiated by priests to a wrongdoing believer. see [[#Cancel Culture and Harmony Maintainance]]

The Church of Evolution considers cancel culture to be an ineffective and inappropriate way to help marginalized groups, one which comes at the detriment to societal order and safety. Immanuelle has argued that cancel culture is especially intimidating to members of marginalized groups who often lack social alternatives when ostracized vs more privileged people.

As such The Church has implemented a hate speech policy known as "consistent guidance". Under the policy priests are able to give [[Demerit (school discipline)|demerits]] and confront members for any form of hate speech or casual racism. Priests are encouraged to be extremely consistent with this and give such penalties to any member regardless of extenuating circumstances. By contrast lay members are not allowed to criticize the behavior of each other when it comes to creating an inclusive environment, in fact such behavior is punished in the same way that racism and homophobia are.

The theory behind this practice is that cancel culture and peer pressure often fail to consistently promote good social behaviors. Bigoted acts which are too small to gain group attention are often ignored, while larger acts are often given excessive attention, and fear of receiving such attention may keep people with different outlooks from expressing their views. Additionally it is often noted that when people are confronted en masse by untrained peers their views are often enforced.

By contrast priests are trained and educated in psychology, ethics, and critical theory. A priest confronting someone will know very well how to articulate the harm the person's actions have caused, and know how to approach someone without causing the blowback effect. Such confrontations resemble a [[Interrogation|police interrogation]] in some ways, but differ in that the goal is calming someone down and convincing them to reassess their behavior. Contents of such confrontations are considered subject to the [[Seal of confession in the Catholic Church|seal of confession]] and [[Priest–penitent privilege|priest-penitient privilege]].



== Cancel Culture and Harmony Maintainance ==
The Church of Evolution considers cancel culture to be an ineffective and inappropriate way to help marginalized groups, one which comes at the detriment to societal order and safety. Immanuelle has argued that cancel culture is especially intimidating to members of marginalized groups who often lack social alternatives when ostracized vs more privileged people.

As such The Church has implemented a hate speech policy known as "consistent guidance". Under the policy priests are able to give [[Demerit (school discipline)|demerits]] and confront members for any form of hate speech or casual racism. Priests are encouraged to be extremely consistent with this and give such penalties to any member regardless of extenuating circumstances. By contrast lay members are not allowed to criticize the behavior of each other when it comes to creating an inclusive environment, in fact such behavior is punished in the same way that racism and homophobia are.

The theory behind this practice is that cancel culture and peer pressure often fail to consistently promote good social behaviors. Bigoted acts which are too small to gain group attention are often ignored, while larger acts are often given excessive attention, and fear of receiving such attention may keep people with different outlooks from expressing their views. Additionally it is often noted that when people are confronted en masse by untrained peers their views are often enforced.

By contrast priests are trained and educated in psychology, ethics, and critical theory. A priest confronting someone will know very well how to articulate the harm the person's actions have caused, and know how to approach someone without causing the blowback effect. Such confrontations resemble a [[Interrogation|police interrogation]] in some ways, but differ in that the goal is calming someone down and convincing them to reassess their behavior. Contents of such confrontations are considered subject to the [[Seal of confession in the Catholic Church|seal of confession]] and [[Priest–penitent privilege|priest-penitient privilege]].

== See Also ==

* [[The Pride]]

[[Category:Lambda Covenant]]
[[sn:Redressing]][[Category:The Pride]]
[[Category:Lifeism 2.0]]
[[sn:Redressing]][[Category:Pages that existed before the Great November Outage]]
[[sn:Redressing]][[sn:Redressing]]
[[Category:Pages]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]