{{Video|linked_video=end of chain, [[How to join the Priesthood]]|link=|topic=[[John Vervaeke]]|linking_videos=[[Reacting to the Meaning Crisis]]}}

This is a planned video to cap off the [[Reacting to the Meaning Crisis]] series as a retrospective. It is released about a month after Reacting to the Meaning Crisis so it is not particularly far away but it is far enough away to be free from exhaustion from the series

This video is the true end of the [[video path]] and as such few people will watch it. (outside the initial algorithmic impressions). Those who do are very valuable and I should encourage them to join the [[lambda covenant]]. This video's value is much more long term than other ones. 

It was uploaded at the same time as [[willpower is a trap]] and the relisting of [[Reacting to the Meaning Crisis]] episode 20 in order to avoid causing algorithm issues.

Willpower is a trap got way more than expected views so this was successful.

== Style ==
This video was done in a synthesized style of [[A Systems-Oriented Theory of Everything]] combined with the standard gameplay form.

A synthesized style was done. Moving to the [[vtuber]] style however made this concern mostly obsolete.

== Content ==

=== 0:00 Introduction ===

=== 0:45 Anagoge ===
Meaning clarification
*[[ennoblement]] and [[anagoge]] are the same thing now

=== 3:02 Sex ===
Questioning Vervaeke's antisexualism
*This is likely still too tied to my personal problems for me to make a fair judgment on it
*I'm uncertain whether I read it into his content due to the lens I was looking at it from my life.

=== 4:46 Knowledge ===
Changes to knowledge model
* [[Phenomenal knowing]] as an alternative that fits with Alpha Lambda Omega
=== 8:11 Seven Plagues ===
Changes to the [[seven plagues]]
* Splitting up of [[Existential Entrapment]]
* Reorganizing into the [[triads]]
* [[Alienation]] replacing [[spiralling]] as the most important of the plagues
** Plagues are in [[Alo order]].
** This is to say they are a different initiation order than the [[covenants]] and this needs to be explained in the video
*Formalization of [[Counter-Spiralling]] as an exploratory practice
===19:55 Cosmology===

*Updates on cosmology
**This was very early in the series and needs some updates and clarification
**[[continuous cosmos]]
**[[kamihood]]
**[[archonhood]]
*Cover the idea of the [[Great chain of being]] in more detail
**There are articles here on self organizingness and other things like that but they are of uncertain placement. Need to link them here
*New concepts
**[[katagoge]] as plunging down into the [[nine plagues]]
**[[shuttering]]
*Archons and updates on the [[Meta-Crisis]]

=== 22:21 Content creation changes ===
* Not a vtuber anymore for the medium term.
** May go back when I have a more distinctive model
* Dropped daily uploads due to it being overwhelming
* Not doing reaction videos anymore due to them being exhausting and not offering as much commentary as I'd like
* Happy I managed to get over my anxiety of recording
* In my view the biggest product of the series was actually the wiki articles I wrote during the production of the series
** Link the wiki in the description with some specific articles

=== 24:36 Call to action ===

* join the [[lambda covenant]] or even become a priest if you have watched the entire series
* If you want to watch something else then watch my most recent video
** If you binged this series then you will have been exposed to a lot of outdated content. If you are watching this video after 2022 it likely includes this video too
** Not AI recommended video, someone at this video willl likely have spent a decent amount of time on the series and as such been exposed to a large amount of outdated content, they will likely be most interested in what I'm doing now

[[Category:John Vervaeke]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]
[[sn:Reflecting on the Meaning Crisis]][[sn:Reflecting on the Meaning Crisis]][[sn:Reflecting on the Meaning Crisis]]
[[Category:Pages]]