{{Anthropology of religion |Basic concepts}}
{{Short description|Sociological concept}}
{{Use dmy dates|date=November 2020}}
{{Use Oxford spelling|date=November 2020}}
The '''sacred–profane dichotomy''' is a concept posited by the French [[sociologist]] [[Émile Durkheim]], who considered it to be the central characteristic of [[religion]]: "religion is a unified system of beliefs and practices relative to ''sacred things'', that is to say, things set apart and forbidden."<ref>Emile Durkheim. [1912] 1995. ''[[The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life|The Elementary Forms of Religious Life]]'', edited and translated by K. E. Fields. New York: The Free Press. [https://web.archive.org/web/20190920140646/http://home.ku.edu.tr/~mbaker/cshs503/durkheimreligiouslife.pdf p. 35].</ref> In Durkheim's theory, the [[sacred]] represents the interests of the group, especially unity, which were embodied in sacred group symbols, or [[totems]]. The [[profanum|profane]], however, involves mundane individual concerns. Durkheim explicitly stated that the sacred–profane dichotomy is not equivalent to [[good and evil|good-evil]], as the sacred could be either good or evil, and the profane could be either as well.<ref>Pals, Daniel. 1996. ''Seven Theories of Religion''. New York: Oxford University Press. US {{ISBN|0-19-508725-9}} (pbk). p. 99.</ref>

Durkheim's claim of the universality of this dichotomy for all religions and [[cult]]s has been criticized by scholars such as the British [[anthropologist]] [[Jack Goody]].<ref>{{cite web|url=http://press-files.anu.edu.au/downloads/press/p35161/mobile/ch06s03.html|title=The sacred-profane distinction is not universal|access-date=2007-07-10}} quote: "neither do the [[Lo Dagaa]] [group in Gonja, ''editor note''] appear to have any concepts at all equivalent to the vaguer and not unrelated dichotomy between the sacred and the profane"</ref> Goody also noted that "many societies have no words that translate as sacred or profane and that ultimately, just like the distinction between natural and supernatural, it was very much a product of European religious thought rather than a universally applicable criterion."<ref>{{cite web |url=http://science.jrank.org/pages/11183/Sacred-Profane-Durkheim-s-Critics.html |title=Sacred and Profane – Durkheim's Critics |access-date=2007-07-10 }}</ref> As [[Tomoko Masuzawa]] explains in ''The Invention of World Religions'' (2005), this system of comparative religion privileged [[Christianity]] at the expense of non-Christian systems. Any [[cosmology]] without a sacred–profane binary was rendered invisible by the field of [[religious studies]], because the binary was supposed to be "universal".

[[Sacredness]] as a [[Greater booster shot]] lines up somewhat with this but not entirely

==See also==
{{Portal|Religion|Society}}
* [[Profanum]]
* [[Carnival]] and [[Carnivalesque]]
* [[Mircea Eliade]]
* [[Grotesque body]]
* [[Kegare]]
* [[Ritual]] and [[ceremony]]
* [[Social control]]
* ''[[Sacred and Profane (8 medieval lyrics)]]'' (choral composition, by Benjamin Britten)
* ''[[Sacred and Profane Love]]'' (oil painting, by Titian)
* [[Sacred site]]
* [[Sacred time]]

==References==
{{Reflist}}

==Further reading==
* Acquaviva, S. S., and Patricia Lipscomb. ''The Decline of the Sacred in Industrial Society''. (Review: {{jstor|1202830}}).
* [[Mikhail Bakhtin|Bakhtin, Mikhail]]. [1941] 1993 ''[[Rabelais and His World]]'', translated by [[Hélène Iswolsky|H. Iswolsky]]. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
* Barber, C. Renate. 1965. "Sacred and Profane: Some Thoughts on the Folk-Urban Continuum of This Dichotomy." ''[[Man (journal)|Man]]'' 65:45–46. {{doi|10.2307/2797525}} {{jstor|2797525}}
* Colpe, Carsten. "[http://www.encyclopedia.com/environment/encyclopedias-almanacs-transcripts-and-maps/sacred-and-profane The Sacred and the Profane]," translated by R. M. Stockman. In the ''Encyclopedia of Religion''. via Encyclopedia.com.
* [[Emile Durkheim|Durkheim, Emile]]. 1912. ''[[The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life]]'', 
** [1915] 1965, translated by [[Joseph Swain (academic)|Joseph Swain]]. The Free Press: {{ISBN|0-02-908010-X}}
** 1995, translated by Karen E. Fields. The Free Press: {{ISBN|0-02-907937-3}}
* [[Mircea Eliade|Eliade, Mircea]]. 1957. ''[https://monoskop.org/images/b/b1/Eliade_Mircea_The_Sacred_and_The_profane_1963.pdf The Sacred and the Profane: The Nature of Religion]'', translated by W. R. Trask. New York: [[Harcourt Brace & World]].
* Pals, Daniel. 1996. ''Seven Theories of Religion.'' New York: Oxford University Press. {{ISBN|0-19-508725-9}} (pbk).

{{Émile Durkheim}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:Sacred-profane dichotomy}}
[[Category:Dichotomies]]
[[Category:Émile Durkheim]]
[[Category:Sociological theories]]
[[Category:Sociology of religion]]
[[Category:Sacredness]]

{{Religion-stub}}
{{Sociology-stub}}[[Category:Old pages]][[Category:Old pages]][[Category:Old pages]][[Category:Old pages]][[Category:Old pages]]
[[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Pages]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]