Scenes are experiences which affect someone and their life which are independent of [[genes]] or [[memes]]

== Etymology ==
The original term prior to the [[great relexifixation]] was [[karma]] but the term was switched due to ambiguity

It came from Karma specifically as used by [[Alok Kanojia]] which often meant arbitrary life circumstances. The term scene taken from Metal Gear Solid 3 Snake Eater was seen as more appropriate

== Info ==
This info is taken from [[a brief treatist of the soul]]

Scenes refer to units of life experience. The term is inspired in its use from the Buddhist concept of karma, but taken from Metal Gear Solid 3: Snake Eater. Scenes are not transmissible between individuals, although they can be self perpetuating such as in intergenerational trauma, or blood feuds. A sceneplex is a specific set of scenes that combines together in a specific way to form a specific expression, a scenome is the set of scenes of an individual and a scenetype is a specific type of person based on their scenome used in population scenetics. People can actively create scenes by altering environments.

=== Α Nature vs nurture and other confusions ===
This model is a bit confusing for some people. We are used to a less rigorous analysis of the origins of our thoughts.

Two people can have identical memes and genes yet different scenes. This would be the case for two identical twins in a small society that considers the monarch a living god. One becomes the monarch and the other lives as a peasant. They have the same beliefs and genetics but will become entirely different people

Some experiences impart both memes and scenes. 

Being raised in a certain religion may give you memes in the form of your religious beliefs, and also scenes in the form of your life experiences in the institutions. 

Converting to the same religion may give you the exact same memes but a completely different set of scenes. Converts to religions often are much more fervent in their beliefs. This may in part be due to memetic differences, but it may also be due to differences in scenes. [https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/aHaqgTNnFzD7NGLMx/reason-as-memetic-immune-disorder Further reading on this topic]

People often attribute a lot of their personal traits and characteristics to their life experiences. Many people will naively attribute nearly all their personality traits to scenes over genes and memes. People are notoriously bad at understanding themselves due to introspection illusion. Many traits such as virginity loss are heavily genetically determined despite the common views that they are a choice <nowiki>https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-021-01135-3</nowiki> . This can be potentially extremely harmful as people may overestimate their ability to choose their life paths and blame themselves for the ways their genetics cause them to act. However this should also be balanced out with ideas that make people feel empowered in their lives, as that is associated with positive outcomes. We need to develop a new memeplex to achieve optimal happiness and productivity on this area because current memeplexes can be very harmful to people.

[[Category:Scenetics]]
[[sn:Scenes]][[Category:MGS model]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]
[[sn:Scenes]][[Category:MGS roots]]
[[sn:Scenes]]
[[Category:Pages]]