The slave morality is a concept introduced by [[Friedrich Nietzsche]]. It is related to [[Anti-Alpha (new)|anti-omega]]. It is what Nietzsche focused on more in his philosophy than the [[Master Morality]] because it is what he suffered from and needed to escape.

You need to overcome [[envy]] and the slave morality before you can address the [[master morality]] and then reach freedom.

==Wikipedia==

According to Nietzsche, masters create morality; slaves respond to master morality with their slave morality. Unlike master morality, which is sentiment, slave morality is based on [[ressentiment|re-sentiment]]—devaluing what the master values and the slave does not have. As master morality originates in the strong, slave morality originates in the weak. Because slave morality is a reaction to oppression, it vilifies its oppressors. Slave morality is the inverse of master morality. As such, it is characterized by pessimism and cynicism. Slave morality is created in opposition to what master morality values as good. 

Slave morality does not aim at exerting one's will by strength, but by careful subversion. It does not seek to transcend the masters, but to make them slaves as well. The essence of slave morality is ''utility'':{{sfn|Nietzsche|1973|p=122}} The good is what is most useful for the whole community, not just the strong. Nietzsche sees this as a contradiction. Since the powerful are few compared to the masses of the weak, the weak gain power by corrupting the strong into believing that the causes of slavery (viz., the [[will to power]]) are evil, as are the qualities the weak originally could not choose because of their weakness. By saying humility is voluntary, slave morality avoids admitting that their humility was in the beginning forced upon them by a master. [[Biblical]] principles of humility, charity, and pity are the result of universalizing the plight of the slave onto all humankind, and thus enslaving the masters as well. "The ''democratic'' movement is the heir to [[Christianity]]"{{sfn|Nietzsche|1973|p=125}}—the political manifestation of slave morality because of its obsession with freedom and equality.

{{quote|...the Jews achieved that miracle of inversion of values thanks to which life on earth has for a couple millennia acquired a new and dangerous fascination - their prophets fused "rich", "godless", "evil", "violent", "sensual" into one, and were the first to coin the word "world" as a term of infamy. It is this inversion of values (with which is involved the employment of the word for "poor" as a synonym for "holy" and "friend") that the significance of the Jewish people resides: With ''them'', there begins the ''slave revolt in morals''.{{sfn|Nietzsche|1973|p=118}}}}

[[Category:Anti-Omega]]

== Sources==
*{{cite book |last=Nietzsche |first=Friedrich |title=On The Genealogy of Morals |year=1967 |publisher=Vintage Books |location=New York |isbn=0-679-72462-1 |url-access=registration |url=https://archive.org/details/ongenealogyofmor00niet_0 }}
* {{cite book | author-mask=1 |last=Nietzsche|first=Friedrich |author-link=Friedrich Nietzsche |title=Beyond Good and Evil |year=1973|publisher=Penguin Books |location=London |isbn=978-0-14-044923-5}}
* {{cite book |author1=Solomon, Robert C. |author2=Clancy Martin |title=Since Socrates: A Concise Sourcebook of Classic Readings |year=2005|publisher=Thomson Wadsworth |location=London |isbn=0534633285}}
* {{Cite book|title=On the Genealogy of Morals: A Polemic. By Way of Clarification and Supplement to My Last Book Beyond Good and Evil|last=Nietzsche|first=Friedrich|publisher=Oxford University Press|year=2008|isbn=978-0-19-953708-2|pages=19}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:Master-slave morality}}

[[Category:Philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche]]
[[Category:Conceptual distinctions]]
[[Category:Morality]]
[[Category:Exegesis]]

== References ==
{{Nietzsche}}
[[Category:Alienation]]
[[Category:Three traps]][[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Pages]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]