
Lifeism has positioned itself as offering a progressive and equitable alternative to 21st-century society during the [[2020s]], and to other organized religions which it describes as archaic and outdated

The [[Ninefold vaccine]] is central to social issues under the principle of [[As above, so below]]

== Economic issues ==
{{Main|Economics}}

== Political systems ==
{{Main|Sangha Democracy}}

== Transhumanism ==
Immanuelle is a strong advocate for [[transhumanism]] and argues it ought to be made equitably available to everyone to avoid exacerbating income inequality. They argue that transhumanism when equitably distributed will cause an increase in equality as people with particular disadvantages will benefit the most from it

== Open source intelligence/Sousveillance ==
Immanuelle argues that [[Information asymmetry|information asymmettry]] is often the cause of social injustice, and that concerns over surveillance are best explained by information asymmettry rather than privacy. They argue that the key to making just societies is increasing transparency so that everyone can make equally informed decisions on issues like which jobs to take and which politicians to vote for.

== Racial Issues ==
The Church strives for racial equality by telling the histories of all races within its holy texts.

Heritage is seen as highly important in Lifeism and such narratives are considered core to an individual's experience of the religion. Telling all sides of history and historical discussions of racial issues are the norm in The Church. A 2021 list of tenets (presumed lost) described repentence for ancestral sins such as systemic racism as one of the core tenets.

Immanuelle has argued that [[racism in the United States]] is intrinsically linked to [[Income inequality in the United States]] and that one cannot be addressed without addressing the other. They have also argued that racial issues in other parts of the world are dissimilar to American racial issues, and looking at them from an American lens is a poor way to address them.

== LGBT Issues ==
LGBT issues have been very prominent throughout the history of Lifeism from the beginning. Numerous figures in its founding including Immanuelle himself were bisexual in particular, with estimates placing 90% of early adherents and associates as being bisexual. Internal debates about the [[LGBT movements|LGBT movement]] dominated Lifeism early on, but became less prominent as the focus shifted towards wider society. Lifeism notably advocated for [[LGBT reproduction]] early on, and has set up a funding system so its LGBT members can afford to have children when it is possible.

== Gender Issues ==
Immanuelle has argued that [[anomie]] hits men especially hard compared to women. They argue this phenomenon is unrelated to feminism, and that feminism is merely a scapegoat used by the far right. He points to similar periods of history where societal norms broke down and argues that predecessors of the ''[[manosphere]]'' have existed long before feminism existed during periods of societal strife. They argue that [[organized religion]] and strong [[Metanarrative|meta-narratives]] are essential for healthy masculinity, and without them it inevitably degrades into nihilistic [[hegemonic masculinity]]. They argue that male entitlement is not a major phenomenon, and that a desire for dominance is often falsely equivocated with entitlement. They have described masculinity as being most healthy when future-looking and producing a better life for future generations, and unhealthy when looking to the past.

Immanuelle has criticized the men's movement for promoting a false understanding of [[toxic masculinity]] as referring to a belief that (all) masculinity is harmful to others, while promoting gender norms that psychologically harm the men that follow them

Immanuelle has described female socialization as resulting in women and trans men being unable to properly voice their desires and negotiate. They argue this results [[passive aggressive behavior]] from women and is the actual cause of most frustrations men have with women. They argue that teaching women to express their desires more clearly and assertively will result in a reduction in the gender wage gap, the end of the sex recession, and a reduction in misogyny. Examples include women asking men out and women asking for higher salaries and women saying no to sexual acts they don't want over merely not saying yes. They describe such issues as [[toxic femininity]] rather than more conventional language such as internalized misogyny

== Deradicalization ==
[[The Church]] has criticized many [[deradicalization]] attempts as failing to provide people the necessary community to live after extremism. The Church also offers a means for proper deradicalization and integration.

== Online dating ==
Lifeism is strictly against [[Online dating service|online dating]]. One of its core tenets is the idea that sexual relationships ought to emerge from the community and remain subservient to the community. As such The Church of Evolution makes it a major priority to organize social events so people can meet their partners without using online dating. Opposition to online dating is often seen as one of the defining social rules of Lifeism that distinguishes Evolutionists from non-Evolutionists.

Immanuelle has frequently criticized online dating as leading to depression, especially among men, and leading people to treat romance as a substitute for the divine. To a lesser extent They have criticized dating as a whole for facilitating this, being a twised form of romanticism that seeks escape from meaninglessness through emotion and a single mortal person rather than through reason and the divine, he credits John Vervaeke for this analysys<ref>{{Citation|title=Ep. 23 - Awakening from the Meaning Crisis - Romanticism|url=https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Noc1OH0CUBc|language=en|access-date=2022-02-09}}</ref>. This is where the concepts of Idolatry (seeking salvation through another) and egotheism (demanding another seek salvation through you) come from.

Online dating creates a privatization of dating which makes it external to other social interactions. <ref>{{Cite web|title=How online dating has changed the way we fall in love {{!}} Dating {{!}} The Guardian|url=https://amp.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2022/feb/13/how-online-dating-has-changed-the-way-we-fall-in-love|access-date=2022-02-16|website=amp.theguardian.com}}</ref>

Immanuelle has described [[Incel|incels]] as being a product of an atomized culture that strips meaning from everything but romance, and proposed resacralization of all aspects of life and community as the solution to the problem.

== Dark Enlightenment ==
{{Main|Dark Enlightenment}}

== Identity politics ==
Identity politics are a strange phenomenon because the right is more motivated by identity politics but it projects it on the left. Nonetheless there are issues of identities being used when they really shouldn't on the left

Particularism is considered a sin in Lifeism, and is contrasted with the ideal of universalism. This is to give everyone a chance to be treated fairly and avoid the establishment of [[extractive institutions]].

==See Also==

* [[Lifeism 1.0]]

==References==

[[Category:Politics]]
[[Category:Pages that existed before the Great November Outage]]
[[sn:Social issues]][[sn:Social issues]]
[[Category:Pages]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]