The Three Orders is a concept created by [[John Vervaeke]]. <ref>https://web.archive.org/web/20220425035243/https://www.reddit.com/r/DrJohnVervaeke/comments/kai0z1/could_anyone_help_in_clarifying_what_the/</ref>

The three of them can be compared to initiatory orders

They are as follows

# [[Narrative Order]] corresponding to [[Alpha]] and [[Phenomenal knowing]]
##Purpose<ref name=":0" />
# [[Normative Order]] correcponding to [[Lambda]] and [[Procedural knowing]]
##Make sense<ref name=":0" />
# [[Normative Order|Nomological Order]] corresponding to [[Omega]] and [[Propositional knowing]]
##Path forward<ref name=":0" />

The three are all described and linked well in the augustine video<ref name=":0">https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Syt76ZvXK6k</ref>

== History ==
The Narrative Order has always been identified with the [[Alpha]]

The Normative and Nomological order had issues. Before the Nomological was identified as a thing which merged the Narrative and Normative together, so it was Lambda. But later it was identified with the three types of [[knowing]] with Normative clearly corresponding to the [[Procedural knowing]] and Nomological clearly corrersponding to [[Propositional knowing]]

== Quote ==
{{Quote|Now we know from current cognitive science that the three components of meaning that people talk about, the things that contribute to meaning in life - and this is Heintzelman's work and others - are a sense of coherence (COHERENCE written on the board) - I'll explain what this means in a minute, a sense of significance (SIGNIFICANCE written on the board) , and a sense of purpose (PURPOSE written on the board) . I got to talk to Samantha Heintzelman about this! The more coherent, the more intelligible, the more things fit together for you, the more real they are, the more meaningful you find your life. Well that's the Nomological Order: how things fit together and make sense in a Coherent fashion. What about Significance? Significance is this (draws an arrow to indicate the ladder diagram of the Normative Order) : how valuable, how deep in reality, how good are the elements of your life? That's the normative order. Purpose... (draws an arrow to the Narrative Order) ? Does your life have a direction? Is it moving in a course? That's the Narrative Order. Human beings want things to make sense. They need a Nomolog-ical Order, and Augustine says, "I have this! It's the Aristotelian World[view] and I can give a Chris-tian explanation of that". They want things to be significant. They want to satisfy the Anagogic drives of inner peace and contact with reality. And Augustine says, "I can tell you that because I can tell you how to put reason and Agape together". That's what Christianity does. And people want things to have a purpose. They want there to be a story. Christianity is offering the ultimate story. Augustine puts it all together! And he puts it all together as the Roman Empire is literally collapsing. He's in Hippo in North Africa when the barbarians are literally at the gate laying siege to the city.
|[[John Vervaeke]]<ref>https://www.meaningcrisis.co/ep-19-awakening-from-the-meaning-crisis-augustine-and-aquin/</ref>}}

== Further reading ==

* https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KZHQicU3hWQ

== References ==
<references />
[[Category:John Vervaeke]]
[[sn:Three Orders]][[Category:Three Orders]]
[[sn:Three Orders]]
[[Category:Pages]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]