We call losing the state of nobility tripping, because it is a brief temporary setback that can happen for any reason, like tripping as you walk.

If you trip the important thing is to figure out why you tripped so you can avoid repeating it.

Sometimes tripping can even be a positive thing. The most common cause of tripping is ascending a bit beyond your nobility. Contemporary humans typically ascend consistently from age 0-60 so their bike needs constant adjustment. Increases in fluid or crystallized intelligence can make your bike no longer fit. When we become immortal and no longer suffer from age related cognitive decline then we may find ourselves ascending indefinitely, or maybe plateauing at age 500 or similar.

Out of respect to anyone who has tripped and needs rehabilitation we should always assume they outgrew their bike.

Another common cause is one of the teeth breaking in their sevenfold system.

The sevenfold vaccine is a complex system of many interlocking parts. If one part changes, say a Pridemate stops talking to you then the system can lose its efficacy.<ref name=":0">https://evolution.faith/lambda-covenant/</ref>

Losing your state of Nobility is not necessarily a bad thing. It’s like falling off of a bike. You can fall off your bike for several reasons: maybe you decided to do a dumb trick and fell off, but also you may have had a growth spurt and your bike is now too small, or maybe your bike got a flat tire.<ref name=":0" />

[[Nobility tests]] are used in order to detect incidences of tripping and address them when needed

== References ==

[[Category:Ninefold vaccine]]
[[sn:Tripping]][[Category:Tripping]]
[[sn:Tripping]][[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Pages]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]