Truesight is the mystical trait of seeing through illusions
. Truesight is associated with freedom from addiction and ability to engage in long term planning, and most importantly to see past irrelevant data. It is a sign of [[nobility]] and it is generally represented by changes to the eyes of people in artistic representations, however it is not actually a sensory thing but a sensory processing ability

== Procheiron ==
Procheiron is a [[stoic]] practice that aims to teach that “there is a difference between the existential, modal [[meaning]] of an event, and the event itself.” Meaning isn’t part of the event at all. If keep them fused, you will become con-fused. If we confuse them, we start to believe that we can alter the meaning by altering the event. But this isn’t always possible.<ref name=":0">{{Cite web |date=2021-03-07 |title=Procheiron - Awakening from the Meaning Crisis |url=https://web.archive.org/web/20210307145118/https://awakeningfromthemeaningcrisis.com/procheiron |access-date=2022-11-10 |website=[[awakeningfromthemeaningcrisis.com]]}}</ref>

“Get a cup you really like, very familiar, then smash it. Then remember the distinction between the meaning and the thing. Practice it with little things. Then can do it with larger things.”<ref name=":0" />
== Spetznaz Chicken Killing Ritual ==
The Spetznaz have a ritual where they raise and kill a chicken during training that is meant to be something like this

[[Category:John Vervaeke]]
[[sn:Truesight]]==Quotes==
[[Category:Absurdity]]
[[sn:Truesight]][[Category:Stoicism]]

[[Procheiron]] is seeing things as they are (I think but I need more on this)<ref name=":0k">https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LRF1fyfgYeM</ref>{{Quote|Procheiron is a stoic practice that aims to teach that “there is a difference between the existential, modal meaning of an event, and the event itself.” Meaning isn’t part of the event at all. If keep them fused, you will become con-fused. If we confuse them, we start to believe that we can alter the meaning by altering the event. But this isn’t always possible.

“Get a cup you really like, very familiar, then smash it. Then remember the distinction between the meaning and the thing. Practice it with little things. Then can do it with larger things.”|https://web.archive.org/web/20210307145118/https://awakeningfromthemeaningcrisis.com/procheiron}}

[[Category:John Vervaeke]]
[[sn:Truesight]]{{Quote|
* Procheiron means ‘ready to hand.’ It means remembering, but in the sense of sati. Remembering in a way that brings skills and sensibilities to bear.
* The Meditations by Marcus Aurelius is a book where you can see procheiron in action. Many people misread this, thinking the point is to believe the propositions he is proposing. But it’s not a book written to you, it’s a book written to himself. “Marcus is practicing psychotechnologies that are attempting to bring into awareness the co-identification process and co-transform the meaning of the world and the meaning of himself.”|Mark Mulvey<ref>https://web.archive.org/web/20210614061354/https://markmulvey.medium.com/awakening-from-the-meaning-crisis-by-john-vervaeke-ep-3dd53ea3703e</ref>}}


[[Category:Mysticism]][[Category:Nobility]]
[[Category:Meta-attention]]
[[sn:Truesight]]== See Also ==
* [[Enlensing]]
* [[Fatality]]
* [[Prosoche]]

==References==[[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Pages]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]