Xenia is the love of lambda. It is in some respects a combination of the loves of [[Eros]] and [[Philia]]<ref>https://evolution.faith/love/</ref>

Xenia has two opponent elements: the Underseer dominated Eros and the Overseer dominated Philia. There is a contrast between familiarity and difference leads to fertility. With too little genetic distance there will be inbreeding and with too much genetic distance there will be infertile hybrids.

Xenia occurs between both platonic friends and romantic partners and is often known as "chemistry". 

== Name ==
On October 31st 2021 it was renamed [[Xenia]] after the [[W:Xenia (Greek)|ancient greek concept]] for the balance between foreign and familiar<ref>https://lifeism.miraheze.org/w/index.php?title=Xenia&oldid=28733</ref>{{Efn|Clarification: The Greek concept only has this as an implicit element since it is applied to only other Greeks.}}

==Eros==

Eros is the [[Underseer]] Xenia. It is the Xenia of unfamiliarity. 

It’s associated with desire and often specifically sexual desires, but this isn’t the fundamental element of it.  

==Philia==

Philia is the [[Overseer]] Xenia. It is the Xenia of familiarity. It differs from [[Storge]] in that it’s still based on desire. It’s more of a desire for the familiar.

== See Also ==

* [[Storge]]
* [[Agape]]

== Related Wikipedia articles ==

* [[w:Xenia (Greek)]] on the origin of the name and 

[[Category:Love]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]
[[sn:Xenia]][[Category:Lambda]]
[[Category:Xenia]]
[[sn:Xenia]][[sn:Xenia]][[Category:Sexuality]]
[[sn:Xenia]][[Category:Philosophy of love]]
[[sn:Xenia]]==References==
{{Notelist}}
<references group="note"/>[[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Oldest pages before the refresh]]
[[Category:Pages]]